7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/526
City of Cedar Park
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 31
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted
3/14/19.
HOME RULE
CHARTER*
ARTICLE I. FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES
Section 1.01 Form of Government
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the “City Council-Manager Government.” Pursuant to its provisions and
subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution, the statutes of this State and by this Charter, all powers of the City of Cedar Park
(“City”) shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the “Council.” The Council shall enact local legislations, adopt budgets,
determine policies and appoint the City Manager. The City Manager shall be held responsible to the City Council for the execution of the laws and
the administration of the government of the City. All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner
is not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the State Constitution or the statutes of the State.
Section 1.02 Boundaries
The bounds and limits of the City are hereby established and described as being those boundaries established in the original incorporated proceedings
of the City, filed of record on February 24, 1973 in the office of the Clerk of the County of Williamson, County, Texas and those boundaries
established and changed thereafter in all annexation ordinances and proceedings of the City.
Section 1.03 Extension of Boundaries
The boundaries of the City may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size and configuration, in any of
the methods hereinafter designated and in accordance with a municipal annexation plan where required:
(a) Extending Limits in Accordance with Chapter 43 of the Texas Local Government Code, as now or hereafter amended: Where such
additional territory adjoins the corporate limits of the City such adjacent territory may be annexed to the City in the manner and in
conformity with the procedure set forth in Chapter 43 of the Texas Local Government Code, as now or hereafter amended.
(b) Annexation of Lands on Petition of Owners: A voluntary annexation by petition of the land owners whose land is contiguous and
adjacent to the City's corporate limits will, in accordance with an ordinance adopted by the City, establish appropriate rules and
procedures for annexation. If the Council grants such petition, it may by proper ordinance receive and annex such territory as a part of the
City.
(c) Annexation by Amendment to Charter: The boundary limits of the City may be fixed and additional territory added or annexed
thereto by amendment to the City Charter.
(d) Extending Limits by Action of the Council: The Council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City and to
provide for the extension of the boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said City, with or without the
consent of the residents or the owners of the territory annexed.
(e) Annexation by Any Other Method Provided by Law: Additional territory may be annexed into the City in any manner provided by
law or in such manner as shall be provided by ordinances or resolutions of the Council. This shall be in addition to the methods
hereinabove provided.
(f) Annexed Territory to Become Part of the City: Upon completion of any one of the procedures hereinabove provided, the territory so
annexed shall become a part of the City, and the land and its residents and future residents shall be provided all the rights and privileges of
other citizens of the City and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/526
(Amended May 12, 2012)
Section 1.04 Contraction of Boundaries
Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City any territory lying adjacent to the corporate limits which is not suitable or necessary for
City purposes, the Council may, upon a nonbinding petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory or without any such
petition by ordinance duly passed, remove the territory as a part of the City. The petition and ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds
of the territory sought to be removed from the City and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that it can be definitely ascertained. When
such an ordinance has been duly passed it shall be entered upon the minutes and records of the City and the territory and the inhabitants thereof shall
cease to be a part of said City. At least thirty (30) days prior to the Council's consideration of any ordinance which would remove a territory as a part
of the City, the Mayor shall have published an announcement that the territory has been determined to be not suitable or necessary for City purposes
and shall include in the announcement the bases and reasons for such determination.
ARTICLE II. POWERS OF CITY
Section 2.01 General
The City shall have all of the express and implied powers available to cities by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 2.02 General Powers Adopted
The City shall have, and may exercise, all the powers enumerated in Article 1175, Chapter 13, Title 28, of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of
Texas of 1925 as now or hereafter amended; with exclusions or alterations that may be specifically included in this Charter.
Section 2.03 Eminent Domain
The City shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers
conferred upon it by this Charter or by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The City may exercise the power of eminent domain in any
manner authorized or permitted by the Constitution and laws of this State. This power of eminent domain shall include the right of the City to take
the fee in land so condemned and shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes as provided by the statutes of the State of
Texas. The City shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in
this Charter. The City shall be required in all instances to pay, as a minimum, the appraised value for tax purposes at the time public notice is given of
the condemnation proceedings.
Section 2.04 Zoning in General
The Council shall have the full power and authority to zone the City and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules and regulations governing the same
under and by virtue of the authority vested in cities by State statutes.
ARTICLE III. CITY COUNCIL
Section 3.01 Number, Selection and Term
The Council shall be composed of the Mayor and six (6) Councilmembers. The Mayor and all Councilmembers shall be elected from the City at
Large and each Councilmember shall occupy a position on the Council, such positions being numbered one (1) through six (6) consecutively. The
Mayor and Councilmembers shall be elected in the manner in Article V of this Charter to serve for two (2) year terms. The Mayor, Councilmember
Place Two (2), Councilmember Place Four (4), and Councilmember Place Six (6) shall be elected in the even years. Councilmember Place One (1),
Councilmember Place Three (3), and Councilmember Place Five (5) shall be elected in the odd years.
Section 3.02 Qualifications
In addition to any qualifications prescribed by law, the Mayor and each Councilmember shall meet the conditions of Section 5.02 while in office, and
shall reside within the City while in office.
Section 3.03 Judge of Election Qualifications
The Council shall be the final judge of all elections and of qualifications of its members and any other elected officials of the City.
Section 3.04 Compensation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/526
Councilmembers shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be entitled to all expenses incurred in the performance of their official
Council duties upon approval by the Council.
Section 3.05 Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem
The Mayor shall be the official head of the City Government, and shall work with the City Manager with assistance from the City Secretary and other
City staff members, as required, in preparing agendas for the Council meetings. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council, shall sign all
ordinances, orders, resolutions, statements, agreements, conveyances, plats, instruments, and documents, authorized or enacted by the Council. The
Mayor shall vote on all issues, proposals, questions, and motions which require Council votes. The Mayor shall not have the power to veto or modify
any ordinance adopted by the Council and shall not, in any way, neutralize or negate any action of the Council. The Mayor shall be recognized as the
head of City government for all ceremonial purposes and shall be responsible for providing initiative and guidance in the orderly management and
growth of the City.
The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor, and, in this capacity, shall have the rights conferred upon the
Mayor.
Section 3.06 Vacancies, Forfeiture, Filling of Vacancies
(a) Vacancies: The office of a Councilmember or office of the Mayor shall become vacant upon their death, resignation, removal from office in any
manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of their office.
(b) Forfeiture of Office: If the Mayor or any Councilmember:
(1) Fails to maintain the qualifications as required in Section 3.02 and Section 5.02 herein;
(2) Violates any expressed prohibition of this Charter;
(3) Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or
(4) Fails to attend three (3) consecutive Regular Council Meetings without being excused by the Council,
the Council shall, at its next regular meeting, after validation of any of the above, declare the office to be vacant and shall fill such vacancy as set
forth in subsection (c) below.
(c) Filling of Vacancies: A single vacancy in the Council shall be filled within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the vacancy, by a majority of
the remaining members of the Council by the appointment of a person qualified for the position as described in this Charter. The Council shall,
within 90 days of the election adopting this provision, adopt a procedure for such appointment to be stated in the Rules of Procedure under Section
3.11 of this Charter; any amendment, supplement, or alteration of the adopted appointment procedure shall be void if it was adopted or became
effective 90 days prior to any vacancy under this Section. This appointee shall serve until the position is filled at the next regular City election and
shall be disqualified from candidacy for any place on the City Council for the next general or special election following the appointment.
When more than one vacancy shall develop at any time, a special election shall be called by the Council within thirty (30) days following the
occurrence of the vacancies to fill the vacancies in the same manner as described herein for regular elections. However, if the vacancies occur within
120 days of a regular election, then no special election shall be called and the remaining Councilmembers shall appoint qualified persons to fill
vacancies until the regular election. Notwithstanding the requirement in Section 3.10, if at any time the membership of the Council is reduced to less
than four (4), the remaining members may by majority action appoint additional members to raise the membership to four (4). These appointees shall
serve until the positions can be filled at the next regular or special City election.
All vacancies filled by election shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of the office so filled.
(Amended May 5, 2018)
Section 3.07 General Powers and Duties
All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, and the Council shall provide for the
exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by law.
Section 3.08 Prohibitions
(a) Holding Other Office: No Mayor or Councilmember shall hold any other City office or City employment during their term as Mayor or
Councilmember and no former Mayor or Councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive City office or City employment until one (1) year
after the expiration of their term as Mayor or Councilmember.
(b) Appointments and Removals: Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment, promotion, demotion,
discipline or removal of any City employees other than the City Manager or City Attorney, but any Councilmember may express its views and fully
and freely discuss with the City Manager or City Attorney anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such employees.
(c) Interference with Administration: Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 3.16 of this Charter, the Council shall
deal with City employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager or City Attorney solely through the City Manager or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/526
City Attorney. Neither the Council nor any of its members shall give orders to or in any way publicly or privately exercise the influence of their
office on any City employee in their official or personal capacity, except as otherwise authorized in this Charter.
(d) Attorney-Client Privilege: No Mayor or Councilmember shall disclose any attorney-client privileged communication. The City Council as the
governing body of the City solely holds and is entitled to the attorney client-privilege, and it may only be waived by an affirmative vote of two-thirds
of the City Council.
(Amended May 5, 2018)
Section 3.09 Meetings of Council
The Council shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings each month and as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the business
of the City. The Council shall fix, by ordinance, the days and time of the regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings of the Council shall be
held on the call of the Mayor or a majority of the Councilmembers. All regular, special and emergency meetings of the Council shall be held in
accordance with Chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code (“The Open Meetings Act”) as hereafter amended.
(Amended May 12, 2012)
Section 3.10 Quorum
Four (4) Councilmembers shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting City business, and no action of the Council, except as provided in
Section 3.06, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of four (4) or more members of the Council.
Section 3.11 Rules of Procedure
The Council shall, by resolution, determine, adopt and amend its own rules, procedures and order of business. The rules shall provide that citizens of
the City shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting in regard to any matter under consideration.
(Amended May 12, 2012)
Section 3.12 Voting
The Council shall provide for minutes to be taken and recorded of all meetings, except those meetings held in executive session. Such minutes shall
be a public record. The Council may determine its own rules for voting not inconsistent with State law. Any Councilmember may require a roll call
vote before a vote is taken.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 3.13 Ordinances in General
No ordinances except emergency ordinances shall be finally passed until they have been read on two (2) separate days not less than 72 hours apart.
The final reading of each ordinance shall be in full unless a written or printed copy thereof shall have been furnished to each member of the Council
prior to such meeting
The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be:
“Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cedar Park, Texas.”
All ordinances which levy a fine or penalty and those which deal with the budget, taxes, franchises, public utilities or the setting of their rates shall be
read at two (2) regular meetings followed by publication in full or by caption in at least one (1) issue of the official newspaper of the City before the
same shall become effective.
Section 3.14 Emergency Ordinances
To meet a public emergency affecting life, property, or the public peace, the Council may adopt emergency ordinances. Such ordinances shall not
levy taxes, grant or renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. The Council shall not authorize the
borrowing of money, except as provided in Article VIII, Section 8.06. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner generally
prescribed for ordinances, except that it shall be plainly designated in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause,
a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. Such emergency clause shall require the affirmative vote
of four (4) members of the Council. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is
introduced. The affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Council shall be required for adoption. After adoption, the ordinance shall be published
as required for other adopted ordinances and shall become effective in the same manner. Every emergency ordinance so adopted, except one
authorizing the borrowing of money as described herein, shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first (61st) day following the day on which
it became effective, but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the ordinance.
Section 3.15 Reserved
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/526
Editor's note–Former Section 3.15 “Bonds for City Employees” was deleted May 5, 2018.
Section 3.16 Investigative Body
The Council shall have the power to adopt ordinances permitting the it [City Council] to inquire into the official conduct of any department, agency,
officer or employee of the City and permitting the Council to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the appearance of witnesses and the
production of books, papers, records and other evidence material to a specific inquiry. Such ordinances adopted by the Council shall include
provisions for penalties for contempt in failing or refusing to obey orders issued by the Council as authorized by such ordinances; and such
ordinances shall provide for punishment for any such contempt in a manner provided by such ordinances.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE
Section 4.01 City Manager
(a) Appointment and Qualifications: The Council, by a majority vote, shall appoint a City Manager. The method of selection shall be left to the
discretion of the Council so long as the method insures orderly, non-partisan action in securing a competent and qualified person to fill the position.
The City Manager shall be chosen upon the basis of executive and administrative training, experience and ability. The City Manager does not need to
be a resident of the City when appointed. However, within a reasonable period of time after the appointment, shall reside within the City during
employment. The City Manager shall be bonded in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and the cost thereof shall
be borne by the City.
(b) Compensation: The City Manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the Council according to experience, education, and training.
The compensation shall be agreed upon before appointment with the understanding that the Council may change it at its discretion.
(c) Term and Removal: The City Manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the discretion of the Council, by a vote
of the majority of the Council. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final. It is the intention of this Charter
to vest all authority and fix all responsibilities of such suspension or removal in the Council.
(d) Powers and Duties: The City Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City, and shall be responsible to the Council for the
proper administration of all the affairs of the City and to that end shall have the power to:
(1) See that all federal, State, and local laws and ordinances are effectively enforced.
(2) Appoint, suspend or remove all or any one of the directors of departments, Assistant City Managers and City employees except as
otherwise provided in this Charter.
(3) Attend all meetings of the Council except when excused by the Council.
(4) Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Council and be responsible for its administration after its adoption.
(5) Prepare and submit to the Council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
City for the preceding year.
(6) Submit to the Council a monthly budget summary and keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the
City and make recommendations as may seem advisable.
(7) Make reports as the Council may require concerning the operation of City departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction
and supervision.
(8) Perform duties prescribed by this Charter and duties required of them by the Council.
(9) Insure that all public records are accessible to the public and available upon request.
(10) To have all such additional authority not inconsistent with the City Charter to carry out the duties reasonably necessary of a City
Manager.
(e) Acting City Manager: The City Manager, within sixty (60) days after taking office, shall designate by letter filed with the City Secretary, a
qualified administrative officer of the City, approved by the Council, to perform the duties of the City Manager in their absence or disability. No
member of the Council shall serve as Acting City Manager.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 4.02 Municipal Court
(a) There shall be established and maintained a court, designated as a “Municipal Court” of the City for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all
such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter be prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal courts.
(b) The City Manager shall appoint the Presiding Municipal Judge and any Associate Judges and recommend their compensation subject to
Council approval. The Judges shall possess a current license in good standing with the State Bar of Texas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/526
(c) There shall be a clerk of said court appointed by the City Manager.
(d) The clerk of said court and deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court
thereto, and perform any and all acts usual and necessary to be performed by the clerks of courts and conducting the business thereof.
(e) All costs, fees, special expenses and fines imposed by the Municipal Court shall be paid into the City Treasury for the use and benefit of the
City except as otherwise required by State Law.
(f) The Municipal Judge and all additional Judges shall be bonded for no less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and the cost thereof
shall be borne by the City.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 4.03 City Attorney
The Council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in the State of Texas, who shall be the City Attorney. They shall
receive for their services such compensation as may be fixed by the Council and shall hold their office at the pleasure of the Council. The City
Attorney, or such other attorneys selected by them with the approval of the Council, shall represent the City in all litigation. They shall be the legal
advisor and attorney for the Council, the City and its Officers, and all of its Departments, Boards, and Commissions in all matters involving City
business. The City Attorney may employ consultants on legal matters as necessary and may employ outside legal counsel subject to ratification by
the Council.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 4.04 City Secretary
The City Manager shall appoint or remove the City Secretary, subject to the approval of the Council; and shall appoint or remove such Assistant City
Secretaries as the Council shall deem advisable.
The duties of the City Secretary, or an Assistant City Secretary, shall be as follows:
(a) To give notice of the Council and Board and Commissions meetings.
(b) To keep the minutes of Council meetings.
(c) To authenticate signature and record in full, in a book indexed for this purpose, all ordinances and resolutions.
(d) To perform such other duties as the City Manager shall assign and as elsewhere provided for in this Charter.
(Amended May 5, 2018)
Section 4.05 Public Safety
(a) Department(s). The Council may establish and maintain one or more departments, eg. fire and/or police, to maintain law and order within the
City and to protect the citizens from violence and threats of violence and to protect property from damage or loss.
(b) Department Head(s). The City Manager shall appoint, subject to approval by the Council, a department head for each department who shall be
fully responsible to the City Manager for administration of their department. Such department head(s) shall be selected based upon training,
knowledge, experience, certification, and demonstrated ability in providing for public safety, shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and shall
establish and maintain written policies including, but not limited to departmental operations, disciplinary procedures, general order, job descriptions,
and dress code.
(c) Special Police: No person, except as authorized by general law, by this Charter or by the ordinances passed pursuant hereto, shall act as special
police or special detective.
(Amended May 5, 2018)
Section 4.06 Health and Sanitation
The Council may, by ordinance, establish health and sanitation standards for the City and may establish a Health and Sanitation Department to
regulate the preparation, display, handling, sale and serving of food by any business in the City; cleanliness and other health related conditions of
hotels and motels in the City; animal control; garbage and trash disposal; prevention of water stagnation; prevention of water pollution and air
pollution; other situations and activities determined by the Council to have a direct relationship to the health of persons in the City. Health and
sanitation ordinances approved by the Council may provide for necessary inspections to be made to identify violations of said ordinances and may
provide for penalties for such violations.
Said ordinances may provide:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/526
(a) That required inspections shall be made by qualified employees of Williamson County Health Department, in accordance with
provisions of a City-County agreement; or
(b) That said ordinances shall be administered by the City Manager or their designee; or
(c) That said ordinances shall be administered by a physician appointed by the Council to serve as Health Officer.
(Amended May 9, 2015)
ARTICLE V. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Section 5.01 City Elections
(a) Schedule: The regular City Election dates and polling locations shall be in accordance with State law.
(b) Special Elections: The Council may, by resolution, order a special election under conditions specified elsewhere in this Charter, or for
ordinances, bond issues, Charter amendments, recall or other purposes deemed appropriate by Council. The Council shall fix time and places for
holding such special elections, and provide all means for holding same.
(c) Voter Eligibility List: A certified list of voter registrants within the City, as prepared by the entity or department responsible for maintaining
voter registration records pursuant to State law, shall be maintained current by the City Secretary. If, for a purpose relating only to a City election or
to candidates or issues involved in such election, any organization, group or person requests a list of qualified voters of the City, permission to copy
the current list shall be granted by the City Secretary.
(d) Conduct and Regulation of Elections: All City elections shall be governed by the Constitution of the State of Texas, general laws of the State,
this Charter, and ordinances of the City. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the election officials appointed or approved by the Council.
Sample ballots shall be posted in the voting place(s) for the purpose of voter orientation.
(Amended May 8, 2010; May 9, 2015)
Section 5.02 Filing for Office
Eligibility to File. Each candidate for an elective City office shall meet the requirements of State law and the following qualifications:
(a) Shall be a registered voter of the City and at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(b) Shall have resided within the corporate limits of the City, including territory annexed prior to the filing deadline, for at least the
twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the election.
(c) Shall have paid a filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) or tendered a petition signed by the greater of twenty-five (25) qualified voters
residing in the City or one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the total votes received by all candidates for Mayor in the last mayoral election,
with each signatory thereto providing their printed name, residential address, date of birth, signature, and date of signing.
(d) An incumbent seeking re-election must file for the same position number presently held.
(e) No candidate may file for more than one office or position number per election.
(f) In addition to the requirements of State law, an elected official filing for any office other than the office presently held or for Mayor,
shall resign from such presently held office at least forty-five (45) days prior to the election.
(Amended May 8, 2010; May 5, 2018)
Section 5.03 Official Ballots
(a) Names on Ballot: The name of each candidate for office shall be listed on official ballots in accordance with State law.
(b) Order of Listing: The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates shall be determined in accordance with State law.
(c) Absentee Ballots: Procedures for voting by absentee ballot shall be in accordance with State law.
(d) [Ballots for Ordinances, Bond Issues, and Charter Amendments:] Ballots for Ordinances, Bond Issues, and Charter Amendment, to be voted on
by registered voters of the City shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title but shall be a
clear, concise statement, approved by majority of the whole Council, describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice.
Below the ballot title shall appear the following question:
“Shall the above described (ordinance) (bond issue) (amendment) be adopted?”
Immediately below or to the left of such question shall appear, in the following order, the words “Yes” and “No” each with a square in which the
voter may cast their vote by marking a cross (x).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/526
(e) [Write-In Votes:] Procedures for write-in votes shall be in accordance with State law.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 5.04 Canvassing
Results of municipal elections shall be canvassed in accordance with State law. The Council shall canvass the returns in accordance with Texas
Election Laws. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council by totals for each candidate, or, for and
against each issue submitted.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 5.05 Election by Majority
A majority vote for an elective office is that number of votes which is greater than one-half of the total number of valid ballots cast for the office
concerned. Any candidate for elective office who receives a majority vote shall be declared elected. If none of the candidates for an elective position
receives a majority vote, none of such candidates shall be elected.
Section 5.06 Run-Off Election
Run-off elections and recounts of election results shall be in accordance with State law.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
ARTICLE VI. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
Section 6.01 Power of Initiative
The people of the City reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in the exercise of that power, may propose any ordinance, except
ordinances appropriating money, levying taxes, annexing land, pertaining to state-designated municipal governmental functions, City budget, capital
programs, or emergency appropriations, or zoning ordinances or ordinances repealing ordinances appropriating money, levying taxes, annexing land,
pertaining to state-designated municipal governmental functions, City budget, capital programs, or emergency appropriations, or zoning ordinances
not in conflict with this Charter or the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the Council by a
petition signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of all qualified voters of the City.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 6.02 Power of Referendum
The people of the City reserve the power of direct legislation by referendum, and in the exercise of that power, may propose any ordinance, except
ordinances appropriating money, levying taxes, annexing land, pertaining to state-designated municipal governmental functions, City budget, capital
programs, or emergency appropriations, or zoning ordinances not in conflict with this Charter or the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas. Any
ordinance subject to referendum may be submitted to the Council by a petition signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to ten percent
(10%) of all qualified voters of the City.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 6.03 Form of Petitions
Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed legislation in the form of an ordinance, including a descriptive caption.
Referendum petition papers shall contain a sufficient description of the ordinance sought to be referred to, identify it, or if the ordinance has been
passed by the Council, the full text of the ordinance sought to be referred shall be included in the papers.
The signatures to the initiative or referendum petitions need not be all appended to one paper, but each signer's name shall be printed and signed in
ink, including the signer's residential address and such additional information to identify them as a qualified voter in the City and the State of Texas.
Before the signatures on any petition paper may be counted, one of the persons signing the petition paper, a qualified voter, shall make oath before
the City Secretary or other officer competent to administer oaths, that the statements made in the affidavit are true, that each signature to the paper
appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name purports to be signed thereto, and that such signatures were placed thereon in the
presence of the affiant.
(Amended May 12, 2012)
Section 6.04 Filing, Examination and Certification of Petitions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/526
Within thirty (30) days after an initiative or referendum petition is filed with the City Secretary, the City Secretary shall determine whether it is
properly signed by the requisite number of qualified voters. The City Secretary shall certify the results of the petition examination in accordance with
State law to the Council at its next regular meeting. If the certificate of the City Secretary shows an initiative or referendum petition to be
insufficient, the City Secretary shall notify the person filing the petition, and it may be amended within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice
by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as prescribed for the original petition. Within fifteen (15) days after the
amendment is filed, the City Secretary shall examine the amended petition and certify as to its sufficiency. If the amended petition is then found to be
insufficient, no further proceedings shall be had with regard to it. No initiative or referendum petition shall be filed within one (1) year of a public
vote on a previous petition containing the same or substantially the same language.
(Amended May 12, 2012; May 5, 2018)
Section 6.05 City Council Consideration and Submission to Voters
If the Council receives an authorized initiative or referendum petition certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall:
(a) Pass the initiated or referendum ordinance without amendment within thirty (30) days after date of the certification to the Council;
or
(b) Submit the initiated or referendum ordinance without amendment to a vote of the qualified voters of the City at a regular election, or
a special election as soon as legally possible but not within ninety (90) days before a regular election, to be held within ninety (90) days
after the date of the certification to the Council or as soon thereafter as permitted by the laws of the State of Texas; or
(c) At an election as described in [subsection] (b), submit to a vote of the qualified voters of the City the initiated or referendum
ordinance without amendment and an alternative ordinance on the same subject proposed by the Council.
If the initiated and the alternative ordinances are both approved by a majority of the votes cast at the election, the ordinance receiving the greater
number of votes shall be effective as an ordinance of the City; the other ordinance shall be considered rejected and shall not be effective.
If the Council receives an authorized referendum petition certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall reconsider the referred
ordinance, and if upon reconsideration the ordinance is not repealed within thirty (30) days, it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City at
a regular or special election to be held not more than ninety (90) days after the date of the certification to the Council or at the earliest time thereafter
permitted by law.
Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall be held when necessary as permitted by State law. No ordinance on the same subject as an
initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on the same subject as a referred ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated
by the voters within one (1) year from the date of that election.
(Amended May 12, 2012)
Section 6.06 Results of Election
Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this Article. If a majority of the legal votes cast
are in favor of an initiated ordinance, it shall thereupon be effective as an ordinance of the City. An ordinance thus adopted may not be repealed or
amended until after the expiration of two (2) years and then only by a vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the Councilmembers qualified and serving. A
referred ordinance which is rejected by a majority of the legal votes cast in a referendum election shall be thereby repealed. A rejected ordinance may
not be re-enacted until after the expiration of two (2) years and then only by a vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the Councilmembers qualified and serving.
Section 6.07 Power of Recall
The people of the City reserve the power to recall any elected officer of the City and may exercise the power by filing with the City Secretary a
petition signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of all qualified voters of the City, demanding the removal
of the elected officer. The petition shall be signed and verified as required for an initiative petition.
Section 6.08 Recall Election
The provisions regulating examination, certification, and amendment of initiative petitions shall apply to recall petitions. If the petition is certified by
the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall order and hold a special election to determine whether the officer shall be recalled.
Section 6.09 Results of Recall Election
If the majority of the votes cast at a recall election are for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, the Council shall immediately declare the
office vacant and call a special election to fill the vacancy.
Section 6.10 Limitation on Recall
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/526
No recall petition shall be filed against an elected officer within six (6) months after taking office, and no officer shall be subjected to more than one
(1) recall election during the term of office.
Section 6.11 Failure of City Council to Call an Election
In the event all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such
recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then the
County Judge of Williamson County, Texas shall discharge any such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of
City Secretary or by the Council.
ARTICLE VII. PLANNING AND ZONING
Section 7.01 Comprehensive Plan
The Council shall adopt and maintain a comprehensive plan to promote sound development and public health, safety, and welfare pursuant to
Chapter 213 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(Amended May 5, 2018)
Section 7.02 Zoning Authority
The Council shall have the power and authority to zone the City and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the same after
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and after all required public hearings, pursuant to State law.
(Amended May 5, 2018)
Section 7.03 Planning and Zoning Commission
The Council shall establish and maintain by ordinance a Planning Commission which shall also serve as a Zoning Commission and which shall be
known as the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall:
(a) Exercise authority over platting and subdividing of land within and outside the corporate limits of the City as authorized by law;
(b) Recommend to the Council approval or disapproval of proposed changes in the City's Zoning Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan;
(c) Recommend to the Council plans for the physical development of the City; and
(d) Perform all other functions of the Planning and Zoning Commission under the laws of the State of Texas.
(Amended May 12, 2012; May 5, 2018)
Section 7.04 Zoning Board of Adjustment
The Council shall establish and maintain by ordinance a Zoning Board of Adjustment
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas, including, but not limited
to, the power to:
(a) Grant special exceptions;
(b) Grant variances; and
(c) Hear and decide appeals from orders enforcing zoning laws.
(Amended May 12, 2012; May 9, 2015; May 5, 2018)
ARTICLE VIII. FINANCE ADMINISTRATION
Section 8.01 Finance Department
(a) A Finance Department is established and shall be maintained to manage the finances of the City.
(b) The Finance Department shall be directed by an experienced financial manager who shall be appointed Finance Director for an indefinite term
by the City Manager after approval of the Council. The Finance Director may be removed from office by the City Manager after consultation with
the Council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/526
(c) The Finance Director shall have custody of all public moneys, funds, notes, bonds, and other securities belonging to the City. The Finance
Director shall make payments out of the City funds upon order signed by City Officers as designated by the Council. The Finance Director shall
make to the City Manager and the Council a full and accurate statement of receipts and payments, as directed by the City Manager. The Finance
Director shall perform other duties as directed by ordinance or the City Manager.
(d) The Finance Director shall be bonded for no less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and the cost thereof shall be borne by the
City.
Section 8.02 Fiscal Year
The Fiscal Year of the City shall begin October 1 and end the following September 30.
Section 8.03 Annual Budget
(a) Scope: The annual budget must specify appropriations for capital expenditures and for expenditures directed by the Council for the operation of
City departments, offices, and agencies. It must comply with fund requirements of bond covenants.
(b) Preparation: City department heads and officers shall submit budget requests for the next fiscal year to and as directed by the City Manager for
review and consolidation. The City Manager shall submit a proposed annual budget to the Council in sufficient time to permit the Council to review
and revise it.
(c) Adoption: Before taxes are levied but after a minimum of two (2) public hearings the Council shall adopt the annual budget. The Council may
amend the proposed budget, but shall not delete or decrease appropriations required for debt service, estimated cash deficit, or by law, and shall not
authorize expenditures in excess of the total of estimated income plus funds available from earlier years.
(d) Failure to Adopt: If the Council fails to adopt the annual budget before the start of the Fiscal Year to which it applies, appropriations of the last
budget adopted shall be considered as adopted for the current fiscal year on a month-to-month, pro-rata basis until the next budget is adopted.
Section 8.04 Budget is a Public Record
All proposed and adopted budgets shall be treated as a public record.
Section 8.05 Transfer of Funds
During the Fiscal Year, the Council shall have the power to transfer, by resolution, in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas, funds within the
budget, but only after a public hearing.
Section 8.06 Emergency Appropriations
The Council may make emergency appropriations at any time to meet a pressing need for public expenditures in order to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare.
Section 8.07 Issuance of Bonds and Other Obligations of City
The City shall have the right and power to borrow money on the credit of the City for permanent public improvements or for other public purposes as
determined by the Council, and the power to issue bonds, certificates of obligation, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness of the City as
authorized by the laws of the State of Texas. The total general obligation debt of the City shall never exceed ten percent (10%) of the net taxable
value of property on the tax rolls of the City, and any issue of bonds in excess of said sum shall be void as to such excess. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Charter to the contrary, ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds, certificates of obligation, warrants or other evidences of
indebtedness, or ordinances authorizing the levy of taxes or the pledge of revenues to secure payment of indebtedness shall require only one reading,
shall become effective immediately, and shall not be subject to referendum. Nothing in this Section excuses compliance with Section 8.08 of this
Charter.
Section 8.08 Election to Authorize Bonds
Bonds payable from ad valorem taxes, other than refunding bonds, shall not be issued unless the bonds have been authorized by a majority vote at a
City election held for that purpose as prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.
Section 8.09 Lapse of Appropriations
Appropriations shall lapse at the close of the Fiscal Year if not spent or encumbered.
Section 8.10 Payment and Obligation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/526
No payment shall be made nor obligation incurred unless it complies with a budget appropriation and unless the Finance Director first certifies that
there is or will be enough unencumbered money in that account to meet the obligation when it is due.
Section 8.11 Financial Records and Reports
The Finance Director shall report to the Council each month the financial condition of the City. For each budget item, the monthly report will show
the annual amount budgeted, the amount expended the preceding month, and the amount expended in the fiscal year to the report date. Financial
records and reports of the City shall be prepared and maintained in accordance with general accepted accounting principles.
Section 8.12 Independent Audit
At the close of each Fiscal Year, and at other times as necessary, the Council shall have a certified public accountant conduct an independent audit of
all accounts of the City. The certified public accountant shall have no direct or indirect personal interest in the financial affairs of the City or of its
officers and in any event shall not perform the audit for more than five (5) consecutive years. A summary of the results of the completed audit shall
be on file in the City Secretary's office as a public record.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 8.13 Purchases and Contracts
The City shall make purchases and execute contracts only in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
Section 8.14 Contingent Appropriation
Provisions shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in any amount no more than three
percent (3%) of the total budget, to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditure. Such expenditure shall be under the control of the City
Manager. A detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported with the City Secretary with a copy to Council.
(Amended May 12, 2012)
ARTICLE IX. TAX ADMINISTRATION*
Section 9.01 Power to Tax; Tax Levy and Administration
The City shall have the power, within the limits of the Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas, to levy and collect annual taxes on all property,
real, personal, or mixed, that is located within the City on January 1st of each year.
The Council, as soon as practicable after certification of assessment rolls but not later than October 1 of each year, shall enact the annual tax levy
ordinance levying the tax rate per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of taxable value, as certified by the Williamson County Appraisal District and the
Travis County Appraisal District, after meeting all requirements of the ‘Truth in Taxation' laws of the State of Texas. If the Council fails to enact the
annual tax levy ordinance for a particular year within such year, the tax levy ordinance last enacted shall remain in effect until the next tax levy
ordinance is enacted. Failure of the Council to enact a tax levy ordinance for a particular year shall not invalidate the collection of taxes for that year.
The Director of Finance shall:
(a) Assure collection of all taxes and special assessments due to the City;
(b) Cooperate with and advise the Williamson County Appraisal District and the Travis County Appraisal District on all appraisals of,
and with the Williamson County Tax Assessor-Collector and the Travis County Tax Assessor-Collector on assessment and collection of
property taxes for all properties;
(c) Advise the City Manager and Council regarding protests of appraised values pursuant to State law;
(d) Preserve the tax records in the City's Finance Department, such records shall be accessible to the public as provided by State law;
and
(e) Perform all other duties as directed by ordinance or the City Manager.
(Amended May 12, 2012; May 5, 2018)
Section 9.02 Tax Appraisal, Assessment, and Collection
Properties shall be appraised by the Williamson County Appraisal District or the Travis County Appraisal District, and property taxes and
assessments shall be assessed and collected by the Williamson County Tax Assessor-Collector and the Travis County Tax Assessor-Collector
pursuant to State law.
(Amended May 12, 2012; May 9, 2015; May 5, 2018)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/526
Section 9.03 Counterclaim of Tax Arrears and Debt of City
If a property owner to whom the City owes a debt is in arrears in payment of City taxes, the City may reduce the debt by an amount equal to the
unpaid taxes. This right of setoff and counterclaim for taxes and arrears shall apply to any debt, claim, demand, or account owned by the City. No
assignment or transfer, after taxes are due, of a debt or any other claim shall affect the right of the City to setoff taxes against the debt or other claim.
ARTICLE X. FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section 10.01 Limits on Transfer of Use of Public Property
Unless otherwise provided by State law, no right of control or use of public property of the City may be transferred except by resolution. No act or
omission of the Council or officer or agent of the City may be construed to grant, renew, extend, or amend, in any way, any right, franchise, or
easement affecting public property of the City except as provided by this Charter.
(Amended May 9, 2015)
Section 10.02 Power to Grant Franchises
The Council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew and extend franchises of public utilities operating in the City. With consent of the
franchise holder, the Council may by ordinance amend franchises of public utilities, but no franchise may be granted for an indefinite term and no
franchise may be granted for a term of more than twenty (20) years.
Section 10.03 Procedure to Enact Franchise Ordinances
Every ordinance granting, renewing, extending, or amending a public utility franchise shall be read at three (3) regular Council meetings and shall
not be finally acted upon until thirty (30) days after the first reading. Within ten (10) days after the first reading of the ordinance, its full text shall be
published in the official newspaper of the City, and the cost of publication shall be paid by the prospective franchise holder.
Section 10.04 Limit on Transfer of Franchise
No public or private utility franchise may be transferred or assigned by its owner except with the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance.
Section 10.05 Regulation of Franchises
Grants, renewals, extensions, and amendments of public utility franchises, whether or not provided in the ordinance granting the franchise, shall be
subject to the right of the Council:
(a) To forfeit the franchise by ordinance for failure of the holder to comply with the terms of the franchise. This right may be exercised
only after written notice to the franchise holder stating how the holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise and setting a
reasonable time for the correction of the failure. Forfeiture may occur only after a hearing and after expiration of a reasonable time for
correction.
(b) To impose reasonable regulations to insure safe, efficient, and continuous service to the public.
(c) To require expansion, extension, enlargement, and improvement of plant and facilities as necessary to provide adequate service to
the public.
(d) To require franchise holders to furnish the City, without cost to the City, full information regarding the location and precise
description of all facilities of the franchise holder in, over, or under the City; and to regulate and control the location, relocation, and
removal of the facilities.
(e) To collect from public utilities operating in the City a proportionate part of the increased cost of City operations and services
attributable to the occupancy by or use of public property by the public utility; to collect a proportionate part of the cost of City operations
and services required as a result of damage to or disturbance of public property caused by the public utility; and to compel the public
utility to perform at its own expense repairs or other operations made necessary by the occupancy or use of, or damage to or disturbance
of, public or private property by the public utility.
(f) To require one franchise holder to allow other holders to use its facilities, if the Council considers that joint use to be in the public
interest. In the event of joint use, reasonable terms of use may be imposed by and a reasonable rental shall be paid to the owner for the use
of the facility. The inability of franchise holders to agree on terms and rentals for the use of each other's facilities shall not be an excuse
for failure to comply with a joint use requirement by the Council.
(g) To require franchise holders to keep records which accurately reflect the value of the franchise holder's property used and other
property useful in rendering its service to the public and which reflect the franchise holder's expenses, receipts, and profits of all kinds.
(h) To examine and audit at any time during business hours the accounts and other records of the franchise holder.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/526
(i) To require reports on the operations of the utility in the form, and containing information, that the Council directs.
Section 10.06 Grant not to be Exclusive
No grant or franchise to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility and/or renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive.
Section 10.07 Regulation of Rates
Subject to the laws of the State of Texas, the Council shall have the power after reasonable notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates,
charges and fares of public utilities operating in the City.
ARTICLE XI. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 11.01 Oath of Office
All officers of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective office, take and subscribe to the official oath prescribed by the
Constitution of the State of Texas. The oath shall be administered by the City Secretary or other person authorized by law to administer oaths.
(Amended May 9, 2015)
Section 11.02 Public Records
All public records of every office, department, or agency of the City shall be maintained and open to inspection by the public pursuant to State law,
including the Public Information Act, Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code, as now and hereafter amended.
(Amended May 5, 2018)
Section 11.03 Official Newspaper
The Council shall contract annually with, and by resolution designate, a public newspaper of general circulation in the City as the official newspaper
of the City, and to continue as such until another is designated, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matter
required by this Charter, by the ordinances of the City, or by the Constitution and/or laws of the State of Texas to be published.
Section 11.04 Nepotism
No person related, within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity, as defined by the Texas Local Government Code
as amended, to an elected City Official or the City Manager shall be employed or appointed to any office, position or clerkship of the City. This
prohibition shall not apply, however, to any person who shall have been employed by the City at least one (1) year prior to and at the time of the
election or appointment of the officer related in the prohibited degree.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 11.05 Personal Financial Interest
No member of the Council or employee of the City shall have a substantial financial interest, as defined by the Texas Local Government Code as
amended, either directly or indirectly in any business entity doing business with the City, contracts with the City, sale of land or any interest in land
to the City, or sale of any supplies or services to the City. The above provision shall not apply where the interest is represented by ownership of stock
in a corporation involved provided such stock ownership amounts to less than ten percent (10%) of the corporation stock or as falls within the scope
of Chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code as now or hereafter amended. Any willful violation of this Section shall constitute malfeasance
in office, and any officer or employee of the City found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. If any corporation or person
contracting with the City has knowledge, expressed or implied, that an employee or officer of the City has violated or attempted to violate this
Section, and such person or corporation fails to report such violation, the contract(s) such person or corporation has with the City shall be subject to
cancellation by the City Manager or the Council.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
Section 11.06 Assignment, Execution and Garnishment
The real and personal property belonging to the City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ, execution or cost bill. The funds
belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the
City be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City
nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The City shall be obligated to
recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/526
Section 11.07 Power to Settle Claims
The Council shall have the authority to compromise and settle any and all claims and all suits of every kind and character in favor of or against the
City, except suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes.
Section 11.08 Prohibitions
(a) Activities Prohibited:
(1) In appointments to and removal from any City office of employment, no persons shall be favored or discriminated against because
of race, sex, political or religious opinions or religious affiliations, age or handicap conditions.
(2) No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any City compensated position or appointive City administrative
compensated office shall directly or indirectly give, render, or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or in
connection with their appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion.
(3) No City officer or employee, elected or appointed, shall orally, by letter, or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment,
subscription or contribution for any political purpose whatever from any subordinate City official or employee holding any compensated
City position.
(4) No person who holds any compensated City position shall solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate
for municipal office or take any part in the management, affairs, or political campaign of any municipal candidate.
(b) Penalties: Any person who by themself or with others violates any of the provisions of Paragraph (1) through (4) of the preceding subsection
(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.000). Any
person convicted under this Section shall be ineligible for a period of five (5) years thereafter to hold any City office or position, and if an officer or
employee of the City, shall immediately forfeit their office or position.
Section 11.09 Conflicts of Interest Prohibited
(a) General: During the term of office or employment, no employee or elected or appointed officer of the City may act in any way which places or
tends to place personal interest in conflict with the interest of the City.
(b) Affidavit: If a local public official or a person related to that official in the first or second degree by either affinity or consanguinity, as defined
by the Texas Local Government Code as amended, has a substantial financial interest, also as defined by the Texas Local Government Code as
amended, in a business entity that would benefit by any official action taken by the governing body, the local public official, before a vote or decision
on the matter, shall file an affidavit with the City Secretary stating the nature and extent of the interest and shall abstain from any discussion, voting,
or further participation in the matter.
(c) Prohibited Acts: No employee or elected or appointed officer of the City may:
(1) Accept directly or indirectly a gift, favor, privilege, or employment from a person or business entity that does business with the City
or that enjoys a franchise, privilege, license, or easement from the City, except as authorized by ordinance.
(2) Have a pecuniary interest, directly or indirectly, in a contract with or job, work, or service for the City; have an interest, directly or
indirectly, in the sale of land, tangibles, or intangibles to the City.
(3) Serve as surety for the performance of a person doing business with the City nor serve as surety for a City officer or employee
required by this Charter to make a surety bond.
(d) Exceptions:
(1) The governing body of a governmental entity may contract for the purchase of services or personal property with a business entity
in which a member of the governing body has a substantial interest if the business entity is the only business entity that provides the
needed service or product within the jurisdiction of the governmental entity and is the only business entity that bids on the contract.
(2) The governing body must take a separate vote on any budget item specifically dedicated to a contract with an entity in which a
member of the governing body has a substantial interest and the affected member must abstain from that separate vote. The member who
has complied in abstaining in such vote, under procedures set forth in Section 11.09(b) of this Charter, may vote on a final budget only
after the matter in which they are concerned has been resolved.
(e) Penalties:
(1) Any person convicted under this section shall be ineligible for a period of five (5) years thereafter to hold any City office or
position, and if an officer or employee of the City shall immediately forfeit his office or position.
(2) A contract in which an employee or elected or appointed officer of the City has or acquires an interest may be declared void by the
Council.
(Amended May 8, 2010)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/526
Section 11.10 Public Library
The City shall have the authority to maintain a public library within the City. The Council may cooperate with any person, firm, or corporation, or
any other governmental entity under such terms as the Council shall prescribe for the maintenance of such public library.
Section 11.11 Severability
If any section or part of a section of this Charter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not
invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this Charter.
Section 11.12 Charter Amendment
This Charter may be amended in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.
Section 11.13 Charter Review
(a) Seven (7) years after a Charter Review Committee has reviewed the Charter, the Council shall appoint, at its first regular meeting in June, a
Charter Review Committee of seven (7) residents of the City. The term of office of the Charter Review Committee shall be six (6) months unless
extended by the Council. The Mayor and each Councilmember shall appoint one (1) member to serve on the Charter Review Committee.
(b) Powers and Duties of Charter Review Committee. The Charter Review Committee shall:
(1) Inquire into the operations of the City government and review this Charter to determine whether the Charter needs revision. Public
hearings may be held and the Committee shall have the power to compel the attendance of City officers or employees and to require the
submission of the City records necessary to the inquiry and review.
(2) Propose to the Council recommendations, if necessary, to insure that the City government and its operations comply with this
Charter.
(3) Propose to the Council recommendations, if necessary, to improve the effectiveness of this Charter.
(4) Make a written report of its findings and recommendations to the Council.
(5) Present to the Council proposed Charter amendments if any are considered necessary.
(6) Meet at least once every two (2) months during its term.
(Amended May 12, 2012)
Section 11.14 Pending Matters and Preservation of Rights
All rights, claims, actions, orders, ordinances, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings existing before the adoption of this Charter shall
continue except as modified by this Charter and shall be maintained, carried on, or dealt with by the City department, office, or agency appropriate
under this Charter.
Section 11.15 Transfer of Powers, Duties, Property, and Records
(a) Departments and Agencies: If a City department or agency is abolished by this Charter, the powers and duties of that department or agency
shall be transferred to the City department, office, or agency designated in this Charter or, if the Charter makes no provision, transfer shall be
designated by the Council.
(b) Property and Records: Property, records, and equipment of the City departments, offices, or agencies existing when this Charter is adopted
shall be transferred to the departments, offices, or agencies assuming the respective power and duties. If the powers or duties are discontinued or are
divided among units or if a conflict arises concerning the transfer, the property, records, and equipment shall be transferred to departments, offices, or
agencies designated by the Council.
Section 11.16 Reserved
Editor's note–Former Section 11.16 “Interim Government” was deleted May 9, 2015.
Section 11.17 Construction of Charter
This Charter shall be construed in accordance with State law as a general grant of power and as a limitation of power on the government of the City
in the same manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as a limitation on the powers of the Legislature. Except where expressly prohibited by
the Charter, each and every power under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, which would be competent for the people of the City to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/526
expressly grant to the City, shall be construed to be granted to the City by this Charter. All references to State law herein shall be construed to include
the referenced and/or governing provisions as now and hereafter amended.
(Amended May 5, 2018)
Editor's note–Former Section 11.18 “Submission of Charter to Voters” was deleted May 8, 2010.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the code of ordinances of the City of Cedar Park as compiled, edited and published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc.
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of
Cedar Park, Texas,” and may be so cited.
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the article or
section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles and sections, nor as any part of the articles and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Cedar Park, Texas.
City Manager, City Secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words “City Manager,” “City Secretary,” “chief of police” or other city
officers or departments shall be construed to mean the City Manager, City Secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments,
respectively, of the city.
Council. Whenever the words “council” or “this council” or “the council” are used, they shall mean the City Council of the city.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the Counties of Williamson and Travis, Texas.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations
as well as to males.
May. Is permissive.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Must and shall. Are each mandatory.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
the city.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/526
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as
to individuals.
Property. Means and includes real and personal property.
Real property. Means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. Means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. Shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public
rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
Year. Shall mean a calendar year.
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable and
if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
code, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in the code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been
previously repealed.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or presented to the City Council for
enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, the code of ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be
made by reference to the chapter and section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure so to do shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such ordinances.
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council. A
supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council or adopted by initiative
and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the
new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance
included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by omission thereof
from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may
make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody
them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the article material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement
and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other subdivision numbers;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/526
(4) Change the words “this article” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc.,
as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance articles or sections inserted into the
code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or
already embodied in the code.
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such provisions of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00). However, a fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public
health and sanitation including the dumping of refuse may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, however, that no penalty shall be
greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of
this code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as
abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.010 Issuance of citations
In addition to certified peace officers, any city code enforcement officer and building inspector may issue a citation for a violation of a city ordinance
or a code adopted pursuant to a city ordinance. The authority of the code enforcement officer and/or building inspector shall extend to the issuance of
citations only for violations of an ordinance or a code that the officer/inspector is charged with inspecting, overseeing, or enforcing. Such citation
shall be for a class C misdemeanor in municipal court, unless otherwise provided by law, for a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)
per day and each day a violation occurs shall be a separate offense. (Ordinance CO41-10-09-09-C1 adopted 9/9/10)
Sec. 1.01.011 Culpable mental states for ordinance violations
(a) Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code that is punishable by a fine that does not
exceed $500.00 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense.
(b) Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code that is punishable by a fine that exceeds
$500.00 shall require a culpable mental state of intent, knowledge, or recklessness.
(Ordinance CO47-18-09-13-E2 adopted 9/13/18)
ARTICLE 1.02 ADOPTION OF HOME RULE CHARTER*
The home rule charter of the city, adopted at the election held within said city on the 17th day of January, 1987, shall upon the adoption of this article
and upon this date be put into full effect in its entirety; and the whole of said charter is now declared to be in full effect as the home rule charter of
said city. (1998 Code, art. 1.400)
ARTICLE 1.03 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS
The City Council shall hold meetings in accordance with the Rules of Procedure adopted by the Council. The City Council may, on the call of the
Mayor, or a majority of the Council, reschedule the date or time of any such regular meeting, but must provide public notice of any rescheduled
meeting as required by law. (Ordinance CO35-18-08-09-E1 adopted 8/9/18)
ARTICLE 1.04 CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES AGAINST THE CITY*
(a) The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not,
unless the person damaged or injured, or someone on his behalf, or in the event injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause
of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within sixty (60) days from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in
writing to the mayor and City Council of the following facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was
received;
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained;
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained;
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred;
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/526
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented;
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of
the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured
person is committed;
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and
addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof.
(b) No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous
to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the City Council for redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the case may be, and
that the same was by vote of the City Council refused.
(c) All notices required by this article shall be effectuated by serving them upon the mayor at the following location: City Hall, 600 North Bell
Boulevard, Cedar Park, Texas 78613, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above.
(d) Neither the mayor, city councilmember, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of
this article.
(e) The written notice required under this article shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him
to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice
may be considered by the City Council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained
therein.
(f) If any provision of this article or the application hereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of the article which can be given effect without defeating the purpose or objective of the provisions, and to this end, the
provisions of this article are declared to be severable.
(g) The notice provisions required herein shall not be applicable in cases in which the plaintiff can demonstrate good cause, actual notice by the
city, or civil rights violations.
(1998 Code, art. 1.300)
ARTICLE 1.05 CITY DEPOSITORY
Sec. 1.05.001 City depository
All fund accounts of the city shall be maintained in a city depository or investment accounts approved by the City Council. (1998 Code, sec. 1.701)
Sec. 1.05.002 Monthly reports
The City Manager shall make a monthly written report to the City Council which shall describe in detail all city fund accounts. The report shall set
forth the type of account, the interest rate (if any) on the funds in such account, the securities pledged against such account and the current market
value of the securities. (1998 Code, sec. 1.702)
Sec. 1.05.003 Authorized signatories
The forms or documents used to open all city accounts shall specifically provide that at least two (2) authorized signatures are required to validate the
transfer of city funds or the issuance of a city check or draft. A transfer, check, or draft shall include any two (2) of the following authorized
signatories:
(1) City Manager
(2) Mayor
(3) Mayor pro tem
(4) City Secretary
(1998 Code, sec. 1.703)
ARTICLE 1.06 PAYMENT OF PROFESSIONAL FEES
Sec. 1.06.001 Payment of professional fees required
An applicant shall pay all professional consultation costs, fees, and expenses, including, but not limited to, legal fees and expenses, incurred by the
city in connection with the review, evaluation, approval, revision, and/or rejection of a zoning request, a variance request, a subdivision request, a
building permit request, a site plan review, a construction plan review, a traffic study, a building and fire safety code review, an environmental
review, a request for the city to enter into a contract or an agreement, a request for the enactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance, a request for
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/526
special development consideration, an inquiry under Chapter 245 of the Local Government Code, or any other matter requiring professional
consultation.
Sec. 1.06.002 Non-refundable fee
An applicant making a zoning request, a variance request, a subdivision request, a building permit request, a site plan review, a construction plan
review, a traffic study, a building and fire safety code review, an environmental review, a request for the city to enter into a contract or an agreement,
a request for the enactment or amendment of an ordinance, a request for special development consideration, an inquiry under Chapter 245 of the
Local Government Code, or any other matter requiring professional consultation shall pay a non-refundable fee for professional consultation services
in the amount of $200.00 in addition to all other applicable fees.
Sec. 1.06.003 Additional deposit
In the event that the non-refundable fee set forth in section 1.06.002 is inadequate to pay all costs, fees, and expenses for professional consultation
relating to a zoning request, a variance request, a subdivision request, a building permit request, a site plan review, a construction plan review, a
traffic study, a building and fire safety code review, an environmental review, a request for the city to enter into a contract or an agreement, a request
for the enactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance, a request for special development consideration, an inquiry under Chapter 245 of the Local
Government Code, or any other matter requiring professional consultation, the City Manager and the City Attorney shall determine an appropriate
sum to be deposited as directed by the City Manager and the City Attorney prior to initiating the review, evaluation, approval, revision, and/or
rejection of a zoning request, a variance request, a subdivision request, a building permit request, a site plan review, a construction plan review, a
traffic study, a building and fire safety code review, an environmental review, a request for the city to enter into a contract or an agreement, a request
for the enactment or amendment of an ordinance, a request for special development consideration, an inquiry under Chapter 245 of the Local
Government Code, or any other matter requiring professional consultation. Applicant shall post such deposit, and the city or its professional
consultants, including, but not limited to, its planners, engineers, and/or attorneys, shall bill against such deposit for costs, fees, and expenses
incurred. In the event that such deposit is exhausted, applicant shall replenish the deposit as directed by the City Manager and the City Attorney. Any
excess deposit remaining after payment of all costs, fees, and expenses for professional consultation shall be refunded to the applicant.
Sec. 1.06.004 Alternative periodic payment
Alternatively and in lieu of an additional deposit under section 1.06.003, the City Council, in its sole discretion, may authorize an applicant to pay all
costs, fees, and expenses for professional consultation upon the submission of periodic statements to the applicant, which periodic statements shall be
due and payable as directed by City Council within thirty (30) days after issuance thereof. The City Council may, in its sole discretion, approve
alternative periodic payment if:
(1) It is in the best interest of the city; and
(2) The applicant provides suitable proof of his ability to pay.
Sec. 1.06.005 Complete application
No application or request shall be accepted or considered complete until:
(1) The non-refundable fee pursuant to section 1.06.002 has been paid; and
(2) Any additional deposit pursuant to section 1.06.003 has been made or the City Council has approved alternative periodic payments
pursuant to section 1.06.004.
Sec. 1.06.006 Failure to pay
No approval shall be issued by the city in connection with any application or request until the applicant has paid:
(1) The nonrefundable fee pursuant to section 1.06.002; and
(2) All costs, fees, and expenses incurred by the city with its professional consultants, including, but not limited to, its planners,
engineers, and/or attorneys.
Sec. 1.06.007 Political subdivisions excluded
This article shall not apply to the federal government, the state government, or any department or political subdivision thereof.
Sec. 1.06.008 Waiver or refund of professional fees
The City Council has and retains sole discretion to waive or refund, in whole or in part, any professional costs, fees, and expenses paid or payable
under sections 1.06.002, 1.06.003, or 1.06.004 if the City Council finds the project relating to the application or request meets one or more of the
following criteria:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/526
(1) The project entails significant special circumstances or conditions that justify an exception to the city's general development policy;
(2) The project entails special development considerations that will result in increased development costs over the usual and customary
development costs within the city and/or its extraterritorial jurisdiction;
(3) The project entails a higher quality public infrastructure, furthers a public purpose, and provides a public benefit;
(4) The project will contribute to the economic development of the city and will improve the quality of life for residents of the city; and
(5) The project will generate other taxes or revenues, particularly sales and use taxes, that will offset the waiver or refund of
professional costs, fees, and expenses.
Sec. 1.06.009 Dispute concerning professional fee
In the event that an applicant disputes the necessity or reasonableness of all or any portion of an additional deposit under section 1.06.003 or an
alternative periodic payment under section 1.06.004, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, determine the necessity and/or reasonableness of the
additional deposit or alternative periodic payment in dispute and adjust the additional deposit or alternative periodic payment as the City Council
deems appropriate.
(Ordinance CO-01-01-25-M.1. adopted 1/25/01)
ARTICLE 1.07 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.07.001 Definition of municipal records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other
information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the
laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures
authorized by it and in no other manner. (1998 Code, sec. 1.801)
Sec. 1.07.002 Additional definitions
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the
recreation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the
city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records
for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control
schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space
effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of
micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records liaison officer. The persons designated under section 1.07.010 of this article.
Records management committee. The committee established in section 1.07.006 of this article.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.07.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.07.007 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated
with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1998 Code, sec. 1.802)
Sec. 1.07.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.07.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by
virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The
unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (1998 Code, sec. 1.803)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/526
Sec. 1.07.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of
records from their creation to their ultimate disposition consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (1998 Code, sec. 1.804)
Sec. 1.07.005 Designation of records management officer
The City Secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each
successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial
designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. (1998 Code, sec. 1.805)
Sec. 1.07.006 Establishment of records management committee
A records management committee consisting of the City Secretary, finance director and City Attorney is hereby established. The committee shall:
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed;
(3) Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer;
(4) Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 1.806)
Sec. 1.07.007 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission
to the City Council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to
adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be
designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the City Council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs,
commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, and microfilmed in
accordance with said plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head
or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be
used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 1.807)
Sec. 1.07.008 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to
ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and
policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to
determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/526
(9) Disseminate, to the City Council and department heads, information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local
government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in
the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of
records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of city records is carried out in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records
microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the City Council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city,
including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) above; and
(15) Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with policies and procedures
of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act.
(1998 Code, sec. 1.808)
Sec. 1.07.009 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient
and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head
and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 1.809)
Sec. 1.07.010 Designation of records liaison officers
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records
management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program
that more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison
officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records
created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the
resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as records liaison officer, the department head
shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. (1998
Code, sec. 1.810)
Sec. 1.07.011 Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct and supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records
control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records
management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(1998 Code, sec. 1.811)
Sec. 1.07.012 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a
department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control
schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/526
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it
is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the
department and the records management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and a majority
of the records management committee.
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the Texas State
Library as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for fling. The records
management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian of the Texas State Library.
(1998 Code, sec. 1.812)
Sec. 1.07.013 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.07.012, shall be implemented by department
heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management
committee that the record be retained for an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the
records management officer from a majority of the records management committee.
(1998 Code, sec. 1.813)
Sec. 1.07.014 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director
and librarian of the Texas State Library an approved destruction authorization request. (1998 Code, sec. 1.814)
Sec. 1.07.015 Records center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 1.07.007, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records
management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management
plan developed under section 1.07.007. (1998 Code, sec. 1.815)
Sec. 1.07.016 Micrographics
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the City Council, all microfilming of records will be centralized
and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the
microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the
microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish
criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the
centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost effectiveness, administrative
efficiency, and compliance with the rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. (1998 Code, sec. 1.816)
ARTICLE 1.08 MUNICIPAL COURT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.08.001 Fines
All persons convicted of any offense and punished by fine shall be committed into the hands of the chief of police until the costs and fine are paid, or
until such fine has been discharged in a manner provided by the laws of the State of Texas. In cases where fines are discharged in a manner other than
by payment in cash, officer's fees shall be paid out of the general fund. (1998 Code, sec. 8.601)
Sec. 1.08.002 Judge to assess costs
In all cases filed in the municipal court of the city, where convictions shall be had, the judge shall assess costs against the convicted parties in such
amounts as may be provided by law for justice courts. Provided that the judge, when in his opinion justice may be served, may in any case order that
no costs be assessed against the convicted party. (1998 Code, sec. 8.602)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/526
Sec. 1.08.003 Fines and costs to be deposited into general fund
All fines and costs collected in criminal cases filed in the municipal court shall go into the general fund of the city out of which shall be paid to the
officers of the court such fees as they may be entitled to by law or ordinance. (1998 Code, sec. 8.603)
Sec. 1.08.004 Special expense for issuance and service of arrest warrant
(a) A person who is arrested after issuance and service of an arrest warrant for an offense under Section 38.11, Penal Code, or under Section 149,
Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (Article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), shall be assessed a special expense by the judge of the
municipal court in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Such special expense shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the
city.
(b) After due notice of default of personal bond, a person who is arrested after issuance and service of an arrest warrant for failure to appear under
Article 17.04, Code of Criminal Procedure, shall be assessed a special expense by the judge of the municipal court in the amount of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00). Such special expense shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.604)
Sec. 1.08.005 Defensive driving administrative fee
Any defendant in a traffic offense being prosecuted in Cedar Park Municipal Court who requests and is granted dismissal of the charges against him
by taking defensive driving pursuant to Article 6701(d), Section 143, V.T.C.S., shall pay a fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the
appendix of this code to the court to cover administrative and handling costs incurred by the court. (1998 Code, sec. 8.605)
Sec. 1.08.006 Miscellaneous court costs
(a) Local court costs as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code shall be collected from any offender convicted of:
(1) A violation of V.A.C.S., Article 6701d which occurs within a school crossing zone;
(2) A violation of Article 6701d, Section 104 (overtaking and passing a school bus); or
(3) A violation of Education Code, Section 4.25 (thwarting compulsory attendance).
(b) Local court costs as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code shall be collected upon conviction of any city parking
ordinance.
(c) Additional local court costs as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code shall be collected from any offender
convicted of an offense under V.A.C.S., Article 6701d except those where a higher cost is provided by this section.
(d) Except in those instances in which higher court costs are provided by this section, court costs as provided for in the fee schedule found in the
appendix of this code shall be collected on Penal Code Class C misdemeanors punishable by fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in section 1.01.009 of this code and court costs as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code shall be collected on such
misdemeanors punishable by fine in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(e) A court cost as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code shall be assessed upon conviction of an offense under
V.A.C.S., 6687b-2, the Texas Commercial Driver's License Act. The fee shall be divided with the State of Texas as provided by state law. All interest
earned on such fee shall be retained by the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.606)
Secs. 1.08.007—1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Building Security Fund*
Sec. 1.08.031 Creation
There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Building Security Fund (the “Fund”) pursuant to Article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. (1998 Code, sec. 8.301)
Sec. 1.08.032 Fee amount
The municipal court of the city (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the “fee”)
in the amount as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code against all defendants convicted in a trial of a misdemeanor
offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. (1998 Code, sec. 8.302)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/526
Sec. 1.08.033 Collection
The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the city. All fees so collected and
paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund. (1998 Code, sec. 8.303)
Sec. 1.08.034 Use of fund
The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or buildings housing the
municipal court of the city. “Security devices and/or services” shall include any and all items described in Article 102.017(d) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. (1998 Code, sec. 8.304)
Sec. 1.08.035 Administration
The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. (1998 Code, sec. 8.305)
Sec. 1.08.036—1.08.050 Reserved
Division 3. Municipal Court Technology Fund*
Sec. 1.08.051 Created
There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund (the “fund”) pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. The fund shall be maintained in an interest bearing account.
Sec. 1.08.052 Fee
The municipal court of the city (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court technology fee (the “fee”) in an
amount provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, against all defendants convicted by the municipal court in a trial of any
misdemeanor offense committed on or after the effective date hereof. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the
fee.
Sec. 1.08.053 Collection
The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the city. All fees so collected and
paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund.
Sec. 1.08.054 Purpose
The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city including,
but not limited to:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; and
(8) Docket management systems.
Sec. 1.08.055 Administration
The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the city.
(Ordinance 99-034 adopted 10/14/99)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/526
Editor's note–Former section 1.08.056 pertaining to the expiration of the municipal court technology fund was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance CO12-08-04-10-3A adopted by
the city on April 10, 2008.
Secs. 1.08.056–1.08.070 Reserved
Division 4. Juvenile Case Manager Fund
Sec. 1.08.071 Creation of juvenile case manager fee
There is hereby established a juvenile case manager fee, as authorized by Texas Code of Criminal Procedure sections 102.0174 and 45.056, as
amended by H.B. 1575, 79th Tex. Leg. 2005. The juvenile case manager fee shall be $5.00, unless a greater sum is allowed by state law, in which
case the amount of the fee shall be the maximum amount allowed by state law.
Sec. 1.08.072 Applicability
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this division, a defendant who is convicted of a fine only misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay the
juvenile case manager fee established in section 1.08.071 as a cost of court. For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted of an
offense if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the defendant by the court; or
(2) The defendant receives deferred disposition from the court, including deferred proceedings under article 45.052 or 45.053 of the
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The Municipal Court judge may waive the Juvenile Case Manager fee in cases of demonstrated financial hardship on the part of a convicted
defendant if the defendant is indigent, has insufficient resources or income to pay the fee, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying
fine or costs.
Sec. 1.08.073 Juvenile case manager fund
(a) There is hereby created the Juvenile Case Manager fund. The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council.
(b) All Juvenile Case Manager fees collected by the Municipal Court shall be deposited into the Juvenile Case Manager fund established under
subsection (a) above.
(c) The juvenile case management fund may be used only to finance the salary and benefits of a Juvenile Case Manager that is employed by the
Municipal Court under section 1.08.074 below and Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, article 45.056(a).
Sec. 1.08.074 Juvenile case manager
The City Council hereby authorizes the Municipal Court to employ one or more full-time or part-time Juvenile Case Managers to provide services in
cases involving juvenile offenders before the court, (including cases brought under sections 25.093 and 25.094 of the Texas Education Code),
consistent with the court's statutory powers.
(Ordinance CO02-08-10-09-C2 adopted 10/9/08)
Secs. 1.08.075–1.08.090 Reserved
Division 5. Juror Reimbursement
Sec. 1.08.091 Juror reimbursement
A person who, in response to a jury summons from the Municipal Court, is selected for jury service, and is not excused through the voir dire process,
is entitled to receive as reimbursement for travel and other expenses, the amount of:
(1) $10.00 per day for each day or fraction of each day the person is in attendance in court in response to the jury summons and
discharges the person's duty for that day.
Sec. 1.08.092 Verification
The Municipal Court clerk is hereby directed to present to the finance department a list of jurors entitled to receive compensation from the City
following jury trial.
(Ordinance CO06-08-11-20-C1 adopted 11/20/08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/526
ARTICLE 1.09 LIBRARY REGULATIONS
Sec. 1.09.001 Definition
Library materials.
(1) All property of the City of Cedar Park Library available for use by: residents within the City, residents who live in extraterritorial
jurisdictions that have an interlocal agreement with the City, and nonresidents who have obtained a City of Cedar Park library
membership.
(2) This term includes: books, articles, media, digital content, equipment, and other materials.
Sec. 1.09.002 Removal of library materials
No person shall remove or borrow any library materials from the premises of the Cedar Park Public Library or from digital content systems unless
and until such removal of library materials has been consented to, recorded and charged out in the library system of the Cedar Park Public Library.
(1) Residents within the City limits of Cedar Park, residents who live in extraterritorial jurisdictions that have an interlocal agreement
with the City, or nonresidents who own real property within the City limits may borrow library materials from the City Library at no
charge. Proper identification and proof of current address or property ownership must be provided at the time of registration.
(2) Nonresidents who do not own real property within the City limits wishing to borrow library materials shall purchase a nonresident
library membership for a period of either: one year, six months, or three months. The charge for such memberships shall be as provided
for in the fee schedule found in the Appendix A of this Code.
(3) TexShare cardholders may borrow physical library materials from the City Library at no charge. TexShare cardholders are not
eligible to borrow digital library materials from the City Library at no charge. TexShare cardholders are participants in the TexShare Card
System, established under the Texas Government Code, chapter 441, libraries and archives, subchapter M, TexShare Library Consortium,
as amended.
Sec. 1.09.003 Return of library materials
It shall be unlawful for any person to retain or fail to return any library materials beyond the date designated by the library employee or designee at
the time such material is removed by consent of the Library, or beyond any extensions of time granted by the Library.
Sec. 1.09.004 Fines and late charges for failure to return library materials
Any person failing to return any library materials on or before the date designated as provided in section 1.09.003 shall be liable for replacement fees
as provided by Appendix A of this Code. If the offending person or borrower of the library materials is under eighteen (18) years of age, then the
parent or guardian who signed for the membership for such person shall be liable for replacement fees as provided in Appendix A of this Code, to be
assessed against such parent or guardian.
Sec. 1.09.005 Use of false identification or false names
It shall be unlawful for any person to register or furnish a false name or address to obtain a library membership or to forge or furnish false
identification for the purpose of borrowing or removing library materials from the Cedar Park Public Library. Any violation of this section may be
charged as a class C misdemeanor and fined in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this Code.
Sec. 1.09.006 Defacing, damaging or destroying, etc., library materials
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or destroy any library materials. Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to fees in
accordance with Appendix A of this Code.
Sec. 1.09.007 Public library's community room and conference room rules and regulations
(a) The Cedar Park Public Library's community room and conference room are facilities of the City.
(b) The rooms are available for public meetings and programs on a first-come, first-served basis and may be reserved up to six months in advance.
However, all reservations are subject to the City's priority status for City uses. The City may, without notice, preempt any reservation of the rooms.
(c) User shall pay all applicable fees to use a community room or conference room required pursuant to Appendix A of this Code upon reservation.
No refunds will be made for any reservation cancelled by the user within two weeks of scheduled use.
(d) No part of the library building is to be reserved for the exclusive use of anyone, nor shall entry or reservation be denied on the grounds of race,
color, national origin, creed, religion, political belief, sex, sexual orientation, age or disability.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/526
(e) The user shall perform all cleaning in accordance with the room rental agreement, on file with library staff, at the conclusion of use and shall be
responsible for the cost of any damage to the rooms or facility. The City may retain any portion of the cleaning/damage deposit, required pursuant
to Appendix A, necessary to cover actual cost of repairs, up to the full amount of the deposit. Any damages to the rooms or facility beyond the
amount of the cleaning/damage deposit will be the responsibility of the user, and the user shall reimburse the City for the actual cost of all repairs.
(f) Any user of the library community room or conference room shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers,
employees, agents and representatives against all claims of liability and causes of action resulting from injury or damage to persons or property
arising out of use.
(g) Failure to comply with the above rules will result in forfeiting the right to use the community room, or conference room, and all fees paid.
Sec. 1.09.008 Miscellaneous fees
Fees for interlibrary loans between the Library and other libraries and for use of miscellaneous library materials by patrons may be assessed by
library staff in accordance with Appendix A.
(Ordinance CO05-18-12-13-E1 adopted 12/13/18)
ARTICLE 1.10 PARKS, ARTS, AND COMMUNITY ENRICHMENT (PACE) ADVISORY BOARD*
Sec. 1.10.001 Establishment of board; roles and responsibilities
The City's Parks, Arts, and Community Enrichment (PACE) Advisory Board (the “board”) is hereby created and established for the purpose of
assisting with the development and promotion of a comprehensive cultural and recreational enrichment program for the City and shall have the
following roles and responsibilities:
(1) The board shall promote the beautification, economic vitality, and attractiveness of the City through arts, culture and recreation.
(2) The board shall work towards providing a high quality of life for residents and creating a unique and positive experience for
visitors.
(3) The board shall advise the City Council on the development, maintenance, protection and enhancement of public art, which shall
include all art or artwork purchased, commissioned, owned or displayed by the City through the City's public art program for the public's
enjoyment; matters pertaining to the acquisition, planning, and development, of all parks and recreation facilities and leisure activities on
municipal grounds; and on other projects pertaining to community enrichment.
(4) The board shall evaluate programs and facilities that may be incorporated within the scope of parks and recreation, public art, and
community enrichment.
(5) The board shall assist with the development and implementation of the parks and recreation and public arts master plans.
Sec. 1.10.002 Youth program standards of care
The City Council hereby adopts the City Parks and Recreation Department youth programs standards of care duly filed with the City Secretary's
office.
Sec. 1.10.003 Number of members, appointments, terms
(a) The board shall be composed of seven (7) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City and appointed by the City Council. The
members shall serve staggered two-year terms with odd-numbered seats running from August 1st to July 31st of odd-numbered years and evennumbered
seats running from August 1st to July 31st of even-numbered years and until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The
initial appointments for places 2, 4 and 6 will serve two-year terms and the initial appointments for places 1, 3, 5, and 7 will serve a one-year term.
(b) A board position shall become vacant if the board member fails to attend three (3) consecutive board meetings without being excused by the
board.
(c) It is the public policy of the City that the board shall reflect the composition of the community and be balanced according to expertise, interest
and geography. Board appointments shall be made without regard to race, sex, religion or national origin.
(d) The board shall adopt bylaws regulating its activities and shall elect officers to more efficiently conduct its business.
Sec. 1.10.004 Officers
The board shall have a Chair, Vice-Chair, and Secretary, whose term shall be one (1) year. The Chair, Vice-Chair, and Secretary shall be elected by
the board members. The chair shall preside over meetings and shall be entitled to vote upon each issue. The Vice-Chair shall assist the Chair in
directing the affairs of the board. In the absence of the chair, the Vice-Chair shall assume all duties of the chair. The Secretary shall assume the duties
of the Chair in the absence of the Chair and Vice-Chair.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/526
Sec. 1.10.005 Vacancies; removal
When vacancies occur on the board, the City Council shall appoint, by majority vote, a replacement to serve the remainder of the term. Each board
member serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed at the discretion of the City Council.
Sec. 1.10.006 Funding
(a) All monies appropriated for public art program purposes shall be transferred into a public art program fund, which shall be maintained
separately from other City funds.
(b) Public art program funds shall be used for artists' fees and costs related to the production, installation, and maintenance of artwork. Funds may
be used for costs associated with the promotion of and administration of board projects and programs.
(c) For each eligible capital improvement project, one percent (1%) of the total of all appropriated engineering, design and construction costs, less
all costs for demolition and real property acquisition, and exclusive of any subsequent amendments or change orders, shall be allocated at the time of
project appropriation to the City's public art program fund for the purpose of funding the public art program. 0.95% of the one percent (1%)
allocation shall be used for the costs associated with public art, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and deaccessioning of public art, and the
costs of selection, installation, administration, community education, and registration of public art. 0.05% of the one percent (1%) allocation shall be
used for the maintenance and conservation costs associated with public art.
(d) For purposes of this section, “eligible capital improvement project” shall mean a project with a total budgeted allocation not less than
$50,000.00 that is funded wholly or in part by voter-approved general obligation bonds for construction, renovation or remodeling of any public
building, structure, or park, and for which the authorizing ballot language expressly identified the 1% allocation for the public art program, with the
exception of the following projects: water, sewer and other utility fund projects; land acquisition; projects consisting solely of the purchase or
installation of equipment, including, but not limited to, lighting, traffic signals, signage, underground utilities, electronics, playground, equipment, or
HVAC; and projects involving the resurfacing, repainting, roofing or overlay of existing streets, sidewalks, trails, parking lots, buildings, or
structures.
(e) City water customers may elect to make a voluntary monthly donation in an amount of their choice to be deposited in the public art program
fund with the payment of the customer's water utility bill. The donation is strictly voluntary and will be made available to all City water customers
who pay their bill in person, via mail, or online.
(f) Hotel/motel occupancy tax revenues collected pursuant to article 10.03 of this code may be used for board projects in accordance with state law
and support of the City's Tourism Advisory Board.
(g) Type B tax revenue may be eligible for board projects contingent upon the approval of the City's Community Development Corporation (type
B board).
(h) Pursuant to section 12.20.001(a) of this Code, parks and recreation projects may receive funding from parkland cash contributions paid in lieu
of property dedication.
(i) Voluntary donations from organizations or individuals in the form of monetary gifts, personal property, or real property may also be accepted
and used to support and fund PACE.
(j) The combining of the multiple funding sources may be used to fund board projects pertaining to both parks and recreation and public arts.
Sec. 1.10.007 Open meetings
All meetings of the board shall be held in conformance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, as amended. The minutes of each board meeting shall be
filed with the office of the City Secretary.
(Ordinance CO46-14-05-08-C1 adopted 5/8/14)
ARTICLE 1.11 PUBLIC INFORMATION REQUESTS
Sec. 1.11.001 Charge for public information
(a) Each person requesting copies of public information shall pay a fee for such copies, said fee to be calculated in accordance with the rules
promulgated by the Texas Attorney General of the state governing charges for public information, as they exist now and as may be amended. Where
appropriate under the rules of the Texas Attorney General and the laws of the state, as they exist now and as may be amended, a charge shall also be
imposed for access to public information.
(b) The City Manager or designee may provide copies of public information or access to public information free of charge or at a reduced charge if
it is determined that waiver or reduction of the charge is in the public interest because providing the copy of the information primarily benefits the
general public. In addition, the City Manager or designee may waive the charge for copies of or access to public information if the cost of processing
the collection charge will exceed the amount of the charge.
Sec. 1.11.002 Requests that include large amounts of employee or personnel time
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/526
(a) After personnel of the City collectively have spent 36 hours of time producing public information for inspection or duplication for a requestor
during the City's 12-month fiscal year (October–September), the City shall recover from the requestor any costs attributable to any further personnel
time spent producing information for inspection or duplication from the requestor.
(b) The charge for personnel costs incurred in processing a request for public information is $15 per hour. When applicable, the personnel charge
will be prorated to recover the cost of personnel time spent complying with requests.
(c) Personnel time will not be recovered for any time spent by an attorney, legal assistant, or any other person who reviews the requested
information:
(1) To determine whether the City will raise any exceptions to disclosure of the requested information under subchapter C of the Public
Information Act.
(2) To research or prepare a request for a ruling by the attorney general's office pursuant to subchapter G of the Public Information Act.
(Ordinance CO67-07-12-06-3B, sec. 2, adopted 11/6/07)
Sec. 1.11.003 Charge for municipal court records
(a) Each person requesting copies of Municipal Court records shall pay a fee for such copies, said fee to be calculated in accordance with the rules
promulgated by the Texas Attorney General of the state governing charges for public information as they exist now and as may be amended. Where
appropriate under the rules of the Texas Attorney General and the laws of the state as they exist now and as may be amended, a charge shall also be
imposed for access to Municipal Court records.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a person shall not be charged for copies of Municipal Court records requested in conjunction
with a Municipal Court case to which that person is a party. For purposes of this section, a person is a party to a Municipal Court case if the person is
a complainant or defendant in the case or if the person is a representative of a complainant or defendant in the case.
(c) The judge of the Municipal Court may provide copies of Municipal Court records or access to Municipal Court records free of charge or at a
reduced charge if it is determined that waiver or reduction of the charge is in the public interest because providing the copy of the information
primarily benefits the general public. In addition, the judge may waive the charge for copies of or access to Municipal Court records if the cost of
processing the collection charge will exceed the amount of the charge. Finally, the judge may waive or reduce the charge for copies of or access to
Municipal Court records if it is determined such waiver or reduction is in the interest of justice.
(d) The clerk of the Municipal Court may waive the charge for copies of or access to Municipal Court records if the cost of processing the
collection charge will exceed the amount of the charge.
(Ordinance CO67-07-12-06-3B, sec. 3, adopted 11/6/07)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be construed so as to give them the same meaning as they have in
common usage and so as to give these provisions the most reasonable application, and as used herein, the singular shall include the plural and the
plural the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
Animal. Any living, nonhuman, domesticated mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird, insect, or arachnid being kept, maintained, fed, or harbored
within the city.
Animal control. The animal control division of the police department, including animal control officers and staff.
Animal control officer. An employee or agent of the city, designated by the chief of police, to administer and enforce the licensing, inspection, and
enforcement requirements contained within this chapter; the terms shall also include peace officers, code enforcement officers, and such other
persons designated by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
At-large.
(1) Any dog not on its owner's property or the property of another person with such owner's consent which is:
(A) Not secured by means of a leash, chain, or other restraint of sufficient strength to control the actions of such dog;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/526
(B) Not fully contained within a cage, crate, kennel, or similar enclosure; or
(C) Not fully confined to such property by a confinement fence of sufficient height and strength, excluding an electric fence or
invisible fence, or by means of a leash, chain, or other restraint of sufficient strength to prevent the dog from escaping the property
and so arranged that the dog shall remain upon the property the device is stretched to full length, and with such property owner's
consent;
(2) Any livestock or fowl on its owner's property or the property of another, regardless of consent, if such livestock or fowl is not fully
confined as required by article 2.05 of this chapter; or
(3) Any animal, other than a dog, cat, livestock, or fowl, not on its owner's property or the property of another person with such owner's
consent.
Cat. Any domesticated feline or member of the family Felis domestica, not including feral or wild felines.
City of Cedar Park or city. The City of Cedar Park, Texas, a municipal corporation duly formed pursuant to the laws of the state and having its
principal place of business at 600 N. Bell Boulevard, Cedar Park, Texas 78613, including its officers, employees, agents, and representatives, and the
corporate and extraterritorial boundaries within which the provisions of this chapter may be enforced.
Cruelly treated. Any animal which has been tortured, seriously overworked, unreasonably abandoned, unreasonably deprived of necessary food, care,
or shelter, cruelly confined, or caused to fight with another animal, as defined in section 821.021, Texas Health & Safety Code, et seq., as amended.
Dangerous cat. A cat that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the cat
was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the cat from leaving the enclosure on its own;
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the cat was being kept and that was reasonably certain to
prevent the cat from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the cat will attack and cause
bodily injury to that person.
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog
was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to
prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and
cause bodily injury to that person, as defined by Texas Health & Safety Code, section 822.041(2), as amended.
Dangerous wild animal. A lion, tiger, ocelot, cougar, leopard, cheetah, jaguar, bobcat, lynx, serval, caracal, hyena, bear, coyote, jackal, baboon,
chimpanzee, orangutan, gorilla, or any hybrid thereof, as defined by section 822.101, Texas Health & Safety Code, as amended, in addition to any
animal of a species that is wild by nature, normally found in a wild state, not naturally tame or gentle, and/or because of its size, toxicity, vicious
nature, or other characteristics constitutes a danger to public health, safety, or welfare, including but not limited to, the following: all nonhuman
primates, all four-legged mammals (other than dogs, cats, ferrets, gerbils, hamsters, mice, potbellied pigs, rabbits, and livestock, as permitted herein
this chapter), all venomous reptiles and amphibians of any size and constricting reptiles of six (6) feet or more in length, all birds (other than fowl
and common household birds, as permitted by this chapter), alligators, bats, crocodiles, emus, ostriches, or any hybrid of such animals.
Dog. Any domesticated canine or member of the family Canis lupus familiaris.
(Ordinance CO20-11-12-22-C1 adopted 12/22/11)
Domestic animals. Recognized domestic breeds of dogs and/or cats, birds, fish, gerbils, hamsters, nonpoisonous reptiles, and potbellied pigs. This
definition excludes dangerous wild animals. (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1 adopted 11/9/17)
Electric fence or invisible fence. A training device only, and not to be constructed as an adequate containment fence, which uses a buried wire or
other means along the perimeter of a premises that transmits a signal to a receiver attached to the collar of the dog, which gives the dog an electric
shock or other warning when the dog approaches the perimeter.
Food establishment. As defined by title 25 of the Texas Administrative Code, section 229.162(40), as amended.
(Ordinance CO20-11-12-22-C1 adopted 12/22/11)
Fowl. Any birds belonging to the game fowl, land fowl (Galliformes), or waterfowl (Anseriformes) biological orders, including but not limited to
poultry, chickens, guineas, laying hens, turkeys, ducks, geese, pheasants, quails, and peacocks, but not including common household birds, emus, and
ostriches.
Livestock. Domesticated mammals other than dogs, cats, ferrets, gerbils, hamsters, mice, potbellied pigs, and rabbits, including but not limited to
horses, cattle, mules, goats, sheep, miniature horses, and other similar animals traditionally raised in an agricultural setting. The term shall also
include emus and ostriches.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1 adopted 11/9/17)
Microchip or chip. An integrated circuit placed under the skin of an animal for purposes of facilitating identification of the animal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/526
Municipal court. The City of Cedar Park Municipal Court, including its staff.
Off-leash area. A designated area of a city park facility within which dogs may freely roam in compliance with posted rules for such city park facility
and/or area.
Owner. Any person or persons, association, or entity, including any member of owner's immediate family, employee, or agent, having the right of
property, care, custody, or control of an animal, who possesses, harbors, or maintains an animal, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or
about any premises occupied by such person or persons, firm, association, or corporation for a period of three (3) days or more.
Police department. The City of Cedar Park Police Department, including its officers and staff.
Public nuisance or public nuisance animal. Any animal within the city that unreasonably disturbs, annoys, or alarms persons of ordinary sensibility,
endangers the public health, safety, or welfare, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens to quiet enjoyment of life or property, including
but not limited to:
(1) An animal that makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, meowing,
crowing, or other utterances in an excessive, continuous or unreasonable fashion or at unreasonable hours, causing annoyance,
disturbance, or discomfort to, or disrupting the quiet enjoyment of neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal
is kept or harbored;
(2) Any dog in a park or public recreation area, unless the dog is controlled by a leash or similar physical restraint or within a
designated off-leash area within a city park facility, in compliance with posted rules at such city park facility and/or off-leash area;
(3) Any animal that damages any property other than that of its owner;
(4) Any animal that defecates on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, passageway, road bypass, play area, park or any place
where people congregate or walk upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the permission of the private
property owner, if the owner of such an animal that soils, defiles, or defecates on any of the above areas fails to immediately remove the
pet feces and droppings and place them in a designated waste receptacle or other suitable waste container;
(5) Any animal that is found at-large more than three (3) times;
(6) Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored, or that causes
noxious or offensive odors which would be unreasonably annoying or discomforting to neighbors or others in close proximity to the
premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
(7) Any female animal in heat (estrus) that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with animals other than the owner's,
unless for the purpose of planned breeding in compliance with all local, state, and federal laws;
(8) Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner and without reasonable provocation, that approaches and hisses, barks, or
growls at a person in an angry, threatening, and ill-tempered manner and causes that person to have an immediate reasonable fear of
bodily injury, that bites, snaps at, or attacks a person or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons in a public right-ofway,
or that attacks and seriously injures or kills another animal that was properly confined, restrained, or under the physical control of its
owner as required by this chapter;
(9) Any dog or cat that:
(A) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the
dog or cat was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog or cat from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(B) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog or cat was being kept and that was reasonably
certain to prevent the dog or cat from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the
dog or cat will attack and cause bodily injury to that person;
(10) Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way;
(11) Any dog in violation of posted rules governing a city park facility and/or off-leash area;
(12) Any dangerous wild animal, as defined by section 822.101, Texas Health & Safety Code, or this section, as amended; or
(13) Any animal that is a threat to public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number of animals maintained at a single property
and the inadequacy of the care, conditions, or facilities.
Register or registration. The responsibility of the owner of dog and cat of four (4) months of age or older to provide information to the city and
obtain from the city a license for such dog or cat, unless such dog or cat shall be temporarily within the possession of a veterinarian, pet shop, animal
shelter, or humane society.
Registration tag or tag. An identification tag issued by an animal control officer or their designee.
Sanitary. A condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission.
Shelter. A structurally sound and weatherproof shelter consisting of at least three (3) sides and a covered roof which provides access to shade from
direct sunlight and regress from extremes of temperature, thereby providing for an animal's health and comfort.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/526
Tattoo. An indelible identification number placed on an animal by means of inserting pigment under the animal's skin.
Sec. 2.01.002 Administration
(a) Appointment and duties of animal control officer. The City Manager or their designee shall appoint one or more animal control officers and
such assistants as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. An animal control officer's duties shall include enforcement of all city
and state ordinances and laws controlling the activities of wild and domestic animals within the city and shall be empowered to take all actions
provided herein this chapter, including but not limited to the authority to issue citations to persons who violate such laws or ordinances and for which
the individual shall appear, pursuant to the lawfully issued citation or summons, at municipal court to respond to the alleged charge(s). The City
Manager or their designee shall prepare a nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form for use in enforcement of this chapter.
(b) Local rabies control authority. The supervisor of animal control is hereby designated as the local rabies control authority for the purposes of
chapter 826 of the Texas Health & Safety Code (Rabies Control Act of 1982), as amended, and shall be responsible for performing the duties and
responsibilities provided herein.
Sec. 2.01.003 Enforcement; penalty
(a) Primary enforcement of the provisions of this chapter are vested in the animal control officers; however, these provisions may also be enforced
by peace officers, code enforcement officers, and such other persons as are designated by the city. Any and all references to animal control and/or
animal control officer herein shall contemplate and include each of the aforementioned individuals.
(b) Unless otherwise stated herein, the provisions of this chapter are enforceable against an owner and/or their animal as set forth herein. Owner(s)
of animal(s) alleged to be in violation of this chapter are responsible for such violations and subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter and this
code, as amended.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct, resist or oppose any enforcement of the provisions of this chapter by an animal
control officer.
(d) In the enforcement of this chapter, any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the authority to immediately
tranquilize, capture, restrain, and/or destroy any animal to protect themselves, a third person, or another animal from attack or threat of imminent
injury, to prevent an animal from enduring further unreasonable pain or suffering as a result of disease or injury, or when the animal control officer
deems such animal a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare.
(e) Any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to pursue onto private property and apprehend an at-large
animal considered a nuisance without first requesting permission from the owner of the private property or without obtaining a search warrant.
(f) Unless otherwise provided by state law, any violation of this chapter may be charged as a class C misdemeanor; and upon conviction, an owner
shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009 of this code, as amended. For those violations that are of a
continuous nature, a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues and such fine
may be levied for each day that a violation exists.
(g) If an owner has been previously convicted of an offense under this chapter and the owner is subsequently convicted of an offense under the
same provision of this chapter, the owner may be subject to an enhanced fine as set by the municipal court.
Sec. 2.01.004 Discrimination prohibited
Nothing herein this chapter shall be construed to discriminate or permit discrimination against a person with a disability in violation of section
121.003 of the Texas Human Resources Code, as amended, or the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, or any governing federal, state, or
local regulation, rule, code, order, statute, ordinance, or law.
Sec. 2.01.005 Severability
If any one or more of these sections, provisions, clauses, terms, or words of this article or the application of such sections, provisions, clauses, terms,
or words to any situation or circumstance shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect any other sections, provisions, clauses, terms, or words of this article or the applications of such sections, provisions, clauses, terms, or words
to any other situations or circumstance, and it is intended that this article shall be severable and shall be construed and applied as if any such invalid
or unconstitutional section, provision, clause, terms, or word had not been included herein.
ARTICLE 2.02 VACCINATION AND REGISTRATION
Sec. 2.02.001 Vaccination
Every dog and cat over the age of sixteen (16) weeks shall be vaccinated against rabies, as required by section 169.29(a) of the Texas Administrative
Code, as amended.
Sec. 2.02.002 Registration
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/526
(a) To facilitate identification and recovery of dogs and cats, every dog and cat over the age of sixteen (16) weeks being kept, maintained, fed, or
harbored within the city shall be registered, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat over the age of sixteen (16) weeks to possess,
harbor, or maintain the dog or cat within the city unless a registration fee has been paid to and a registration tag provided by the city for such dog or
cat. The registration fees set forth in appendix A, section 1.100 of this code shall be due and payable on or before the date of each year that is the
annual or triennial anniversary of the previous annual or triennial rabies vaccination, respectively. The owner of a dog or cat that has received a
triennial vaccine may pay the triennial registration fee for the period corresponding to such triennial vaccination. The owner of the dog or cat shall
pay a penalty as set forth in appendix A, section 1.100 of this code for each month that the owner fails to pay the registration fee.
(b) At the time of an application for registration, the owner of a dog or cat shall present a written certificate of antirabies vaccination by a
veterinarian. The certificate shall show the name and address of the owner of the dog or cat, shall contain a description of the color, breed, sex and
weight of the dog or cat, together with the type, amount, and duration of vaccine administered and the date of administration, and shall certify that
the dog or cat was so vaccinated and immunized against rabies as required by section 169.29(a) of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended. No
registration fee shall be accepted unless accompanied by the presentation of the current certificate of antirabies vaccination.
State law references–Registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.031 et seq.; confidentiality of certain information in dog or cat registry, V.T.C.A.,
Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.0311.
Sec. 2.02.003 Registration tags to be issued
(a) Application for registration; issuance of tags. Upon presentation to animal control of a completed application for registration, a certificate of
antirabies vaccination, and payment of the applicable registration fee, animal control shall issue to the owner a metallic registration tag which shall at
all times be securely attached to a collar around the neck of the dog or cat for which said registration fee was paid. Any dog or cat not wearing such
collar and registration tag shall constitute prima facie evidence that such dog or cat is in violation of this article.
(b) Issuance of tags by a licensed veterinarian. Alternatively, an owner may submit to any participating licensed veterinarian within the city a
completed application for registration, a certificate of antirabies vaccination, and payment of the applicable registration fee, and upon receipt of the
same, such licensed veterinarian shall issue to the owner a metallic registration tag which shall at all times be securely attached to a collar around the
neck of the dog or cat for which said registration fee was paid. Any licensed veterinarian may obtain from animal control registration tags to be
issued to an owner under this article, provided such licensed veterinarian first tenders to animal control payment for each requested registration tag.
For each registration tag issued by a licensed veterinarian under this article, the issuing licensed veterinarian shall submit to animal control, within
fourteen (14) days of the issuance of a registration tag, information relating to the registration, including the owner's name, address, and phone
number; the dog or cat's breed, color, age, sex, and weight; date and duration (whether annual or triennial) of the dog or cat's most recent antirabies
vaccination; and the number of the registration tag issued to the dog or cat. If any licensed veterinarian shall fail to comply with this article, animal
control may deny future purchase of registration tags for issuance pursuant to this article.
(c) Confidentiality. A licensed veterinarian collecting registration information and issuing registration tags under this article shall preserve the
confidentiality of such information pursuant to section 826.0311, Texas Health & Safety Code, as amended.
Sec. 2.02.004 Issuance of duplicate registration tags
Should a current registration tag be lost or destroyed, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure a duplicate registration tag. Upon animal control's
receipt of an owner's application for registration, certificate of antirabies vaccination, and payment of the duplicate registration tag fee provided for in
appendix A, section 1.100 of this code, animal control shall issue a duplicate metallic registration tag which shall at all times be securely attached to
a collar around the neck of the dog or cat for which said duplicate registration tag fee was paid.
Sec. 2.02.005 Reports of rabies
A person who knows of an animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies, or who
knows of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, shall report to animal control the incident, including the name and address of the victim and of
the animal's owner, if known, and any other information that may help in locating the victim or animal, in accordance with section 826.041, Texas
Health & Safety Code, as amended.
State law references–Authority of municipalities to establish rabies control programs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.015
Sec. 2.02.006 Quarantine of animals
Quarantine of animals shall be in accordance with section 826.042, et seq., Texas Health & Safety Code, as amended, and 25 TAC, section 169.27, as
amended.
State law references–Quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042.
ARTICLE 2.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMALS
Sec. 2.03.001 Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for an animal to be or create a public nuisance within the city. The owner of a public nuisance animal shall be culpable for any
violations of this section.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/526
Sec. 2.03.002 Complaints of public nuisance animals
(a) Whenever any person shall complain to the animal control officer of an alleged public nuisance animal, an animal control officer shall
promptly investigate the complaint and notify the owner of the animal that a complaint has been received.
(b) If the animal control officer does not observe a violation of this article, then the animal control officer shall promptly provide to the
complaining person a nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form.
(c) If the animal control officer observes a violation of this article, or receives from the complaining person a signed and completed
nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form, then a citation shall be issued to the owner of the alleged public nuisance animal, and, if deemed by the
animal control officer to be necessary in order to abate an imminent risk to public health, safety, or welfare, the animal control officer may impound
the alleged public nuisance animal pursuant to sections 2.04.002–2.04.004 of this chapter without regard to whether the animal is at-large.
Sec. 2.03.003 Completion and submission of nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form
(a) The nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form is to be completed voluntarily, truthfully, and accurately by the complaining person, signed,
and then submitted to the animal control officer, police department, or municipal court.
(b) By submitting a nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form, the complaining person agrees to testify as the complaining witness if the matter
should proceed to trial in municipal court.
ARTICLE 2.04 AT-LARGE ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.04.001 Unlawful to allow animal to run at-large
(a) Violation. No person shall cause, permit, or allow an animal to be, and no owner shall fail to prevent their animal from being at-large within the
city. Voice command alone shall not be sufficient restraint, confinement, or control. An at-large animal registered in a person's name shall constitute
prima face evidence that such person is the owner and such person allowed the animal to run at-large. An at-large unregistered animal which
consistently returns to a residence shall constitute prima face evidence that the owner, lessee or occupant of such residence is the owner of the
animal, and that such person allowed the animal to run at-large.
(b) Exceptions. It shall not be a violation of this section:
(1) If an animal is fully confined within its owner's vehicle or trailer, or the vehicle or trailer of another with such owner's consent, in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; or
(2) If a dog is within a designated off-leash area within a city park facility, in compliance with posted rules at such city park facility
and/or off-leash area.
Sec. 2.04.002 Impoundment
(a) Impoundment of animals running at-large. An animal control officer may seize any animal, whether or not vaccinated and/or registered, found
running at-large within the city.
(b) Registry of impounded animals to be kept. An animal control officer, upon seizing any animal, shall make a complete registry entering the
breed, color, sex, species of such animal, and determine if the animal is registered. If registered, the animal control officer shall obtain the name and
address of its owner and the number of the registration tag and make every reasonable effort to promptly notify the owner of the impoundment.
(c) Liability for fees and expenses. The owner of an impounded animal shall be responsible for any fees and expenses incurred by animal control,
the Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter, and/or their designee, for seizure, impoundment, medical treatment, and daily care and boarding of
the impounded animal. In addition to the impoundment fees and expenses, the owner shall also be responsible for any fine and court costs for a class
C misdemeanor violation of this article, as provided by section 2.01.003(f) of this chapter.
(d) Procedure to redeem impounded dogs.
(1) The owner of any impounded dog may redeem such dog any time prior to the release to authorized third-party animal adoption
agencies, shelter or rescue group, or destruction as set forth hereinafter by:
(A) Paying the fees and expenses incurred by animal control, the Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter, and/or their
designee, for seizure, impoundment, medical treatment, and care and daily boarding of the impounded animal; and
(B) Having on their person a valid city registration receipt and certificate of antirabies vaccination showing the dog to have been
vaccinated as required by section 169.29(a) of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
(2) In the event the dog is not properly registered prior to redemption, the owner must register said dog immediately with the city;
however, if the dog is not vaccinated at the time of redemption, the owner shall have vaccinated such dog, submit to animal control a
certificate of vaccination for such dog, and have such dog registered. Failure to submit such certificate of vaccination to animal control
and have such dog registered within seven (7) days after redemption shall be a violation of this section.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/526
(e) Procedure to redeem impounded animals, other than dogs. The owner of any impounded animal may redeem such animal any time prior to the
release to authorized third-party animal adoption agencies, shelter or rescue group, or destruction as set forth hereinafter by paying the fees and
expenses incurred by animal control, the Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter, and/or their designee, for seizure, impoundment, medical
treatment, and care and daily boarding of the impounded animal.
(f) Authority to request and issue warrants. An animal control officer may apply for and obtain a warrant or other legal writ from the municipal
judge or justice court to seize any animal alleged to be in violation of this chapter. The municipal judge or justice of the peace shall have the authority
to issue such warrant.
State law references–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033; quarantine and impoundment facilities generally,
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
Sec. 2.04.003 Disposition of impounded animals
(a) Disposition. Any animal impounded in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be kept and so impounded by animal control, the
Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter, and/or their designee, for a minimum period of seventy-two (72) hours, unless earlier redeemed by the
owner. During this period, an animal control officer shall make all reasonable efforts to identify and contact the owner of an impounded animal,
including review of the city's registration records, contacting persons in the area where the animal was found, and examination for an implanted
microchip. At the expiration of the impoundment period, the impounded animal becomes the property of the Williamson County Regional Animal
Shelter and shall be maintained, released, and/or disposed of pursuant to its policies and procedures.
(b) Animal control officer to keep record of disposition of animals. The animal control officer or its designee shall keep all records as may be
required to show, in detail, the disposition of all animals impounded, fees and expenses collected, and such other information as may be required.
Sec. 2.04.004 Quarantine and impoundment facilities
Unless otherwise expressly stated herein this chapter, all animals seized, impounded, or quarantined by an animal control officer under this chapter
shall be delivered to the Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter or such other suitable and humane facility as determined by animal control, in
accordance with section 826.051, Texas Health & Safety Code, as amended.
(Ordinance CO20-11-12-22-C1 adopted 12/22/11)
ARTICLE 2.05 KEEPING OF DOMESTIC PETS, LIVESTOCK, AND FOWL*
Sec. 2.05.001 In general
(a) Domestic pets shall be limited to domestic animals only.
(b) No person may possess, harbor, or maintain any type of livestock or fowl within the corporate limits of the City.
(c) Subsection (b) shall not apply to lots or tracts of property one acre or greater in size located within the following districts, as defined in the
zoning ordinance, chapter 11 of this Code:
(1) Development Reserve (DR);
(2) Estate Residential (ES); and
(3) Suburban Residential (SR).
(d) Where permitted by subsection (c), livestock and fowl shall be maintained solely for the direct benefit of the residents of the property and may
not be used for commercial sale or production purposes.
Sec. 2.05.002 Keeping of livestock
Where permitted by section 2.05.001(c), all livestock shall be maintained in accordance with Article 2.07 of this chapter and the following
requirements:
(1) In ES and SR districts, livestock shall be limited to one animal per acre of land;
(2) Livestock weighing twenty (20) pounds or less at maturity shall be contained in a ventilated or open-air cage, pen, coop, or
enclosure with a minimum of three (3) square feet of covered floor space per animal; and
(3) All cages, pens, coops, and enclosures in which livestock are kept or harbored shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet away
from any property lines.
Sec. 2.05.003 Keeping of fowl
Where permitted by section 2.05.001(c), all fowl shall be maintained in accordance with Article 2.07 of this Chapter and the following requirements:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/526
(1) In ES and SR districts, fowl shall be limited to no more than fifteen (15) total per lot or parcel, including no more than one (1)
rooster;
(2) Fowl shall at all times be confined in a fully enclosed and ventilated or open-air cage, pen, coop, or enclosure with a minimum of
three (3) square feet of covered floor space per animal, except that in RA districts, fowl may be kept or harbored free of such
confinement, so long as the fowl remains on its owner's lot; and
(3) All cages, pens, coops, and enclosures in which fowl are kept or harbored shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet away from
any property lines.
Sec. 2.05.004 Livestock and fowl not to run at-large
No person shall cause, permit, or allow livestock or fowl to be, and no owner shall fail to prevent their livestock or fowl from being at-large within
the City.
State law references–Animals running at-large on highways, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, sec. 143.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.05.005 Impoundment of livestock or fowl
Animal Control Officers are authorized to impound all livestock or fowl in violation of this chapter, subject to terms and conditions established
throughout this chapter. Livestock will be held by a private contractor with the owner being responsible for all impound, transportation, medical
treatment, boarding, feeding, and any other expenses incurred in impounding the livestock. All fees and charges must be paid prior to release of the
livestock.
Sec. 2.05.006 Liability
If necessary to ensure the public safety and avoid injuries to persons or damage to property, any livestock or fowl that is in danger of entering a
public roadway may be tranquilized by an Animal Control Officer, or, if the livestock or fowl cannot be tranquilized or corralled in a timely manner
and the circumstances are of an emergent nature, such livestock or fowl may be destroyed by an Animal Control Officer. Neither the City nor the
Animal Control Officer(s) acting under this Article shall be liable for damages to or loss of such livestock or fowl.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1 adopted 11/9/17)
ARTICLE 2.06 LEASHING AND UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT OF DOGS
Sec. 2.06.001 Leashing of dogs
Any dog, while not on the property of its owner or not upon private property with the permission of the private property owner, or in any place open
to the public, shall be secured by a leash, chain, or other restraint, not including an electric fence or invisible fence, that does not unreasonably limit
the dog's movement, as proscribed by Texas Health & Safety Code, sections 821.077–78, et seq., as amended, except that a dog may freely roam
without being secured by a leash, chain, or other restraint within a designated off-leash area within a city park facility, in compliance with posted
rules at such city park facility and/or off-leash area.
ARTICLE 2.07 TREATMENT OF ANIMALS; CRUELTY
Sec. 2.07.001 Care of animals
(a) Owners of animals shall provide adequate food for such animals at suitable intervals of not more than twenty-four (24) hours and shall provide
a quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable for the physical condition and age of the animal, served in a clean receptacle or container, sufficient to
maintain an adequate level of nutrition for such animal.
(b) If kept outdoors, animals shall be provided with adequate outdoor shelter as set forth in the definitions of this chapter.
(c) If kept indoors, animals shall be provided with adequate indoor shelter which shall mean a properly ventilated and illuminated facility,
sufficiently regulated by heating or cooling to protect the animal from extremes of temperature, thereby providing for its health and comfort.
(d) Any vehicle in which an animal is kept for any duration, shall be properly ventilated and sufficiently regulated to protect the animal from
extremes of temperature, thereby providing for its health and comfort, and any animal kept, harbored, or maintained in a vehicle not so ventilated or
regulated shall be presumed cruelly confined.
(e) Animals shall be kept in areas which maintain adequate sanitation which shall mean periodic cleaning and sanitizing of primary enclosures and
housing facilities to remove excreta and other waste materials and dirt, so as to minimize health hazards, flies or odors.
(f) Animals shall be provided with adequate space which shall mean primary enclosures, and housing facilities shall be constructed and maintained
so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal to make normal postural and social adjustments with adequate freedom of movement to
maintain physical condition. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition, debility, stress or abnormal behavior
patterns.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/526
(g) Owners of animals shall provide adequate veterinary care for their animals. A sick, diseased or injured animal shall be provided with a proper
program of care by a veterinarian or humanely euthanized. Animals shall be provided with an adequate supply of clean, fresh potable water provided
in a sanitary manner. If potable water is not accessible to the animal at all times, it shall be provided daily for such duration and of sufficient quantity
as necessary for the animal's health and comfort.
Sec. 2.07.002 Suffering animals
In the event an animal control officer finds an animal to be suffering, imminently endangered, or in need of immediate emergency care, they shall
have the right forthwith to remove or have removed such animal to a safe place for care at the owner's expense or to order euthanization of the animal
when necessary to prevent further suffering. Return of the animal to the owner may be withheld until the owner has made full payment for all
expenses incurred by such removal, care, and/or euthanization.
Sec. 2.07.003 Molesting or releasing animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner, tease, annoy, disturb, molest or irritate an animal that is confined to the owner's premises. It
shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner of an animal or their authorized agent, to willfully open any door or gate, or otherwise
compromise the confinement of an animal, on any private or public premises for the purposes of enticing or enabling any animal to leave such
private or public premises.
Sec. 2.07.004 Animal enclosures
All pens, cages, coops, or enclosures wherein animals are kept shall be securely built and maintained, adequate in size for the kind and number of
animals contained therein, and maintained in a sanitary condition; such enclosures shall be cleaned and maintained so as to not become offensive to
residents or businesses adjacent thereto.
Sec. 2.07.005 Tampering with traps and equipment
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, damage, or otherwise tamper with any approved traps or equipment lawfully set by an animal
control officer for the purpose of capturing any animal that may be deemed by an animal control officer to be at-large or a public nuisance animal.
Sec. 2.07.006 Right to confine animals
Any animal found upon the private premises of person other than the owner, may be humanely confined and held until such a time as the animal
control officer may be notified. Upon such notification, the animal control officer shall respond immediately, and impound such animal in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 2.07.007 Restraint when animal in estrus
The owner of a female dog or cat in estrus (heat) shall confine such female dog or cat in a house or other enclosure in such a manner that such female
dog or cat cannot come into contact with animals other than the owner's, unless for the purpose of planned breeding in compliance with all local,
state, and federal laws.
Sec. 2.07.008 Animal cruelty prohibited
Animal cruelty shall be regulated pursuant to section 821.021, et seq., Texas Health & Safety Code, and section 42.09, Texas Penal Code, as
amended.
ARTICLE 2.08 ANIMALS CAUSING DEATH OF OR SERIOUS BODILY INJURY TO PERSONS
Sec. 2.08.001 Regulation
Animals causing death of or serious bodily injury to persons shall be regulated pursuant to Tex. Health & Safety Code, section 822.001, et seq., as
amended.
(Ordinance CO20-11-12-22-C1 adopted 12/22/11)
ARTICLE 2.09 DANGEROUS DOGS AND CATS*
Sec. 2.09.001 Applicability
The provisions of this Article shall be applicable to both dangerous dogs and dangerous cats. The provisions of Tex. Health & Safety Code, section
822.041, et seq., as amended, relating to dangerous dogs shall also apply to dangerous cats within the City.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/526
Sec. 2.09.002 Offenses
(a) It shall be an offense by an owner of a dangerous dog or cat if the dangerous dog or cat makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside
the dangerous dog or cat's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. If an owner is found guilty of an offense under this subsection, the
Municipal Court may order the dangerous dog or cat destroyed, as provided by section 822.044, Tex. Health & Safety Code, as amended.
(b) It shall be an offense for any person to own, possess, harbor, or maintain a dangerous dog or cat within the City, unless such dangerous dog or
cat is registered as a dangerous dog or cat and the owner has complied with all requirements under this Article, as provided by section 822.045, Texas
Health & Safety Code, as amended.
(c) Defenses. Pursuant to section 822.046, Texas Health & Safety Code, as amended, it is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
(1) The person is a licensed veterinarian, a Peace Officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by
the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog or
cat in connection with that position;
(2) The person is an employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or a law enforcement agency and
trains or uses dogs or cats for law enforcement or corrections purposes;
(3) The person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under chapter 1702, Occupations Code.
Sec. 2.09.003 Complaints of dangerous dogs and cats
(a) Complaint process. Whenever any person shall complain to an Animal Control Officer of an alleged dangerous dog or cat, the Animal Control
Officer shall promptly investigate the complaint and notify the owner of the animal that a complaint has been received. If the Animal Control Officer
does not observe a violation of this Article, then the Animal Control Officer shall promptly provide to the complaining person a nuisance/dangerous
animal complaint form.
(b) Complaint form. The nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form is to be completed voluntarily, truthfully, and accurately by the complaining
person, signed, and then submitted to the Animal Control Officer, Police Department, or Municipal Court. By submitting a nuisance/dangerous
animal complaint form, the complaining person agrees to testify as the complaining witness if the matter should proceed to trial in Municipal Court.
Submission of a false complaint may be punishable pursuant to Penal Code, section 37.02 or section 37.08, as amended.
(c) Investigation. After receiving a completed nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form, an Animal Control Officer shall investigate whether the
dog or cat is a dangerous dog or cat. If the Animal Control Officer observes a violation of this Article or through their investigation reasonably
believes that this Article has been violated, the Animal Control Officer shall issue a citation to the owner of the alleged dangerous dog or cat. Further,
upon receiving a signed and completed nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form, the Animal Control Officer may issue a citation to the owner of
the alleged dangerous dog or cat based solely upon the submitted nuisance/dangerous animal complaint form.
Sec. 2.09.004 Reporting of incident; seizure and impoundment of dog or cat pending hearing
(a) The City of Cedar Park elects to be governed by section 822.0422, Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(b) Any person, including an Animal Control Officer, may make a report of a dangerous dog or cat to the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court
shall send notice of the report to the owner of the alleged dangerous dog or cat. Submission of a false report may be punishable pursuant to Penal
Code, section 37.02 or section 37.08, as amended.
(c) The owner of the dog or cat shall deliver the animal to animal control not later than the fifth day after the date on which the owner receives
notice that the report has been filed. If the owner fails to deliver the dog or cat, the Municipal Court shall issue a warrant authorizing seizure. Animal
Control shall seize the dog or cat and provide for impoundment in secure and humane conditions, pending a hearing under section 2.09.005 of this
Article, as amended.
(d) It shall be an offense for a person to possess and fail to release to an Animal Control Officer an alleged dangerous dog or cat that has been
made the subject of a hearing under this Article.
(e) No person shall be allowed to reclaim the alleged dangerous dog or cat from the time of delivery or seizure and impoundment until a hearing
under this Article has been conducted.
Sec. 2.09.005 Hearing
(a) The Municipal Court, upon delivery or seizure of a dog or cat under this Article, or on application under section 2.09.006(c) of this Article,
shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether an alleged dangerous dog or cat is a dangerous dog or cat or whether the owner of the dangerous
dog or cat has complied with this Article. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth (10th) day after the date on which the alleged dangerous
dog or cat is seized or delivered, pursuant to section 822.0423(a), Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(b) Notice. The Municipal Court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to:
(1) The owner of the alleged dangerous dog or cat or the person from whom the alleged dangerous dog or cat was seized; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/526
(2) The person who made the complaint.
(c) Presentation of evidence. Any interested party, including the county or City Attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing, as provided
by section 822.0423(c), Texas Health & Safety Code, as amended.
(d) Defenses. In response to the allegation that a dog or cat is a dangerous dog or cat, it is a defense that:
(1) The injury was sustained or the belief of attack and injury was held by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or
other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the alleged dangerous dog or cat;
(2) The person was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the alleged dangerous dog or cat or has, in the past been observed or
reported to have teased, tormented, abused, or assaulted the alleged dangerous dog or cat;
(3) The person was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
(4) The animal that was attacked or killed was at the time teasing, tormenting, abusing or attacking the alleged dangerous dog or cat;
(5) The alleged dangerous dog or cat was protecting or defending a person within immediate vicinity of the alleged dangerous dog or
cat from an unjustified attack or assault;
(6) The alleged dangerous dog or cat was injured and responding to pain; or
(7) The alleged dangerous dog or cat was protecting its offspring, itself, or its kennelmates.
(e) Appeal. An owner or applicant may appeal the decision of the Municipal Court pursuant to section 822.0423(d), Texas Health & Safety Code,
as amended.
(f) Result of hearing.
(1) If the court finds that an alleged dangerous dog or cat is not a dangerous dog or cat, the court shall:
(A) Order the owner to pay any fees arising from the seizure or impoundment of the alleged dangerous dog or cat within thirty
(30) days of the order; and
(B) Upon payment of any such fees, order the release of the dog or cat to the owner.
(2) If the court finds that an alleged dangerous dog or cat is a dangerous dog or cat, the court, based on the least restrictive means
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community according to all of the evidence presented, shall:
(A) Order that the owner of the dangerous dog or cat follow all requirements set forth in section 2.09.006 of this Article and order
the continued impoundment of the dangerous dog or cat until the owner provides proof of compliance to animal control and to the
court;
(B) Order that the dangerous dog or cat be permanently removed from the City; or
(C) Order that the dangerous dog or cat be destroyed.
(3) If the court finds that an alleged dangerous dog or cat is a dangerous dog or cat, the court shall also:
(A) Notify the owner of the court's decision as well as the ordered disposition of the dangerous dog or cat by personal service or
certified mail, return receipt requested, if the owner is not present at the hearing; such personal service may be completed by the
Animal Control Officer;
(B) Order that the owner of the dangerous dog or cat pay any fees due for the impoundment of the dangerous dog or cat within
thirty (30) days of the order; and
(C) Notify the facility where the dangerous dog or cat is impounded of the court's decision and the ordered disposition of the
dangerous dog or cat by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested; such service may be completed by the Animal
Control Officer.
(g) Removal of dangerous dog or cat. If the court orders the removal of a dangerous dog or cat from the City, the owner shall have five (5) days
from the date of the order to remove the dangerous dog or cat. The owner must provide proof of the removal to the court within five (5) days after the
deadline to remove. If adequate proof is not provided to the court within the required time, an Animal Control Officer shall investigate and if the
dangerous dog or cat is found within the City, the Animal Control Officer shall be authorized to immediately seize and impound the dangerous dog or
cat. Upon impoundment of such dangerous dog or cat, the dangerous dog or cat becomes the property of the City and it shall be humanely destroyed.
If the dangerous dog or cat has been previously removed from the City or is not present in the City on the date of the hearing, the court shall order
that the dangerous dog or cat shall be permanently banned from the City and not be allowed to return.
(h) Destruction of dangerous dog or cat.
(1) The destruction of an animal ordered under this Article shall be performed by:
(A) A licensed veterinarian;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/526
(B) Personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society who are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or
(C) Personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal control who are trained in the humane destruction of animals.
(2) Any such destruction shall be delayed until after the expiration of the owner's deadline to appeal the court's order under this Article
or chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(i) Disobedience of court order. It shall be an offense for any person to possess and fail to release a dangerous dog or cat that has been ordered
destroyed or removed by the court to an Animal Control Officer.
Sec. 2.09.006 Requirements for owner of dangerous dogs
(a) Pursuant to section 822.042(a), Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, not later than the thirtieth (30th) day after a person learns that the
person is the owner of a dangerous dog or cat, the person shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog or cat with animal control pursuant to this Article;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog or cat at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure;
(3) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog or cat causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof
of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to animal control; and
(4) Comply with all applicable federal, state, county, or municipal rules, regulations, requirements, or restrictions on dangerous dogs
and cats.
(b) The owner of a dangerous dog or cat who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the dangerous dog or cat to animal control not later
than the thirtieth (30th) day after the owner learns that the dog or cat is a dangerous dog or cat, as provided by section 822.042(b), Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended.
(c) If, on application of any person, the court finds, after notice and hearing under this Article, that the owner of a dangerous dog or cat has failed
to comply with subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the court shall order animal control to seize the dangerous dog or cat and shall issue a warrant
authorizing the seizure. Animal control shall seize the dangerous dog or cat or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the
dangerous dog or cat in secure and humane conditions, as provided by section 822.042(c), Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(d) The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by animal control related to the impoundment and/or destruction of the dangerous dog or cat, as
provided by section 822.042(d), Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(e) The court shall order animal control to humanely destroy the dangerous dog or cat if the owner has not complied with subsection (a) before the
eleventh (11th) day after the date on which the dangerous dog or cat is seized or delivered to animal control. The court shall order animal control to
return the dangerous dog or cat to the owner if the owner complies with subsection (a) before the eleventh (11th) day after the date on which the
dangerous dog or cat is seized or delivered to animal control, as provided by section 822.042(e), Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(f) The court may order the humane destruction of a dangerous dog or cat if the owner of the dangerous dog or cat has not been located before the
fifteenth (15th) day after the seizure and impoundment of the dangerous dog or cat, as provided by section 822.042(f), Texas Health and Safety Code,
as amended.
(g) As provided by section 822.042(g), Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog
or cat when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in this Article;
(2) The owner receives notice that a justice court, county court, or Municipal Court has found that the dog or cat is a dangerous dog or
cat under Texas Health and Safety Code, section 822.0423, as amended; or
(3) The owner is informed by animal control that the dog or cat is a dangerous dog or cat under Texas Health and Safety Code, section
822.0421, as amended.
Sec. 2.09.007 Registration of dangerous dogs or cats
(a) Pursuant to section 822.043(a), Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, an owner of a dangerous dog or cat shall annually present to animal
control for the dangerous dog or cat:
(1) Proof of liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog or cat causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof
of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to animal control;
(2) Proof of current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog or cat;
(3) A written description and photographs of the secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog or cat will be kept; and
(4) Payment of an annual registration fee as set forth in Appendix A, section 1.100 of this Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/526
(b) Animal control shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog or cat a registration tag which shall at all times be securely attached to a
collar around the neck of the dangerous dog or cat for which said registration fee was paid. Any dangerous dog or cat not wearing such collar and
registration tag shall constitute prima facie evidence that such dangerous dog or cat is in violation of this section, as provided by section 822.043(b),
Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog or cat sells or moves the dangerous dog or cat to a new address, the owner, not later than the
fourteenth (14th) day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the Animal Control Authority for the area in which the new address is located.
On presentation by the owner of the dangerous dog or cat's prior registration tag and payment of a fee as set forth in Appendix A, section 1.100 of
this Code, the Animal Control Authority shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog or cat's collar, as provided by section
822.043(c), Texas Health & Safety Code, as amended.
(d) An owner of a registered dangerous dog or cat shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog or cat was registered of any attacks the
dangerous dog or cat makes on people, as provided by section 822.043(d), Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(Ordinance CO48-16-06-23-C4 adopted 6/23/16)
State law reference–Registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.031 et seq; dogs that attack persons or are a danger to persons, V.T.C.A., Health and
Safety Code, sec. 822.001 et seq.
ARTICLE 2.10 DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.10.001 Applicability of article
The provisions of this Article shall apply throughout the City, except as set forth in chapter 822, subchapter E, of the Texas Health & Safety Code, as
amended.
Sec. 2.10.002 Dangerous wild animals prohibited
It shall be unlawful to possess, harbor, or maintain, or have care, custody, or control of a dangerous wild animal within the City.
ARTICLE 2.11 SANITATION
Sec. 2.11.001 Maintaining sanitary conditions on private property
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring, or maintaining an animal within the City to allow any waste matter from the
animal to collect and remain on the owner's property or on the property of another person so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous
or offensive living condition on the owner's or other person's property, or to abutting property of others.
Sec. 2.11.002 Maintaining sanitary conditions on public property
It shall be unlawful for any animal to defecate on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, passageway, road bypass, play area, park or any place
where people congregate or walk upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the permission of the private property
owner; except that it shall not be a violation if the owner of an animal that soils, defiles, or defecates on any of the above areas immediately removes
the pet feces and droppings and places them in a designated waste receptacle or other suitable waste container.
Sec. 2.11.003 Animals prohibited in food establishments; exceptions
Animals are prohibited on the premises of any food establishment, except as provided by title 25 of the Texas Administrative Code, section
229.167(p)(15), as amended, or pursuant to a variance granted as provided in section 2.11.004, below.
(Ordinance CO20-11-12-22-C1 adopted 12/22/11)
Sec. 2.11.004 Variance to permit dogs in outdoor eating areas of food establishments
(a) Pursuant to 25 TAC, section 229.171(c) of the state food establishment rules, as amended, the local, state, or federal enforcement body or
authorized representative having jurisdiction over a food establishment, may grant a variance to the prohibition stated in this section.
(b) If an owner or operator of a food establishment wishes to be granted such a variance, the food establishment shall comply with the following
conditions to ensure that a health hazard or nuisance will not result:
(1) Except as allowed under section 229.167(p)(15) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules, no dog may be present inside the food
establishment or on any playground area of the food establishment.
(2) A separate entrance must be provided from the outside of the food establishment to the outdoor patio so that a dog will have direct
access to the patio without entering the interior of the food establishment or any playground area of the food establishment. A dog on an
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/526
outdoor patio may not be allowed within seven feet of any entrance to the interior of the food establishment, except when necessary to
enter or exit the patio.
(3) A sign must be posted at the front entrance of the food establishment so that it is easily visible to the public. The sign must state:
“dog friendly patio - dog access only through outdoor patio.”
(4) Doors equipped with self-closing devices must be provided at all entrances to the outdoor patio from the interior of the food
establishment.
(5) No food preparation, including mixing drinks or serving ice, may be performed in the outdoor patio area, except that a beverage
glass may be filled on the patio from a pitcher or other container that has been filled or otherwise prepared inside the food establishment.
(6) The outdoor patio must be continuously maintained free of visible dog hair, dog dander, and other dog-related waste or debris. The
outdoor patio must be hosed down or mopped with animal friendly chemicals at the beginning of each shift during which food or
beverages will be served (breakfast, lunch, dinner, or late-hours), or, if a food establishment has continuous food or beverage service
without designated shifts, then every six hours that the establishment is open for business, except that cleaning under this subsection is not
required if no dog has been present on the outdoor patio since the last cleaning. Waste created from a dog's bodily functions must be
cleaned up with animal friendly chemicals within five minutes after each occurrence. All dog waste must be disposed of outside of the
food establishment in an appropriate waste receptacle. Equipment used to clean the outdoor patio must be kept outside of the food
establishment.
(7) While on duty, wait staff or other food handlers at the food establishment may not pet or have contact with any dog.
(8) A dog must be kept on a leash and remain in the control of the customer while in the outdoor patio area. The dog must be wearing a
collar or harness with a current rabies tag attached to it.
(9) A dog is not allowed on a seat, table, countertop, or similar surface in the outdoor patio area.
(10) A dog is not allowed to have contact with any dishes or utensils used for food service or preparation at the food establishment.
(11) A dog may not be given any food (including, but not limited to, dog kibble, biscuits, and edible treats) while in the outdoor patio
area, but may be given water in a disposable container.
(c) Any variance requested shall be requested by the owner of the food establishment by submitting a city certification and registration application.
The city shall forward the variance request to the local, state, or federal enforcement body or authorized representative having jurisdiction over a
food establishment, which has the authority to grant the variance.
(Ordinance CO22-15-03-26-C3 adopted 3/26/15)
ARTICLE 2.12 BREEDING AND SALE OF ANIMALS
Sec. 2.12.001 Breeding of animals prohibited
No person shall permit, facilitate, promote, or allow breeding of any animals in development reserve (DR), estate residential (ES), suburban
residential (SR), semi-urban residential (SU), urban residential (UR), or multifamily residential (MF) zoning districts, as defined in the zoning
ordinance, Chapter 11 of this Code. Where permitted, all breeding activities shall be in accordance with the laws of the state.
Sec. 2.12.002 Sale of animals prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or make available for sale any animal on the public streets, alleys, rights-of-way, parks, or other public
property within the City, or upon property of another without such owner's consent; except that is shall not be a violation of this section for the
Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter, Humane Society, or any other shelter/rescue operation to sell or make available for sale or adoption
dogs or cats on public property with the City's approval.
Sec. 2.12.003 Enforcement; impoundment
(a) An Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to impound any animal deemed to be breeded, bred, sold, or for sale in violation of this
Article.
(b) The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this Article shall be liable to the City in the amount of the impoundment and boarding fees
charged the owner pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and any animal impounded pursuant to this Article shall be handled and disposed of in
the same manner as any animal which is so confined because of being found at-large within the City.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1 adopted 11/9/17)
CHAPTER 3
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/526
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 BUILDING CODE
Sec. 3.01.001 Building codes adopted
(a) 2015 International Building Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Building Code, including appendices “C,” “F” and “I,” as may be amended
from time to time as such amendments are not in conflict with state or federal laws, as the building code for the City, for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance, of buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the City, and within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Building Code shall be amended to read as follows:
(A) Section 101.1 Title - These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Cedar Park. Texas, hereinafter
referred to as “this Code.”
(B) Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit - Subsection 2 under the heading “building” shall be amended to read as follows:
2. Fences not over 8 feet (2438 mm) high.
(C) Section 109.2 Schedule of permit fees - On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or
alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with Appendix A, Article 2.000 of the
City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be amended.
(D) Section 109.3 Building permit valuations - Shall be amended to add the following to the existing text:
Valuation shall be determined using the most recent building valuation data as published by the International Code Council.
State law references–Building and residential codes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.211 et seq.; adoption of rehabilitation codes or provisions, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 214.215; International Building Code adopted as municipal commercial building code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.216.
(b) 2015 International Residential Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Residential Code, including appendices “A,” “B,” “C,” “E, “G,” “H,” “J,”
“K,” “N” and “P” as may be amended from time to time as such amendments are not in conflict with state or federal laws, as the
residential code for the City, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement,
repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures
within the corporate limits of the City, and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of
building inspection and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Residential Code shall be amended to read as follows:
(A) Section R101.1 Title - These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the
City of Cedar Park, Texas, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”
(B) Section R104.10.1 Flood hazard areas - Deleted.
(C) Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit - Subsection 2 under the heading “Building” shall be amended to read as follows:
2. Fences not over 8 feet (2438 mm) high.
(D) Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees - On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or
alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with Appendix A, Article 2.000 of the
City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be amended.
(E) Section R110 Certificate of occupancy - Deleted.
Ground
Snow Load
WIND DESIGN Seismic Design
Category
Speed
(mph)
Topographic
effects
Special
wind region
Windborne
debris zone
5 psf 115 mph none
A
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/526
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
Weathering Frost line depth Termite
Negligible Less than 6 inches Moderate to heavy
Editor's note–The layout of the table above was changed by the editor in order to fit on the printed page.
(F) Table 301.2(1) Climatic and geographic design criteria:
Winter Design
Temp
Ice Barrier Underlayment
Required
Flood Hazards Air Freezing
Index
Mean Annual
Temp
32 degrees No As defined by most
current FEMA/FIRM
map
30 68.1
(G) Section R314.3 Location - is amended to add subsection 5:
5. Media and game rooms with doors that isolates the spaces from adjoining rooms or hallways and have no code compliant
means of emergency egress to the exterior.
(H) Section G2417.4 Test pressure measurement - Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressuremeasuring
device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test
period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. Mechanical gauges used to measure test pressures
shall have a range such that the highest end of the scale is not greater than three times the test pressure.
(I) Section G2417.4.1 Test pressure - Original text of section shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
The test pressure to be used shall not be less than 20 psig (rounds per square inch gauge).
(J) P2503.5.1 Rough plumbing - Shall be amended to add the following to the existing text:
When weather conditions make it impractical to test tightness of joints in a drainage system using a water test, the system may
be tested with air at a pressure between 3 and 5 psig for a period of no less than 10 minutes. Test gauge type shall be
Grade/Class 1A diaphragm. In all other instances, testing shall be per section P2503. Air testing shall only be permitted on
piping systems utilizing materials that are rated for pressures consistent with these testing requirements or otherwise expressly
permitted by the manufacturer.
(K) P2903.10 Hose bibb - Deleted.
(L) The following amendments shall apply to all references to the below conductors in the 2015 International Residential Code:
a. Minimum conductor size for all 15A/120V branch circuits shall be #12 AWG copper.
Use of aluminum or copper clad aluminum conductors smaller than #6 AWG is not permitted.
State law references–International Residential Code adopted as a municipal residential building code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.212; building and residential
codes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.211 et seq.
(c) 2015 International Plumbing Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Plumbing Code, including appendices “C,” “D,” and “E” as may be
amended from time to time as such amendments are not in conflict with state or federal laws, as the plumbing code for the City, for the
purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, moving, removal, conversion,
demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the City, and
within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Plumbing Code shall be amended to read as follows:
(A) Section 101.1 Title - These regulations shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the City of Cedar Park, Texas,
hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”
(B) Section 106.6.2 Fee schedule - Shall be amended to add the following, to the existing, text:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/526
Permit fees shall be as stated in Appendix A, Article 2.000 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(C) Section 106.6.3 Fee refunds - Deleted.
(D) Section 108.4 Violation penalties - Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair plumbing, work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a
class C misdemeanor offense, punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it
may be amended. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(E) Section 109 Means of appeal - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Appeals shall be made pursuant to Chapter 3, section 3.01.004 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(F) Section 305.4.1 Sewer depth - Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be installed not less than
twelve (12) inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be installed not less than twelve
(12) inches below grade.
(G) Section 312.2 Drainage and vent water test - Shall be amended to add the following, to the existing, text:
When weather conditions make it impractical to test tightness of joints in a drainage system using a water test, the system may
be tested with air at a pressure between 3 and 5 psig for a period of no less than 10 minutes. Test gauge type shall be
Grade/Class 1A diaphragm. In all other instances, testing shall be per section 312.2 and 312.3. Air testing shall only be
permitted on piping systems utilizing materials that are rated for pressures consistent with these testing requirements or
otherwise expressly permitted by the manufacturer.
(H) Section 903.1 Roof extension - Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated not less than six (6) inches
above the roof. Where a roof is to be used for assembly or as a promenade, observation deck, sunbathing deck, or similar purposes,
open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
State law reference–Adoption of plumbing codes and amendment of codes by municipality, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 1301.255.
(d) 2015 International Fuel Gas Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, including appendices “A,” “B” and “C,” as may be
amended from time to time as such amendments are not in conflict with state or federal laws, as the fuel gas code for the City, for the
purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, moving, removal, conversion,
demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the City, and
within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said code is on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Fuel Gas Code shall be amended to read as follows:
(A) Section 101.1 Title - These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Cedar Park, Texas, hereinafter
referred to as “this Code.”
(B) Section 106.6.2 Fee schedule - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Permit fees shall be as stated in Appendix A, Article 2.000 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(C) Section 106.6.3 Fee refunds - Deleted.
(D) Section 108.4 Violation penalties - Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code, fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the
code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be amended. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(E) Section 109 (IFGC) Means of appeal - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Appeals shall be made pursuant to Chapter 3, section 3.01.004 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(F) Section 406.4.1 Test pressure - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
The minimum test pressure to be used shall be 20 psig (pounds per square inch gauge).
(G) Section 406.4.2 Test duration - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
The minimum test duration shall be 10 minutes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/526
(e) 2015 International Mechanical Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Mechanical Code, including appendix “A,” as may be amended from time
to time as such amendments are not in conflict with state or federal laws, as the mechanical code for the City, for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the City, and within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Mechanical Code shall be amended to read as follows:
(A) Section 101.1 Title - These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the City of Cedar Park, Texas, hereinafter
referred to as “this Code.”
(B) Section 103 Department of mechanical inspection - Deleted.
(C) Section 106.5.2 - The original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Permit fees shall be as stated in Appendix A, Article 2.000 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(D) Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds - Deleted.
(E) Section 108.4 Violation penalties - Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved provisions of this Code,
shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of
Ordinances, as it may be amended. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(F) Section 108.5 Stop-work orders - Shall be amended by causing the last sentence of the section to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine in accordance with section
1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be amended.
(G) Section 109 Means of appeal - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Appeals shall be made pursuant to Chapter 3, section 3.01.004 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(f) 2015 International Existing Building Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Existing Building Code as may be amended from time to time as such
amendments are not in conflict with state or federal laws, as the existing building code for the City, for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the City, and within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said code is on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Existing Building Code shall be amended to read as follows:
(A) Section 101.1 Title - These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City of Cedar Park, Texas,
hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”
(B) Section 108.2 Schedule of permit fees - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Permit fees shall be as stated in Appendix A, Article 2.000 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(C) Section 112 Board of appeals - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Appeals shall be made pursuant to Chapter 3. section 3.01.004 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(g) 2015 International Energy Conservation Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code as may be amended from time to time as such
amendments are not in conflict with state or federal laws, as the energy conservation code for the City, for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the City, and within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code shall be amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/526
(A) Sections C101.1 Title and R101.1 Title - This Code shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code of the City
of Cedar Park, Texas, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as “this Code.”
(B) Sections C107.2 Schedule of permit fees and R107.2 Schedule of permit fees - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in
its entirety to read as follows:
Permit fees shall be as stated in Appendix A, Article 2.000 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(C) Sections C109 Board of appeals and R109 Board of appeals - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read
as follows:
Appeals shall be made pursuant to Chapter 3, section 3.01.004 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(D) Sections C301.1 General and R301.1 General - Shall be amended to add the following to the existing text:
For purposes of this Code, the applicable climate zone shall be 2A with designation as a warm/humid location.
State law reference–Adoption of building energy efficiency performance standards, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 388.003.
(h) 2015 International Property Maintenance Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, including appendix A as may be amended
from time to time as such amendments are not in conflict with state or federal laws, as the property maintenance code for the City, for the
purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, moving, removal, conversion,
demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the City, and
within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code shall be amended as follows:
(A) Section 101.1 Title - These provisions shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Cedar
Park, Texas, hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”
(B) Section 102.3 Application of other codes - The last sentence in this section shall be amended to read as follows:
“Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of Chapter 11 Zoning of the Cedar Park
Code of Ordinances.”
(C) Section 103.5 Fees - The original text shall be amended to read as follows:
“The fee for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under the property
maintenance code shall be as indicated in Chapter 3, Article 3.02 Permits and Fees of the City of Cedar Park Code of
Ordinances, as it may be amended.”
(D) Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation - “Any person failing to comply with any provision of this Code shall be deemed
guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as
it may be amended. The code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.”
(E) Section 107.1 Notice to person responsible - Shall be amended to read as follows:
“Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this Code or has grounds to believe that a violation
has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner of the property or the person or persons responsible therefore in the manner
prescribed in sections 107.2 and 107.3.”
(F) Section 110 Demolition - Deleted.
(G) The title of section 111 Means of appeal shall be amended to read:
“Section 111 Building and Standards Commission.”
(H) Section 111.1 Application for appeal - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
“The Building and Standards Commission shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Building and Standards Commission is
established in section 3.01.004 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be amended. For the purposes of this Code,
“board of appeals” shall be defined as the Building and Standards Commission.”
(I) Sections 111.2 through 111.8 - Shall be deleted in their entirety.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/526
(J) Section 112.4 Failure to comply - Shall be amended to read as follows:
“Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be charged with a class C misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be assessed a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.”
(K) Section 302.4 Weeds - Deleted.
(L) Section 304.14 Insect screens - Shall be amended to read as follows:
“Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16
mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are
employed.”
(M) Section 602.3 Heat supply - Shall be amended to read as follows:
“Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms,
either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than
65°F (18°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that
the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as
indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.”
(N) Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces - Shall be amended to read as follows:
“Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the
period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.”
(i) 2014 National Electrical Code.
(1) Adopted. The National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby adopted in its entirety, as may be amended from time to time and as
such amendments are not in conflict with state or federal law, as the electrical code of the City, to prescribe regulations to provide
minimum electrical installation standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the City, and within
its extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The following amendments shall apply to all references to the below conductors in the 2014 National Electrical
Code:
(A) Minimum conductor size for all 15A/120V branch circuits shall be #12 AWG copper. Use of aluminum or copper clad
aluminum conductors smaller than #6 AWG is not permitted.
State law reference–National Electrical Code adopted as municipal residential and commercial electrical code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.214.
(j) 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
(1) Adopted. There is hereby adopted the 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as may be amended from time to time and
as such amendments are not in conflict with state or federal law, as the swimming pool and spa code of the City, to prescribe regulations
to provide minimum swimming pool and spa installation standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all swimming pools and spas
within the City, and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of the City Secretary and two
(2) copies of said Code are on file in the office of building inspection and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set
out at length herein.
(2) Amendments. The 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall be amended to read as follows:
(A) Section 101.1 Title - These regulations shall be known as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Cedar Park, Texas,
hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”
(B) Section 105.6.2 Fee schedule - Original text shall be deleted and shall be replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Permit fees shall be as stated in Appendix A, Article 2.000 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/526
(C) Section 105.6.3 Fee refunds - Deleted.
(D) Section 107.3 Prosecution of violation - If any person shall violate any provision of this Code or fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof, the code official shall request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at
law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful pool or spa in
violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
(E) Section 107.4 Violation penalties - Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair a pool or spa in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(F) Section 107.5 Stop-work orders - Shall be amended by causing the last sentence of the section to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine in accordance with
section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be amended.
(G) Section 108 Means of appeal - Original text shall be deleted and replaced in its entirety to read as follows:
Appeals shall be made pursuant to Chapter 3, section 3.01.004 of the City of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as it may be
amended.
(Ordinance C019-18-03-22-E2 adopted 3/22/18)
Sec. 3.01.002 Substandard buildings declared public nuisance
(a) Substandard buildings declared a public nuisance. The city hereby declares that every building or structure in the city, regardless of the date of
its construction, which is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and is a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare is herein
defined to be a public nuisance. A building or structure is substandard if it fails to comply with the minimum standards for continued use and
occupancy set forth in the standard building codes adopted in section 3.01.001 of this article, as amended. In order to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public, the city declares that any substandard building or structure in the city is subject to being repaired, vacated, secured, removed, or
demolished to abate such public nuisance.
(b) Criminal penalty for violation. Any violation of this article, including but not limited to the standard building codes adopted in section 3.01.001
of this article, shall be deemed a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction, punishable by fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per
day for each violation, pursuant to the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009 of this code, as amended. Continuing violations shall be deemed
a separate offense upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues, and such fine may be levied for each day that a violation exists.
Sec. 3.01.003 Abatement of substandard buildings
(a) Local Government Code, chapter 54, subchapter C adopted. There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of hearing and determining
cases concerning alleged violations of health and safety ordinances, the provisions of Tex. Loc. Govt. Code chapter 54, subchapter C, entitled “quasijudicial
enforcement of health and safety ordinances,” and such subchapter is hereby declared to be implemented, as amended.
(b) Local Government Code, chapter 214 adopted. There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of enforcing ordinances relating to
dangerous structures, the provisions of Tex. Loc. Govt. Code chapter 214, subchapter A, entitled “dangerous structures,” and such subchapter is
hereby declared to be implemented, as amended.
(c) Right of inspection. The building official, fire marshal, or their designated representative shall, after obtaining any necessary search warrant
pursuant to state law, inspect any building or structure for the purpose of determining the presence of a violation of a fire, health, or building
regulation, statute, or ordinance.
(d) Securing substandard building.
(1) The building official, fire marshal, or their designated representative may secure any building they determine to be in violation of
the minimum standards set forth in this article and is unoccupied or is occupied by persons who do not have a right of possession to the
building.
(2) Before securing a building under this subsection, the building official, fire marshal, or their designated representative shall post a
notice on or near the front door of the building stating that if the owner does not secure the building within forty-eight (48) hours, the city
will secure the building at the owner's expense.
(3) Before the eleventh (11th) calendar day after the date the building is secured, the city shall give notice to the owner pursuant to
section 214.0011(c) and (d) of the Local Government Code, as amended.
(4) A hearing shall be held before the city's building and standards commission (the “commission”) if, within thirty (30) calendar days
after the date the city secures the building, the owner files with the building official or fire marshal a written request for the hearing. The
hearing shall be held within twenty (20) calendar days after the date the request is filed and is open to the public. At the hearing, the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/526
building official, fire marshal, or their designated representative, shall present evidence of the need to secure the building and the owner
may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's decision to secure the building.
(5) The commission shall uphold the city's action in securing a building if it finds the building or a portion of the building to be open
and potentially dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. A building is open if a door, window, or other opening is not
securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry, and the building is left unattended.
(e) Notice of alleged violations, enforcement proceedings, and orders.
(1) Notice of all alleged violations, enforcement proceedings, and orders shall be provided in accordance with chapter 54, subchapter C,
and chapter 214, subchapter A, of the Local Government Code, as amended.
(2) When the building official, fire marshal, or their designated representative determines that a building is substandard and occupied
by persons having a lawful right to possession, the building official, fire marshal, or their designated representative shall place a sign on
the building stating that the building shall be vacated and providing notice of the unsafe, unsanitary, and dangerous condition of the
building, as well as the time, date, and place of the scheduled hearing.
Sec. 3.01.004 Building and standards commission
(a) Commission established. There is hereby established the building and standards commission of the city (the “commission”), which shall be
authorized to enforce ordinances pursuant to chapter 54, subchapter C, and chapter 214, subchapter A, of the Local Government Code, as amended.
The commission shall be composed of seven (7) members, each to be appointed by the City Council for terms of two (2) years and removable for
cause by the City Council upon written charge and after a public hearing. Additional alternate members may be appointed by the City Council to
serve at the request of the mayor or City Manager in the absence of one (1) or more regular members. Alternate members shall be afforded the same
duties, responsibilities, and term of appointment, and are subject to removal in the same manner as regular members.
(b) Election of officers; duties. A majority of the entire commission shall elect by majority vote a chairman and a vice-chairman to serve in the
absence of the chairman. The chairman and vice-chairman shall serve for the duration of the term in which each was appointed. The chairman, or in
the chairman's absence, the vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses to appear before the commission.
(c) Authority of commission.
(1) The commission shall have all powers, duties and responsibilities authorized by state law, it being the intent of the city to fully
implement Tex. Local Govt. Code chapter 54, subchapter C, as amended, relating to quasi-judicial enforcement of health and safety
ordinances:
(A) For the preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used to construct a building or improvement,
including the foundation, structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances, or exits;
(B) Relating to the fire safety of a building or improvement, including provisions relating to materials, types of construction or
design, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water supply for extinguishing fires, or location,
design, or width of entrances or exits;
(C) Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or improvements;
(D) Relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding and living places
for insects and rodents; or
(E) Relating to a building code or to the condition, use, or appearance of property in a municipality.
(2) Further, the commission shall have all powers, duties and responsibilities authorized by state law, it being the intent of the city to
fully implement Tex. Local Govt. Code chapter 214, subchapter A, as amended, relating to the vacation, relocation of occupants, securing,
repair, removal, or demolition of substandard buildings.
(d) Commission procedure. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at other times as determined by the commission. All meetings of
the commission shall be open to the public.
(1) The commission shall, by majority vote, adopt rules and procedures for use in hearings. Such rules and procedures must provide
ample opportunity for presentation of evidence and testimony by persons opposing charges brought by the city relating to alleged
violations of ordinances.
(2) The official designated by the city to enforce the provisions of the municipal building regulations shall be the city's building official,
fire marshal, or those persons designated to act under their authority.
(3) A majority of members of the commission shall hear any case presented. At the hearing, the commission panel shall hear and
consider all information, documentation, and testimony presented by the City Attorney, members of the city staff, and any person
claiming to have a legal interest in the property.
(4) The commission shall record and maintain minutes of its proceedings. The minutes shall record the presence or absence of
commission members, the vote of each member on each question, or the fact that a member fails to vote. Records of the commission's
examinations and other official actions shall be filed immediately in the office of the commission and maintained as public records.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/526
(e) Actions by the commission.
(1) The concurring simple majority vote of the members voting is necessary to take any action.
(2) At the conclusion of the hearing or as soon as possible thereafter, the commission panel shall find whether a violation has occurred.
Upon finding that a violation has occurred, the commission may:
(A) Order the repair, within a fixed period, of buildings or structures found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this
article;
(B) Declare a building substandard;
(C) Order the removal of persons or property found on private property, enter on private property to secure the removal if it is
determined that conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation of an ordinance, and order action to be taken as necessary
to remedy, alleviate, or remove any substandard building found to exist;
(D) Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the chief of police of the
municipality, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the commission;
(E) Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the municipality may recover pursuant to section 54.017 of the Local
Government Code, as amended.
(3) If the commission determines a building is substandard and in violation of standards set forth in this article, it may order that the
building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within a reasonable time, as
provided by section 214.001 of the Local Government Code, as amended:
(A) The commission shall, within thirty (30) days of the commission's determination that the building is substandard, require the
building's owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to: (i) secure the building from unauthorized entry; or (ii) repair, remove, or demolish the
building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.
(B) If the commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove, or demolish the
building, the commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall
require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is
being performed.
(C) The commission may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove, or demolish
the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee:
(i) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(ii) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety (90) days because of the scope
and complexity of the work.
(D) If the commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the work
required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the commission shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly
submit progress reports to the building official, fire marshal, or their designated representative, to demonstrate compliance with the
time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The commission may also require a cash or surety
bond, letter of credit, or other financial assurances pursuant to section 214.001(k) of the Local Government Code.
(4) Pursuant to section 214.001(g) of the Local Government Code, the final decision of the commission shall be in writing and filed in
the office of the City Secretary; a copy of the commission's order shall be promptly mailed or personally delivered to all persons to whom
notice is required to each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee; and within ten (10) calendar days after the date the commission's order is
issued, an abbreviated copy of the order shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(5) The City Secretary shall file with the district clerk of the county in which the municipality is located, a certified copy of the order of
the commission establishing the amount and duration of any assessed civil penalty.
(f) If the building or structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished within the time allotted by the commission, the City
Manager may have the structure vacated, secured, repaired, removed, demolished, or take other action to implement the provisions of this article at
the city's expense. Any expenses incurred by the city in vacating, securing, repairing, removing, or demolishing the structure shall be assessed as a
lien against the property upon which the structure was situated, and the assessed amount shall accrue interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year
from the date of the assessment until paid in full. A notice of lien shall be filed in the real property records of the county in which such property is
located. A notice of lien and demand for payment shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owner of the property. If
such owner does not pay the assessed amount within thirty (30) days, the city may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover such
expenses.
(g) Civil penalties and remedies cumulative. The civil penalties and remedies set forth herein in this article are in addition to and cumulative of all
legal rights and remedies available to the city pursuant to federal, state, and local law, including but not limited to those set forth under chapter 54 of
the Local Government Code.
(h) Appeal. The commission's final decision may be appealed within thirty (30) calendar days after the date a copy of the final decision is
personally delivered or mailed, as provided in section 54.039 or section 214.0012 of the Local Government Code, as amended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/526
(Ordinance CO23-14-01-23-C6 adopted 1/23/14)
ARTICLE 3.02 PERMITS AND FEES
Sec. 3.02.001 Building official to collect fees
Whenever any permit is required by the codes adopted by reference in this chapter, the building official shall collect said permit fees as contained in
section 3.02.004 of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 3.201)
Sec. 3.02.002 Applications for permits
All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall contain adequate information to enable the building official to determine the fees applicable
thereto, and it shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person to submit an application containing false or inaccurate information. (1998
Code, sec. 3.202)
Sec. 3.02.003 Terminology to be consistent
The terms used in this article shall be read to be consistent and to harmonize with like or similar terms used in other portions of this code, which is
being supplemented by this article; or shall be deemed to be used in the ordinary sense in which such terms are commonly understood. (1998 Code,
sec. 3.203)
Sec. 3.02.004 Permit and fee schedule
Unless otherwise provided for in this code of ordinances, permits and fees shall be collected in the amounts provided for in the schedule found in the
appendix of this code. Any reference to fees contained in any code adopted by reference in this code or contained in any chapter of this code shall be
superseded by the comprehensive permit and fee schedule in the appendix of this code. All fees provided for in the fee schedule shall be nonrefundable.
(1998 Code, sec. 3.204)
Sec. 3.02.005 Penalty for failure to obtain permit prior to initiating work
Any person who is required to obtain a permit by the codes adopted by reference in this article shall obtain such permit prior to initiating any work.
In the event work is initiated prior to issuance of a permit, a penalty equal to the permit fee must be paid in addition to the permit fee before the
permit may be issued. (1998 Code, sec. 3.205)
Sec. 3.02.006 Certificate of occupancy; change in use; temporary certificate of occupancy
(a) Change in use. No change in the use or occupancy of any land or any change of use or occupancy in an existing building other than for singlefamily
dwelling purposes, shall be made nor shall any new building be occupied until a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Building Official in compliance with the Chapter 3 of this Code.
(b) Temporary certificate of occupancy. Pending the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, during the completion of alterations or
during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building Official for a
period not exceeding 30 days when accompanied by fiscal surety. Such temporary certificates shall not be construed as in any way altering the
respective rights, duties, or obligations of the owners or of the City relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by
this Code.
(c) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be
fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1 adopted 11/9/17)
Editor's note–Former section 3.02.006 pertaining to time limitation and deriving from Ordinance 99-008 adopted 3/11/99, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance CO19-18-03-
22-E2 adopted 3/22/18.
ARTICLE 3.03 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS*
Sec. 3.03.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, Section 16.315, as amended, delegated the responsibility of
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of Cedar Park of Travis and Williamson
County, Texas does ordain as follows. (Ordinance CO31-16-02-25-C1 adopted 2/25/16)
Sec. 3.03.002 Findings of fact
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/526
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities,
and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
Sec. 3.03.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to
minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure the potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.03.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protection barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards
to other lands.
Sec. 3.03.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and
to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by
high-velocity flows, active processes or erosion, sediment transport, and deposition, and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental
to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future
conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent change or
greater annual change of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/526
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for
publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones, A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study
(FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of
equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. A nonbasement building:
(1) Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the
case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated
above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (post and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and
(2) Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, “elevated building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones
V1-30, VE or V, “elevated building” also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the
lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as existing structures.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface
elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not
limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/526
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
Floodway (regulatory floodway). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
High adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminary
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary [of the interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure
is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
(Ordinance CO59-08-09-25-C5 adopted 9/25/08)
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. (Ordinance CO31-16-02-25-C1 adopted 2/25/16)
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/526
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348),
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
placement, or other improvement was within one hundred-eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would
equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
(50) percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official, and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
(Ordinance CO59-08-09-25-C5 adopted 9/25/08)
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Sec. 3.03.006 General provisions
(a) Lands to which this Article applies. This Article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City.
(b) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Williamson County, Texas, and Incorporated
Areas dated September 6, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated September 6, 2008,” as amended, and “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Travis County, Texas, and Incorporated Areas” dated January 6, 2016 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRMs) dated January 6, 2016, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Article.
(c) Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Article.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
Article and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this Article and another existing easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/526
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by
manmade or natural causes. This Article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on these provisions or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Sec. 3.03.007 Administration
(a) Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Director of Engineering is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this Article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood
Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this Article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from
which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board
(TWDB), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) must also be notified.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.03.006(b), the Floodplain Administrator shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in
order to administer the provisions of section 3.03.008.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM,
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may
approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base
flood by more than 1 foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance CO31-16-02-25-C1 adopted 2/25/16)
(c) Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the locations, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the
following information is required:
(A) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved
structures;
(B) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of section 3.03.008(b)(2);
(D) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development; and
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection (b)(1) above.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/526
(2) Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and
the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(D) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(E) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets
and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems.
(F) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment, transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action,
if applicable, expected at the site.
(G) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(H) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(d) Variance procedures.
(1) The board of adjustment as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this article.
(2) The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article.
(3) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent
jurisdiction.
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in
subsection (c)(2) above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of section 3.03.002 of this article.
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances.
(A) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(B) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(C) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/526
(11) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary
for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(A) The criteria outlined in subsections (d)(1)–(9) of this section are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
(Ordinance CO59-08-09-25-C5 adopted 9/25/08)
Sec. 3.03.008 Provisions for flood hazard reduction
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
(4) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and airconditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system.
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in sections 3.03.006(b),
3.03.007(b)(8), and 3.03.008(c)(4), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor
shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that these standards as proposed in section 3.03.007(c)(1)(A), are satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood level or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications
and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and method of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(A) A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exist of floodwaters.
(Ordinance CO31-16-02-25-C1 adopted 2/25/16)
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM and FIRM shall be installed using
methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated
and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/526
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside the manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage
as a result of flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to
or above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision with zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by the reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM
either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(B) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.03.007(c)(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured
homes in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(c) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections
3.03.002, 3.03.003, and 3.03.004 of this article.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet
development permit requirements of sections 3.03.006(c), 3.03.007(c) and 3.03.008 of this article.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise
provided pursuant to section 3.03.006(b) or 3.03.007(b)(8) of this article.
(4) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.03.006(b) are
areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM [at least three feet (3') if
no depth number is specified].
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM [at least three feet (3') if no depth number is specified]; or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is water-tight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
article, as proposed in section 3.03.007(c)(1)(A), are satisfied.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/526
(4) Require within zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
(e) Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.03.006(b) are areas designated as floodways. Since
the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted
regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (e)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of this subsection.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit
encroachment within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the
community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
Sec. 3.03.009 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance CO59-08-09-25-C5 adopted 9/25/08)
ARTICLE 3.04 STREETS, DRAINAGE AND UTILITY CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 3.04.001 Standards adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing uniform guidelines for the construction, alteration, repair, and maintenance of
streets and drainage utility improvements, those standards which shall be known as Standard Specifications and Details for Streets, Drainage, and
Utility Construction. Copies of such standards shall be kept on file in the offices of the City Secretary and the city engineer. Such standards shall
control the construction of all streets, utilities, and drainage improvements in the city. (1998 Code, sec. 3.401)
Sec. 3.04.002 Conflict
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the standards adopted herein and any other provision of this code, the most stringent provisions
shall prevail. (1998 Code, sec. 3.402)
ARTICLE 3.05 SIDEWALK INSTALLATION
Sec. 3.05.001 Required installation
Sidewalks shall be installed in city street rights-of-way adjoining any lot on which a building is being constructed, prior to the building official
approving final inspection of the building for which a building permit has been issued. Responsibility for installation of the sidewalk shall be with the
owner of the lot on which the building (for which the building permit has been issued) is located. (1998 Code, sec. 3.501)
Sec. 3.05.002 Applicability
Installation of sidewalks, as described in the above section 3.05.001 shall be a condition for final inspection approval of all new residential and
nonresidential buildings (not including building additions, renovations or construction of accessory storage buildings) located on lots in subdivisions
or resubdivisions approved by official action of the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council after July 9, 1985. (1998 Code, sec. 3.502)
Sec. 3.05.003 Standards
Sidewalks required pursuant to this article shall be constructed in conformance with all applicable standards and specifications promulgated by the
city engineer of the city, including those reflected in Standard Specifications and Details for Streets, Drainage and Utility Construction. (1998 Code,
sec. 3.503)
ARTICLE 3.06 ELECTRICAL CODE*
Sec. 3.06.001 When electrical service shall be provided
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/526
With respect to any building, structure, or premises requiring a building permit, which permit is issued after the effective date of this section under
any ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city, no electric service shall be provided to such building, structure, or premises unless and until a certificate
of occupancy has been duly issued by the building department of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 3.601)
Sec. 3.06.002 Reserved
Editor's note–Former Section 3.06.002 pertaining to the adoption of the electrical code was repealed by Ordinance CO01-08-10-09-C1 adopted by the city on October 9, 2008.
These provisions can be found in Section 3.01.001(h) of this Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 3.06.003 Amendments
(a) The provisions of article 250 and table 310.106A notwithstanding, no aluminum wire smaller than #6 AWG shall be used for any electrical
wiring. (Ordinance CO57-12-07-12-C1, sec. 2, adopted 7/12/12)
(b) Annex H, to the 2008 National Electrical Code, Administration and Enforcement, exclusive of section 80.15 Electrical Board is hereby
adopted.
Sec. 3.06.004 Permit fees
Fees for electrical permits shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted and amended from time to time by City Council as appendix
A, article 2.000 Development Service Related Fees.
(Ordinance CO01-08-10-09-C1 adopted 10/9/08)
ARTICLE 3.07 CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND EXCAVATION IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY*
Sec. 3.07.001 Permit required
(a) Any person who undertakes to perform any work upon, in, under, above or about any public street, highway, roadway, alley or sidewalk
hereafter collectively called public right-of-way, which requires that the right-of-way be partially or completely closed for construction and/or
maintenance operation which work shall require excavation within or occupancy of the whole or a portion of the width of any such public right-ofway
by equipment, materials, debris or workmen shall use barricades, signals, flags, flares and all other traffic control and warning devices and
procedures about the work area during the duration of the work within the public right-of-way of the type and in the manner required by the Uniform
Barricading Standards adopted herein below. Such persons shall also be required to obtain a permit from the street superintendent if the specifications
stated in section 3.07.003(b) are applicable, with the exception of the state department of highways and public transportation conducting work on any
state designated system.
(b) The permit holder shall provide, erect, place and maintain all warning signs, traffic control devices and barricades required by the Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or the street superintendent. All such signs, devices and barricades should be in good condition, clean
and legible and shall be of the type required by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; provided, that the street superintendent may
authorize the use of different or special devices and equipment if, in his opinion, such equipment will be at least as effective for its intended purpose
as that set forth for such purpose in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. When additional regulatory signs are deemed necessary
by the street superintendent such signing will be installed as directed by the street superintendent along with such regulatory signs as are required to
be provided by the city as required by the manual.
(1998 Code, sec. 3.701)
Sec. 3.07.002 Definitions
Alley. Minor traveled ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Contractor. Any person or group of persons entering into an agreement with the city.
Detour. An alternate route in which vehicular traffic is directed around a street which is closed.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
Manual. The Manual on Uniform Barricading Standards.
Permit. A written letter of approval from the street superintendent or his appointed representative.
Public Right-of-Way. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
Shall, should and may. The word “shall” is a mandatory condition; the word “should” is an advisory condition to insure safe operation conditions;
and the word “may” is a permissive condition.
Street superintendent. The person designated as the street superintendent of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/526
Street. A traveled way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard,
land, place or however otherwise designated.
(1998 Code, sec. 3.702)
Sec. 3.07.003 Procedure and permit requirements
(a) Permit required.
(1) Application. When a permit is required, the permit application shall, unless otherwise authorized by the street superintendent for
good cause shown, be filed with the city at least five (5) days prior to the day the applicant seeks to first close or block any part of the
roadway and shall contain the following information:
(A) The name, telephone number, local address and principal place of business of the applicant;
(B) The name and day and night telephone number of the engineer, foreman or other person who will be in charge of the
construction or repairs for which the application is requested;
(C) The times of the day and total number of calendar days the applicant seeks to block the roadway;
(D) A statement signed by the applicant or a person authorized to bind the applicant that the applicant will indemnify and forever
hold the city harmless against each and every claim, demand or cause of action that may be made or come against it by reason of or
in any way arising out of the closing or blocking of the roadway by the applicant under a permit from the city, if such permit is
granted;
(E) A standard barricading layout showing placement of barricades, cones and informational signs used on the project;
(F) An explanation as to the type of equipment to be used, and the nature or type of work that is to be performed along with its
location;
(G) Evidence of a bond in the amount of $10,000.00 upon which the city can draw to correct any problems caused by the
applicant's work.
(H) Certificate of general liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $100,000.00/500,000.00 bodily injury and $100,000.00
property damage.
(2) Approval or disapproval. The street superintendent shall either approve or disapprove the application in five (5) business days after
it is submitted. The street superintendent may approve an application either as applied for or subject to special requirements, as provided
in subsection (a)(3), which special requirements shall be endorsed on the permit when issued and become a part thereof. If an application
is not approved, the street superintendent shall so notify the applicant, in writing, stating the reasons for disapproval. An applicant may, if
he so desires, undertake the revision of the unapproved application and resubmit it to the street superintendent who shall approve, approve
subject to special requirements or disapprove the amended application within two (2) business days.
The street superintendent may disapprove applications for permits under this article only for the following reasons:
(A) The proposed barricading, channelizing, signing, warning or other traffic control procedures or the equipment therefor do not
comply with the requirements of the manual;
(B) The nature of the work to be performed or its location is such that the work may, without imposing any undue hardship on the
applicant, be performed without the necessity of blocking or closing the roadway;
(C) The work or the manner in which it is to be performed will violate a city ordinance or a state statute;
(D) Failure to furnish all of the information required by this subsection or, except for good cause shown, to file the application
within the time prescribed by this article;
(E) Misrepresenting or falsifying any information in the application.
(3) Special requirements. The street superintendent may at the time he approves the application or any time after a permit is issued
require:
(A) The use of specific location of additional barricades, signals, signs or other traffic control or safety devices, or the pursuance
of special traffic control or safety procedures;
(B) That the work be performed only at certain hours during the day or night or during specified days of the week;
(C) That only a specified area or not more than a specified number of lanes shall be blocked at the same time or at specified times
of the day;
(D) That materials and equipment be moved from the traffic lanes and any excavation in the traffic lane be covered or filled with
materials of sufficient strength and construction to permit vehicular traffic to pass over such excavation during all or part of the peak
traffic periods or at night.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/526
When such requirements are deemed necessary by the street superintendent in the interest of public safety and to avoid traffic
congestion, any such special requirements shall be endorsed on the permit and shall be a part thereof.
(4) Revocation. The street superintendent or his authorized representatives may revoke a permit issued hereunder if any of the permit
holder's barricading, signing, channelizing, warning or other traffic control procedures or the equipment at the work site do not comply
with the requirements of the manual, or with any special requirements imposed by the street superintendent. The permit holder or the
person named as responsible for or in charge of the work in the permit shall first be notified of the failure or defect and be given a
reasonable time, such length of time to be determined by the street superintendent and not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours, to correct
same before such permit is revoked. In the event a permit issued under this article is revoked, it shall be unlawful to continue to block the
roadway, except to restore the site to its proper condition as required herein.
(5) Restoration. In the event a permit is revoked, the permit holder shall immediately commence operations to restore the work area
within the roadway to its proper condition, such work to be completed within twenty-four (24) hours. In addition, except as required to
restore the work area to its proper condition, the permit holder shall remove all equipment, men, materials and debris from the roadway. In
the event such restoration is not done, the city shall be authorized, at its election, to take charge of the work and restore the premises to its
proper condition and shall be entitled to recover from the permit holder by civil action the actual expenses incurred by the city in restoring
the premises, including but not limited to, cost of labor, materials, overhead, rental of any equipment used by the city in restoring the site
and attorney's fees, and for such purposes the city shall have a right of action against any bonds in effect running from the holder of the
permit to the city, conditioned upon compliance with the ordinances of the city in the performance of said work.
(b) Persons requiring permits.
(1) Contractor's requirements. Any contractor undertaking any work whether of his own accord, or under contract for any other person,
and such work is within a city street and requires that a set of plans be drawn up due to the extensive and/or complex nature of the work,
must file for a permit under this article before beginning construction. Proof must also be shown that he has obtained approval by other
affected agencies of the city to actually perform the work.
A plan must be prepared by the contracting agency showing where work is to be performed. The plan will include a standard
barricading layout showing placement of barricades, cones and informational signs used on the project. In most cases, layouts will be
similar to those shown in the manual. Deviation from the manual will be allowed only with approval of the street superintendent or his
appointed representative.
The plan as mentioned above, must be submitted a minimum of five (5) business days prior to actual beginning of the construction
work. This time period will allow the street superintendent the opportunity to survey the construction site in an attempt to uncover any
traffic problems which might develop as a result of the barricading.
Each contractor or construction agency will provide with his barricading plan a listing of all persons directly responsible for the safety
on each project to include any address or a telephone listing at which said person can be reached at any hour of the day if a hazardous
condition develops.
(2) Contract work by city prepared construction plans. In the event the contractor undertakes work based on plans prepared by, or on
behalf of the city, all detour and barricading requirements will be inserted as part of the construction plans.
In this situation, the contractor's acceptance of the construction project will serve as indication that he understands the layout and is
responsible for compliance with the requirements of this article, subject to the penalties established in this code.
(3) City forces and public utility company requirements. All city forces, as well as public utility companies performing construction
work within a street which requires that a set of plans be drawn up due to the extensive and/or complex nature of work, will be subject to
the same requirements established in subsection (b)(1) above. Such work would include major street construction (street cuts, street
widening, etc.), water and sewerage line laying or relocation or off-street construction which requires that a portion of the adjacent
roadway be barricaded.
Construction work performed by city forces or utility companies, minor enough such that a set of plans need not be drawn up, will not
be subject to the same requirements established in subsection (b)(1) above. Such work includes minor street construction (resurfacing,
patching, striping) minor utility work (usage of manholes such that a lane must be barricaded), etc.
These forces will be required, however, to comply with all other provisions set forth in the manual as to the construction site, barricade
layout and signing. In addition, the street superintendent or his authorized representative shall be contacted before said construction work
is begun and be informed of the location and nature of construction. This work shall not be performed during the peak hour congestion
periods of 7:00–9:00 a.m. and 4:00–6:00 p.m., unless approved by the street superintendent.
(c) Emergency situations. The requirements as mentioned above are to be used for all planned construction projects. In the event of an emergency
type situation, notification of work to be done can be made by telephone directly to the street superintendent or his appointed representative, thereby
bypassing the requirements mentioned above. Under these conditions the contractor or agency will still be required to follow the basic barricading
standards as outlined in the manual.
(1998 Code, sec. 3.703)
ARTICLE 3.08 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
Sec. 3.08.001 Valid license required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/526
(a) Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, must hold a valid
license, as defined by title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 and required by chapter 1903 of the Texas Occupations Code, or as defined by
chapter 365, title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code and required by chapter 1301 of the Texas Occupations Code.
(b) Exemptions: a property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with Texas Occupations Code, title 12, section 1903.002(c)(1) if he
or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned and occupied by the person as the person's home and homestead property.
A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 344
regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow
prevention and isolation valves. The city may, at any point adopt more stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation
system.
Sec. 3.08.002 Permit required
(a) Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall first submit system
installation plans and obtain a permit from the building inspection department of the city. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Exemptions.
(1) An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by section 366.002, Health and Safety Code; or
(2) An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by section 251.002, Agriculture Code.
Sec. 3.08.003 Irrigation system design, installation and operation
Within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, all irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained and operated in accordance with
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rules adopted under title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 344, rules for landscape irrigation,
said rules, as amended, being adopted by reference and incorporated for all purposes herein.
Sec. 3.08.004 Duties and responsibilities of the city plumbing inspectors
A licensed plumbing inspector shall enforce this article, and shall be responsible for:
(1) Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigation system and that the irrigator
and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed;
(2) Inspecting the irrigation system;
(3) Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this chapter;
(4) Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested and test results provided to the city;
(5) Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system
and advertisement of irrigation services; and
(6) Maintaining records according to this chapter.
Sec. 3.08.005 Items not covered by this article
Any item not covered by this article and required by law shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code, the Texas Water Code, title 30 of the
Texas Administrative Code, and any other applicable state statute or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rule.
Sec. 3.08.006 Fees
Permit fees shall be assessed in accordance with appendix A, article 2.000, development service related fees.
Sec. 3.08.007 Enforcement
(a) The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter as may be required by governing law. Any person, firm,
corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit
for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each day that a provision of
this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this chapter is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to
$2,000.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/526
(c) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to
seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this article or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance
with this article; and
(2) Other available relief.
(Ordinance CO39-10-08-26-C1 adopted 8/26/10)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS*
ARTICLE 4.01 FAIR HOUSING POLICY*
Sec. 4.01.001 Statement of policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity of each person to obtain
housing without regard to race, color, creed, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status or age. (1998 Code, sec. 4.101)
Sec. 4.01.002 Discriminatory housing prohibited
The city hereby prohibits any discriminatory housing practice which would violate 42 U.S.C. 3604-3606, the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended.
(1998 Code, sec. 4.102)
Sec. 4.01.003 Penalty
If a discrimination in housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case has been referred to municipal court, the respondent shall be
assessed a penalty as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 4.103)
ARTICLE 4.02 RESERVED†
ARTICLE 4.03 PAWNBROKERS, JEWELERS AND PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS OF DEALING WITH SECONDHAND
GOODS
Sec. 4.03.001 Record books required to be kept by pawnbrokers, jewelers and dealers in secondhand goods
Every pawnbroker, jeweler or person doing business as such in the city, or who may hereafter engage in such business and every dealer and any
caretaker of secondhand goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, shall keep a record book in which he shall make accurate daily entries of any and
all secondhand or used articles received by him in the course of his business, with a description of such articles. He shall affix a distinctive number to
each such article so received by him and shall make an entry of such number in his record book. He shall also make a record in such book of the
name of the person from whom he received such article. He shall also make an entry in such book of the disposition made by him of such article and
if sold, he shall state to whom sold and the price received therefor. The record books required to be kept by this subsection shall be at all times open
to the inspection of the chief of police or other duly authorized law enforcement officers; it shall be the duty of the persons required to keep such
books to exhibit such books to any such officer for inspection upon demand. (1998 Code, sec. 4.401)
Sec. 4.03.002 Dealer to require proper identification
Whenever any person shall offer for sale any secondhand article to any dealer described herein, unless the dealer is personally acquainted with such
person so offering such article, the dealer shall require such person to be identified before purchasing such article. (1998 Code, sec. 4.402)
Sec. 4.03.003 Violation and penalty
Any person who shall violate any part of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to fine in accordance with section
1.01.009 of this code for every such violation. Every failure to make an entry as required above shall be deemed a separate violation and every day
for which a person subject to this article fails to maintain a record book as required herein shall likewise be deemed a separate violation of this
article. (1998 Code, sec. 4.403)
ARTICLE 4.04 WRECKER BUSINESS REGULATIONS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/526
Sec. 4.04.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle that has been left on private property without the consent of the property owner for a period in excess of five (5)
calendar days or as defined by section 683.002 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
Consent tow. Any tow of a motor vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has
possession, custody, or control of the vehicle, as defined by 16 Tex. Admin. Code section 86.10(5), as amended. The term does not include an
incident management tow or a private property tow.
Heavy duty tow. Any tow of a motor vehicle with a gross weight rating that exceeds 25,000 pounds.
Illegally parked vehicle. Any motor vehicle alleged to be in violation of chapter 17, article 17.04, of this Code, or in violation of applicable parking
regulations of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
Incident management tow. Any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned by the Police Department to the scene of a traffic accident or to
an incident, including the removal of a vehicle, commercial cargo, and commercial debris from an accident or incident scene, as defined by 16 Tex.
Admin. Code section 86.10(11), as amended. The term shall also include tows incident to arrest, traffic hazards and illegally parked vehicles, and
tows of abandoned vehicles initiated by the Police Department.
Light duty tow. Any standard tow of a motor vehicle with a gross weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, as defined by section 2308.0575 of the
Texas Occupations Code, as amended.
Medium duty tow. Any tows of a motor vehicle with a gross weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, but less than 25,000 pounds, as defined by
section 2308.0575 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
Nonconsent tow. Any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow, including an incident management tow and a private property tow, as defined
by 16 Tex. Admin. Code section 86.10(13), as amended.
Permit. Authorization granted by the Chief of Police under the provisions of this article to engage in towing from the wrecker rotation lists in the
City.
Permit holder. Any wrecker company possessing a current, valid permit to engage in towing from the wrecker rotation lists in the City. A permit
holder's primary business office shall be located and maintained within the corporate limits of the City, its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or ten (10)
miles of those areas.
Private property tow. Any tow of a vehicle authorized by a parking facility owner without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle, as
defined by 16 Tex. Admin. Code section 86.10(18), as amended.
Vehicle storage facility. A vehicle storage facility, as defined by Texas Occupations Code, section 2303.002, as amended, that is operated by a person
who holds a license issued under Texas Occupations Code, chapter 2303 to operate the facility.
Wrecker company. A person or legal entity operating a tow truck registered under Tex. Transportation Code Ann. Chapter 643 (Vernon 1999), as
amended. The term includes the owner, operator, employee, or agent of a towing company, but does not include a political subdivision of the State.
Wrecker rotation list. A list of permit holders prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article, as amended.
Sec. 4.04.002 Scope
(a) This article applies to all wrecker movements within the City, except for those performed by governmental entities or directed by law
enforcement.
(b) Unless exempted by State law, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a wrecker company, or to perform wrecker movements for incident
management tows or private property tows in the City without a permit issued in accordance with this article.
(c) A wrecker company that has a proper certificate of registration or permit from the State is not required to obtain a permit from the City under
this article in order to perform consent or nonconsent tows within, from, or through the limits of the City; provided, however, that nonconsent tows
originating within the corporate limits of the City or roadways subject to its jurisdiction shall be subject to section 4.04.008(b).
(d) All permit holders under this article shall comply with all applicable State laws. A failure to comply with State laws will be a violation of this
article.
Sec. 4.04.003 Wrecker rotation list operation
(a) The Chief of Police shall establish and cause to be maintained a wrecker rotation list of all validly permitted wrecker companies, which shall be
used for all incident management tows.
(b) The wrecker rotation list shall be made available for inspection during regular business hours. The list shall contain a designation of each
permit holder qualified to be on the list in order of rotation list number. The wrecker rotation list shall be limited to four (4) wrecker companies. Such
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/526
number shall be reviewed every two (2) years or at the discretion of the Chief of Police, which such number may be adjusted by resolution of the
City Council. As each new permit holder becomes qualified, it shall be placed at the end of the rotation list.
Sec. 4.04.004 General regulations
(a) Wrecker driven to scene of collision. No person shall drive, or cause to be driven, a wrecker to or near the scene of a collision on a public
roadway in the City or any roadway subject to the City's jurisdiction unless such person has been called to the scene by the Police Department. In
situations where a wrecker driver is a certified emergency medical technician, such driver may stop and render aid as required by law but such
wrecker driver will not be able to tow at such collision except pursuant to the rotation list.
(b) Wrecker driver's relationship with Police Officers. All wrecker drivers arriving at the place where any accident has occurred shall obey all
lawful orders given them by any Police Officer investigating such accident and shall not in any manner interfere with such officer in the performance
of his duty.
(c) Parking of wrecker at scene of accident. Whenever a wrecker arrives at the place where a vehicle has been disabled, the wrecker driver shall
park his wrecker as close to the roadway curb as possible and otherwise dispose of it in a manner that does not interfere with traffic. He shall not park
his vehicle within a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from a wrecked or disabled vehicle.
(d) Duty of wrecker driver to clear debris. It shall be the duty of the driver of each wrecker that removes a wrecked, damaged or disabled vehicle
from the place where an accident or collision has occurred to clear and remove any and all debris, parts, glass or vehicle fluids as the result of an
accident or collision from the roadway to the satisfaction of the officer investigating the accident. In the event two (2) or more wreckers pick up
vehicles for towing, it shall be the duty of each driver to clear and remove debris, parts or glass from the roadway.
(e) Issuance and expiration of permits; renewal; fee.
(1) The Chief of Police shall issue a permit to engage in towing from the wrecker lists to all applicants complying with the provisions
of this article. A permit may be evidenced by a windshield sticker.
(2) No permit shall be granted to any person who had a financial interest in a wrecker business whose permit has been suspended
within the preceding twelve (12) months. This shall include any stockholders, officers, directors, managers or partners.
(3) Each permit holder must present the wreckers for inspection annually by January 1st at the Police Department.
(4) Each company desiring to be on the wrecker lists shall pay the City an inspection fee as provided for in the fee schedule presented
in the appendix of this Code, as amended.
(5) A wrecker company or wrecker failing to pass inspection shall pay a reinspection fee as provided for in the fee schedule presented
in the appendix of this Code, as amended, for each additional inspection.
(6) No permit shall be granted to any person or company whose name appears on the current delinquent tax rolls of the City.
(f) Vehicle operator to designate wrecker company. When a Police Officer investigating a collision determines that any vehicle involved in a
collision is unable to safely proceed under its own power, or when the Police Officer determines that the driver of any vehicle involved in a collision
is physically unable to safely move the vehicle to a location where it will not create a traffic hazard, such officer shall request the driver to designate
the permit holder he desires to remove the vehicle, and the Police Officer shall contact the driver's designee.
(g) Wrecker rotation list operation. In the event a Police Officer requires the removal of a vehicle and the vehicle operator does not designate the
permit holder of his choice, due to the operator's arrest or incapacitation, the officer shall request the permit holder next to be called from the wrecker
rotation list.
(h) Maintenance of records. Each permit holder shall make his records available for inspection by the Chief of Police or their designee during
regular business hours at the primary business office of the permit holder, which shall be located and maintained within the corporate limits of the
City, its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or ten (10) miles of those areas.
(i) Parking in residential areas. Except in the following situations, no person shall park or stand a wrecker in the public right-of-way in a residential
area within the corporate limits of the City:
(1) Where a tow has been requested;
(2) Where a wrecker has become inoperable and is waiting for transportation to a repair facility; or
(3) Where the Police Department has directed such activity.
Sec. 4.04.005 Duties of permit holders
(a) Compliance. All permit holders shall comply with all applicable requirements of title 16, chapter 86 of the Texas Administrative Code, as
amended. No operator shall perform an incident management tow under this article without a valid incident management towing operator license
pursuant to 16 Tex. Admin. Code section 86.209, as amended.
(b) Call response.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/526
(1) All permit holders shall respond to a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the City or roadway subject to the City's jurisdiction by
arriving at the scene of the collision or incident within thirty (30) minutes of the requesting officer's call for service. If the responding
wrecker fails to meet this time requirement, whether in route or not, the call shall immediately be canceled and the next rotation wrecker
called.
(2) Any permit holder unable or failing to respond, for whatever reason, for five (5) times or three (3) consecutive times during any one
(1) year, shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation pursuant to section 4.04.010, as amended.
(3) All permit holders shall store all vehicles towed under the provisions of this article at their respective vehicle storage facility unless
the owner of the vehicle and permit holder agree to take the vehicle to another location.
(c) Service hours. A permit holder operating a wrecker, must maintain a twenty-four (24) hour wrecker service, seven (7) days a week, and have
two (2) telephone numbers, one of which is answered twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The permit holder must be able to
immediately advise the Chief of Police of the availability of a tow truck. The wrecker company must have two-way voice communication between
the wreckers and the wrecker company's office.
(d) Solicitations by permit holders prohibited. No permit holder, or his employee, shall solicit, in any manner directly or indirectly, on the public
roadways of this City, a wrecker's business involving any vehicle that has been wrecked or otherwise disabled on a public roadway. This prohibition
applies regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading,
selling, or purchasing such vehicle. Proof of the operation of a wrecker by any person engaged in a wrecker business by or near the scene or site of a
wreck or collision on a public roadway in the City without having first complied with the provisions of section 4.04.004(g) or (h) of this article, as
amended, shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this section.
Sec. 4.04.006 Wrecker requirements
(a) General.
(1) All permit holders shall maintain wreckers meeting the requirements of this article and title 16, chapter 86 of the Texas
Administrative Code, as amended.
(2) All wreckers shall maintain a valid incident management towing permit pursuant to 16 Tex. Admin. Code, as amended, and be in
such condition that they can safely and readily be used as a wrecker for incident management tows.
(b) Wrecker lifting capacity. Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power operated winch with a lifting capacity of not less than eight thousand
(8,000) pounds single line capacity, as reflected by a manufacturer's certificate.
(c) Standard equipment.
(1) Each wrecker shall carry as standard equipment: two (2) safety chains appropriate for load securement, (1) 2.5 pound A.B.C. fire
extinguisher, wrecker bar, absorbent and broom and dust pan.
(2) Each wrecker with a rated capacity of three (3) tons or greater shall be equipped with booster brakes.
(3) Each wrecker must be equipped with dual rear tires.
(4) Upon request of a Police Officer or vehicle owner, the permit holder must make available a wrecker with a specially designed wheel
lift attachment. This need not be a requirement for every wrecker unit, but each permit holder must own at least one (1) so equipped.
(d) Carrying capacity. Each wrecker's carrying capacity shall not be less than one (1) ton as reflected on the manufacturer's certificate for the
vehicle.
(e) Name. In addition to the requirements of 16 Tex. Admin. Code section 86.701, as amended, each wrecker must have the permit holder's name,
phone number, address, and permit number permanently displayed on each side of the wrecker at least three (3) inches in size and in a color that
contrasts with the color of the background surface.
Sec. 4.04.007 Vehicle storage facilities
All vehicle storage facilities used to store vehicles towed from incident management tows or private property tows pursuant to this article shall be
located within the corporate limits of the City, its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or ten (10) miles of those areas. All vehicle storage facilities must be
licensed by the State and must comply with all applicable requirements of title 16, chapter 85 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
Sec. 4.04.008 Fees
(a) The fee charged by a permit holder for tows, tow-related services and equipment, and storage of vehicles towed pursuant to this article shall not
exceed the lower of the maximum allowable fee set forth in the fee schedule presented in the appendix of this Code, as amended, or the maximum
allowable fee provided by State law, as amended.
(b) Towing fee study. Pursuant to Tex. Occ. Code section 2308.203, as amended, a towing company subject to this article may request a towing fee
study be performed by submitting a written request to the Chief of Police and paying the applicable fee set forth in the fee schedule presented in the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/526
appendix of this Code, as amended. No towing company shall be authorized to request a towing fee study within twenty-four (24) months of the
completion of a prior towing fee study performed pursuant to this section.
Sec. 4.04.009 Contractual agreement between wrecker owner and permit holder
A permit holder may contract with another permit holder for the use of permitted wreckers to provide services pursuant to this article; however, no
permit holder shall contract with more than one (1) other permit holder for such use of wreckers, and all contracted wreckers shall be permitted
pursuant to this article.
Sec. 4.04.010 Violation procedures; enforcement; penalties
(a) The Chief of Police, or their designee(s), shall enforce the terms and provisions of this article. All references to “Chief of Police” or “Police
Chief” herein this article shall include the Chief of Police and their designee(s), if any.
(b) The Chief of Police may promulgate procedures to carry out and enforce the provisions of this article.
(c) Any person aggrieved by a permit holder, towing company, or operator subject to this article may file a written complaint with the Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police shall provide written notice of the complaint to the permit holder, towing company, or operator, and within a reasonable
time thereafter the Chief of Police shall conduct a hearing regarding the complaint.
(d) If after such hearing the Chief of Police determines that there has been a violation of any of the terms of this article or this Code, the Chief of
Police may suspend, cancel, or revoke the permit of such permit holder as set forth below. If the Chief of Police determines that the permit holder or
operator has failed to comply with any applicable requirement of title 16, chapter 86 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended, then the Chief of
Police may immediately revoke the permit and/or suspend/remove the permit holder or operator from the rotation and/or service lists. Within fifteen
(15) days of the hearing, the Police Chief shall forward written notice of their findings and determination to the permit holder or operator.
(e) The permit holder, in cases of revocation, shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. The request for appeal must be made, in writing, to
the City Secretary within ten (10) days of the Police Chief's written determination. Upon receiving such request for appeal, the City Council, as soon
as practicable thereafter, shall notify the appellant as to whether or not such an appeal will be heard and if the Council approves such an appeal, it
then may hear such and shall either sustain or reverse the revocation of the Chief of Police.
(f) If no appeal is taken from the Police Chief's action within ten (10) days of notification, as set out herein, then the Police Chief's decision shall
be final.
(g) The period of administrative action per calendar year shall be as follows:
(1) For the first violation, not more than thirty (30) days;
(2) For the second violation, not more than ninety (90) days; and
(3) For the third or subsequent violation, such period of suspension, cancellation or revocation as the Chief of Police may determine,
including permanent revocation.
(h) The administrative penalty set forth in this section shall be independent of and may be in addition to any other penalties assessed pursuant to
any violation of this Code or State law. The determination of whether the violation is significant shall be within the sole discretion of the Police
Chief.
(Ordinance CO21-15-12-17-C3 adopted 12/17/15)
ARTICLE 4.05 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
A mixed beverage permittee under the State Alcoholic Beverage Code located in the city may sell or offer for sale mixed beverages between
midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. (1998 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, art. 4.600)
ARTICLE 4.06 GARAGE SALE REGULATIONS
Sec. 4.06.001 Garage sale defined
Garage sales are hereby defined as occasional sales of household goods or used merchandise conducted in an area zoned for residential uses by the
owner or occupant of the residence at which the sale is conducted and which is not an ongoing or regular business activity. (1998 Code, sec. 4.901)
Sec. 4.06.002 Conduct limited
(a) A garage sale shall not be conducted on any residential lot or tract in the city on more than five (5) consecutive calendar days or two (2)
consecutive weekends.
(b) A garage sale shall not be conducted on any residential lot or tract in the city on more than ten (10) calendar days in any twelve (12) month
period.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/526
(1998 Code, sec. 4.902)
Sec. 4.06.003 Penalty
Any garage sale held in violation of this article shall be prohibited and violations shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code per violation per day. (1998 Code, sec. 4.903)
ARTICLE 4.07 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.07.001 Purpose and intent
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The
regulations contained herein have been established for the purpose of limiting the well documented, adverse secondary effects suffered by properties
located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a sexually oriented business.
(b) The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
speech, expression or communicative materials, including sexually oriented speech, expression or communicative materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent or effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented speech, expression or communicative materials protected by the
First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Sec. 4.07.002 Findings and basis for regulation
(a) Regulations contained herein, including those pertaining to the licensing, operation, and location of sexually oriented businesses, are based on
the sexually oriented business revision committee, October 21, 2010 report, together with studies, reports, findings, court case decisions, and
evidence presented and made available to the City Council.
(b) Copies of the October 21, 2010, sexually oriented business revision committee report, together with the studies, reports, and court case
decisions referenced in subsection (a) above are on file in the office of the City Secretary.
(c) Regulations contained herein have been established under the authority granted to municipalities by section 243.003 of the Texas Local
Government Code.
Sec. 4.07.003 Definitions
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by regularly depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. A commercial establishment for which the regular offering of a service or the selling,
renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer constitutes twentyfive
percent (25%) or more of the items in inventory and/or floor space of the sexually oriented business, including:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, DVD's, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations, that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, but not including
items used for birth control or for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases.
Adult cabaret. A commercial establishment that regularly features the offering to customers of live entertainment that:
(1) Is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customer; and
(2) Is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, simulating, describing, or relating to specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.
Adult motel. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the regular depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises
the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/526
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or seminude,
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Applicant.
(1) A person or entity in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business will be issued;
(2) Each individual who signs an application for a sexually oriented business license as required by section 4.07.006;
(3) Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business for which a license application is made under section 4.07.006,
regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the application;
(4) Each individual who has a 20 percent (20%) or greater ownership interest in a sexually oriented business for which a license
application is made under section 4.07.006, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the application; and
(5) Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a sexually oriented business for which a license application is made
under section 4.07.006, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the application.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or the chief's designated agent.
Child-care facility. A facility licensed by the state, whether situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment
or supervision for more than six (6) children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to
the owner or operator of the facility, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or
charges for the services it offers.
Conviction. A conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has not
been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. Conviction includes disposition or charges against a person by probation or deferred adjudication.
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon. The dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers
to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas,” the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas
or specified sexual activities.
Employee. Any individual who:
(1) Is listed as a part-time, full-time, temporary, or permanent employee on the payroll of an applicant, licensee, or sexually oriented
business; or
(2) Performs or provides entertainment on the sexually oriented business premises for any form of compensation or consideration.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort agency. A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establishment. Any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
(5) Any building operated as a sexually oriented business.
Hearing officer. The City Manager, or his or her designee. The hearing officer shall exercise those powers authorized under the Texas Local
Government Code, the charter of the city, and the Code of Ordinances of the city, as appropriate in the furtherance of his or her duties.
Hospital. A facility or area for providing health services primarily for human in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part of
the facilities.
Licensee.
(a) A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued;
(b) Each individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/526
(c) Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business for which a license has been issued under this article, regardless of
whether the individual's name or signature appears on the license application;
(d) Each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater ownership interest in a sexually oriented business for which a license
has been issued under this article, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the license application;
(e) Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a sexually oriented business for which a license has been issued
under this article, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the license application.
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration; however,
nude modeling at or on behalf of any properly accredited institution of higher learning shall not fall within this definition.
Nudity or a state of nudity. A state of dress which fails to fully and opaquely cover the anus, genitals, pubic region, or perineum anal region, or the
exposure of any device, costume or covering that gives the realistic appearance of or simulates the anus, genitals, pubic region, or perineum anal
region, regardless of whether the nipple and areola of the human female breast are exposed, or shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
Operates or causes to be operated. To cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. Operator means any person on the premises of
a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operation control of the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be
operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Public park. Any city park defined by article 1.10 of the Code of Ordinances, or any park or recreational area operated by a county government.
Regularly features or regularly shown. A consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.
Religious institution. A building or group of buildings in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for
purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. For the purposes of this definition, the term religious
institution shall include, but not be limited to, a church, synagogue, mosque or temple.
Residential district. A single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple family, or mobile home zoning district as defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
Residential use. A single-family, duplex, multiple family, or mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, and campground use as defined in the
city's zoning ordinance.
Semi-nude or semi-nudity or state of semi-nudity. The exposure of the post-puberty female nipple or areola, or the exposure of any device, costume
or covering that gives the realistic appearance of or simulates the post-puberty female nipple or areola, so long as the following anatomical areas of
an individual are fully and opaquely covered: the anus, genitals, pubic region and the perineum anal region of the human body. The term semi-nude
shall not apply to an individual exposing a post-puberty female nipple or areola in the process of breastfeeding a child under that person's care.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial establishment that as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration,
a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of sexual
encounter center or any sexually oriented business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, escort
agency, nude model studio, or other commercial enterprise for which the regular offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices
or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer constitutes twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the
items in inventory and/or floor space of the sexually oriented business. The terms shall also mean any commercial enterprise that self-identifies as an
adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, escort agency or nude model studio,
regardless of whether the percentage of items in inventory and/or floor space constitute twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the total items in
inventory and/or floor space.
Sign. Any display, design, pictorial, or other representation that is:
(1) Constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened, or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that it is visible from the
outside of a sexually oriented business; and
(2) Used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services, or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business.
The term sign also includes any representation painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business establishment or
to any part of the tract upon which the establishment is situated.
Specified anatomical areas.
(1) Any of the following, or any combination of the following, when less than completely and opaquely covered:
(A) Any human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
(B) Any buttock; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/526
(C) Any portion of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
(2) Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
Violation. Any offense under or failure to comply with this article, the punishment for which shall be in accordance with section 4.07.021.
Sec. 4.07.004 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult theaters;
(6) Adult motion picture theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
Sec. 4.07.005 Nonconforming uses
(a) Any sexually oriented business that is in violation of section 4.07.014, or any other location requirement of any other city ordinance, that was
legally operating at the time it was licensed, or the effective date of any amendment of such ordinance or regulation, shall be deemed a
nonconforming use.
(b) Any legally established, sexually oriented business that is in violation of this article because of annexation into the city shall be deemed to be a
nonconforming use.
(c) A sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating within the city on or after the effective date of this article shall not be rendered a
nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a protected use listed in section 4.07.014 within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented
business.
(d) Notwithstanding anything contained in this article or in the city's zoning ordinance as amended to the contrary, a legal nonconforming sexually
oriented business shall be required to meet all applicable requirements of this article except locational requirements established by section
4.07.014(b) within sixty (60) days of the date it becomes nonconforming. The zoning board of adjustment may grant a nonconforming sexually
oriented business an extension if the business shows, upon written application, that meeting these requirements within sixty (60) days imposes an
unnecessary hardship on the business.
(e) Legal nonconforming sexually oriented businesses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
use other than a sexually oriented business to the extent allowed by the city's zoning ordinance. A person commits an offense if he increases,
enlarges, extends or alters, or causes to be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, a nonconforming sexually oriented business.
Sec. 4.07.006 License required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/526
(a) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the
city for the particular classification of sexually oriented business.
(b) Any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a sexually oriented business license shall make application on a
form provided by the chief of police.
(c) The fact that a person, association, firm, partnership or corporation possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the
person from the requirement of obtaining a license for a sexually oriented business.
(d) An application for a sexually oriented business license shall only be considered to be complete if it contains all information specified in
subsections (1) through (13) below:
(1) The applicant's full and true name along with any other names used in the preceding five (5) years. Any individual with a twenty
(20) percent or greater interest in the business shall:
(A) Be considered to be an applicant and shall sign the license application form;
(B) Provide all information and documentation required of the applicant;
(C) Be qualified under section 4.07.005;
(D) Be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(2) The applicant's current address;
(3) Either a set of fingerprints suitable for conducting necessary background checks pursuant to this article, or the applicant's Social
Security number, to be used for the same purpose;
(4) The business name as it is to be displayed on the premises, the company name, if different than the preceding, the property address
and legal description, the business mailing address, business telephone number, and any e-mail or website addresses that are to be used in
conjunction with the business;
(5) Written proof of age, in the form of a birth certificate accompanied by a current photograph, a current driver's license, or other
picture identification issued by a domestic governmental agency;
(6) The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business,
and whether any such license or permit has been denied, revoked, or suspended, and if so, the reason or reasons therefor;
(7) The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process;
(8) A diagram showing a plan of the premises. A diagram prepared in support of a sexually oriented business license application need
not be professionally drawn. The diagram shall:
(A) Be oriented to the north, or to a designated street;
(B) Be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches;
(C) Specify the location of all overhead lighting fixtures;
(D) Designate any portion of the premises in which customers will not be permitted;
(E) Specify the location of all manager's stations, if applicable; and
(F) Designate the place at which the license, if granted, will be conspicuously displayed.
(9) An approved city sign permit accompanied by a photograph verifying posting of notification signage required by section 243.075 of
the Texas Local Government Code;
(10) All information, supported by any necessary documentation, required by this section;
(11) A list of all employees, or prospective employees, along with copies of complete updated employment application, valid driver's
license, state identification card, or passport containing a photograph of the employee;
(12) A notarized affidavit signed by each applicant and certifying all information and documentation provided with the application to be
true and correct;
(13) A nonrefundable application fee as specified by appendix A, fee schedule, article 3.000;
(14) An application submitted without all required information, or without the specified application fee shall be deemed incomplete.
Incomplete applications shall be denied and within thirty (30) days of its receipt by the city, be returned to the applicant, accompanied by
a notice specifying the reasons for application denial.
Sec. 4.07.007 Issuance of license
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/526
(a) The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the City Secretary to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an
application, unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true:
(1) The location of the sexually oriented business is or would be in violation of section 4.07.014 of this article.
(2) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application.
(3) The applicant gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application.
(4) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(5) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the Secretary of State or the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business.
(6) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted or placed on deferred dispositions, probation or community supervision for
a violation of a provision of this article, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect.
(7) The license fee required by this article has not been paid.
(8) The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the sexually oriented business owns or holds a lease for the property or the
applicable portion thereof upon which the sexually oriented business will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the
same.
(9) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with section 4.07.007, issuance of license, or
section 4.07.014, location requirements.
(10) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted or placed on deferred disposition, probation, or community supervision
for:
(A) Any offense under the laws of the United States of America, another state or the Uniform Code of Military Justice for an
offense described in this subsection; or
(B) Any of the below offenses of the state or criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit same;
(C) Any of the following offenses as described in chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code:
(i) Prostitution;
(ii) Promotion of prostitution;
(iii) Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
(iv) Compelling prostitution;
(v) Obscenity;
(vi) Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
(vii) Sexual performance by a child;
(viii) Possession of child pornography;
(D) Any of the following offenses as described in chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code:
(i) Public lewdness;
(ii) Indecent exposure;
(iii) Indecency with a child;
(iv) Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code;
(v) Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or
(vi) Those crimes defined as “drug-defined offenses” or “drug-related offenses” by the Bureau of Justice Statistics Drug and
Crime Data Fact Sheet, 1994, for which punishment would be classified as a felony as set forth in section 12.04 of the Texas
Penal Code;
(E) For which:
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or the date of release from the terms of community
supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/526
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or the date of release from the terms of community
supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(11) The applicant or the applicant's spouse is required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of chapter 62 of the Texas
Code of Criminal Procedure.
(12) The applicant failed to comply with any of the requirements of section 243.0075 of the Texas Local Government Code regarding
the posting of an outdoor sign.
(b) An applicant, or applicant's spouse, who has been convicted of or placed on deferred disposition, probation or community supervision for an
offense listed in subsection (a)(10) above, may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)
(10)(E) above, has elapsed.
(c) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the
sexually oriented business.
(d) The license shall be posted in accordance with the provisions of section 4.07.006(d)(8)(F).
(e) Upon approval of a sexually oriented business license, an applicant for a sexually oriented business license must obtain a certificate of
occupancy from the building official.
(1) If applicable city ordinances do not require that a building permit be obtained, the building official shall issue or deny a certificate
of occupancy not later than forty-five (45) business days subsequent to the date of the applicant's submission of such application. A
certificate of occupancy application not issued or denied by the building official by the forty-fifth (45th) business day following
submission shall be deemed to be approved.
(2) If a building and/or other construction related permit is required under applicable city ordinances, the applicant shall submit to the
building inspection department, all necessary plans and permit applications. The building official shall cause all plans and permit
applications to be processed and reviewed under the terms of applicable codes and ordinances. Permit applications found to be in
compliance with applicable codes and ordinances shall not be unreasonably withheld. Upon approval of a final inspection, by applicable
city departments, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
Sec. 4.07.008 Inspection and maintenance of records
(a) A licensee, operator or employee of a sexually oriented business shall be subject to regulation under this article and shall permit representatives
of the police department, health department, fire department, building inspections division and code enforcement division to inspect all portions of
the premises where customers are allowed and the records required to be maintained under this article by the sexually oriented business for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with this article at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(b) A licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person operates the establishment without maintaining a
current list of all employees of the business, along with a completed updated employment application for each employee. A legible copy of a valid
driver's license, state identification card, or passport, with a photograph, together with an original photograph accurately depicting the employee as
the person appears at the time the person is hired, shall be required and maintained on the premises with the employee's application.
(c) A licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the records and
premises by a representative of the police department at any time the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for business.
(d) The licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business shall maintain all records required to be maintained under the provisions of this article
on the licensed premises.
(e) The licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person does not maintain the required records on the
premises of the licensed establishment.
(f) A licensee, operator or employee of a sexually oriented business shall permit representatives of the police department to take photographs of the
licensee, operator or employees of the sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this section at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
(g) A licensee, operator or employee of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if that person does not permit representatives of the police
department to take photographs of the licensee, operator or employee of the sexually oriented business, for official police department purposes, at
any time it is occupied or open for business.
(h) The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation.
Sec. 4.07.009 Expiration of license
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/526
(a) A sexually oriented business license shall be valid from the date of issuance through January 31 of the following year.
(b) A license may be renewed by submission to the chief of police of an application on the form prescribed by the chief of police and payment of a
nonrefundable renewal processing fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(c) Application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the license.
(d) Sexually oriented business licenses shall be renewed no later than January 31st of each calendar year. A business that fails to renew a license
shall forfeit the right to conduct business within the city until such time as the renewal is approved.
(e) The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A, fee schedule, section
3.700 of this code. Annual renewal fees shall not be prorated.
Sec. 4.07.010 Suspension of license
The chief of police shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an
employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or
(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; or
(3) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or
(4) Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.
Sec. 4.07.011 Revocation of license
(a) The chief of police shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if:
(1) A cause of suspension in section 4.07.010 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months;
(2) On two or more occasions within a five-year period of time a licensee(s) or operator(s) (or any combination thereof) has/have been
convicted of or placed on deferred disposition, probation or community supervision for conduct occurring in a licensing period on the
premises of a sexually oriented business that constitutes any of the offenses of the state or criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to
commit same for:
(A) Any of the following offenses as described in chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code:
(i) Prostitution;
(ii) Promotion of prostitution;
(iii) Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
(iv) Compelling prostitution;
(v) Obscenity;
(vi) Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
(vii) Sexual performance by a child;
(viii) Possession of child pornography;
(B) Any of the following offenses as described in chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code:
(i) Public lewdness;
(ii) Indecent exposure;
(iii) Indecency with a child;
(C) Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code;
(D) Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or
(E) Those crimes defined as “drug-defined offenses” or “drug-related offenses” by the Bureau of Justice Statistics Drug and
Crime Data Fact Sheet, 1994, for which punishment would be classified as a felony as set forth in section 12.04 of the Texas Penal
Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/526
(3) A licensee or operator gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application
process;
(4) A licensee or operator has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of a controlled substance on the premises;
(5) A licensee or operator has on two (2) or more occasions knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(6) A licensee or operator knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended;
(7) A licensee or operator has, on two (2) or more occasions, knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term sexual contact shall have the same meaning as it is
defined in section 21.01, Texas Penal Code;
(8) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually
oriented business;
(9) The licensee is required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of chapter 62 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure;
(10) A license is transferred in violation of section 4.07.014(a).
(b) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(c) Subsection (a) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license, unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
Sec. 4.07.012 Denial, suspension and revocation procedures
(a) If the chief of police determines that facts exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this article, the chief of police shall
notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by
personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the city. Within five (5)
working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the City Manager, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of
reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked. Within three (3) days of the receipt of respondent's written response,
the City Manager shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension or revocation proceeding.
(b) Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the City Manager shall conduct a hearing at which respondent
shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. If a response is not received by the
City Manager in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the City Manager finds that grounds as specified in this article exist for denial, suspension or
revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five (5) days after the hearing unless within that time the City Manager
sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked or has been accepted. If denied, such notice shall
include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(c) If the City Manager finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license, then within five (5) days after the hearing, the
City Manager shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such
action and shall contemporaneously issue the license.
(d) When a decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application of a license
has been denied, or whose license has been suspended or revoked, shall have the immediate right to appeal such action to a court of competent
jurisdiction. Until the court of competent jurisdiction issues its final judgment, the decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license shall remain in force
and be enforced.
(e) A sexually oriented business license or the ownership or control of a sexually oriented business which is directly or indirectly a part of civil
litigation or administrative hearings or procedures regarding the denial, suspension or revocation shall not be transferred, sold or given to another
during the pendency of the judicial or administrative processes.
Sec. 4.07.013 Transfer of license
(a) A person commits an offense if the person transfers a license or permit to another person or operates a sexually oriented business under the
authority of a license at any place other than the address designated on the license. A transfer of a license is deemed to have occurred if there is a
transfer of more than fifty percent (50%) of the ownership or control of a sexually oriented business.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person counterfeits, forges, changes, defaces or alters a license.
Sec. 4.07.014 Location requirements
(a) A person commits a violation if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than a
heavy industrial (HI) district as defined and described in chapter 11, zoning, of this code.
(b) A person commits a violation if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/526
(1) A religious institution including a church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities;
(2) A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities. The term school includes the
school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
(3) A boundary of a residential district as defined by chapter 11, zoning, of this code;
(4) A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trail, swimming pool, athletic field, basketball, or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path, or other similar public land
within the city, or its ETJ, which is under the control of either the city or county park and recreation authorities;
(5) The property line of a lot or parcel devoted to a residential use as defined by chapter 11, zoning, of this code;
(6) A family oriented recreation facility including but not limited to a roller skating rink, an ice skating rink or a facility devoted to
children's athletic activities;
(7) Any premise licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state;
(9) A public library.
(c) A person commits a violation if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business.
(d) A person commits a violation if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or
portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(e) For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight ling, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection (b). The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant
for the purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
(f) For the purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is
located.
Sec. 4.07.015 Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos, or live entertainment in viewing rooms
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business (other than an adult motel) which exhibits on the premises, in a
viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video, or live entertainment which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
providing all information specified in section 4.07.006(d)(8) of this article. Manager stations shown on this diagram shall be dimensioned
and shall not contain in excess of thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area per station.
(2) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city.
(3) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(4) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more managers' stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.
(5) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (4) remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
subsection (1) of this section.
(6) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any time.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) footcandles as measured at the floor level.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/526
(8) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present
in the premises.
(9) No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
(10) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms or booths.
(11) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths or rooms to determine if any
openings or holes exist.
(12) The license shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths or rooms to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or
carpeting.
(13) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight
(48) inches of the floor.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (13) above, commits a violation if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
Sec. 4.07.016 Additional regulations for escort agencies
(a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person commits a violation if the person acts as an escort, or agrees to act as an escort, for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Sec. 4.07.017 Additional regulations concerning public nudity
(a) A person commits a violation if the person knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears nude or in a state of nudity or
engages in specified sexual activities.
(b) A person commits a violation if the person knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a semi-nude state, unless the
person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is at least six (6) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two (2) feet from the floor.
(c) A person commits a violation if the person receives directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or if any patron or customer pays
or gives any gratuity directly to the person, while the person is an employee and semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
(d) A person commits a violation if the person, while semi-nude, knowingly and intentionally touches a part on or the clothing of a patron or
customer.
Sec. 4.07.018 Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business
A person commits a violation if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
Sec. 4.07.019 Hours of operation
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) a.m. and eight
o'clock (8:00) a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and twelve o'clock (12:00) a.m. and noon (12:00) p.m. on Sundays.
Sec. 4.07.020 Exemptions
It is a defense to prosecution under section 4.07.017 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
(A) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing; and
(B) Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
(C) Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Sec. 4.07.021 Violation a class A misdemeanor
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/526
(a) Except as otherwise stated herein, any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any provision of this article (a
violation) shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $4,000.00 and/or confinement in jail for a term not to exceed
one (1) year.
(b) Each day that a violation exists or is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) The refusal to issue a permit based on ineligibility shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty and the imposition of a criminal
penalty shall not prevent the refusal to issue a permit based on ineligibility.
(d) The revocation or suspension of a permit shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall
not prevent the revocation or suspension of a permit.
Sec. 4.07.022 Civil remedies
(a) The city reserves the right to seek all available civil remedies in a court of law to include, but not be limited to, injunction and civil fines for
any violations of this article.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any provision of this article, in addition to any criminal remedies, shall
be subject to a civil fine up to and including two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day for each day the violation occurs.
Sec. 4.07.023 Notice of violation
The city shall send to a sexually oriented business written notice of each citation issued to an operator or employee of the business for an alleged
violation of sections 4.07.033, 4.07.034, 4.07.035, or any provision of article 5 of this chapter [sic]. The notice will be sent within three (3) business
days of the issuance of the citation to the operator or employee. The notice will be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the business
address of the sexually oriented business as it appears on its license application, to the attention of the licensee, as it appears on the license
application. A failure of the city to provide such notice is not a violation of this article. It is not a defense to a citation issued to an employee or
operator for an alleged violation of section 4.07.010, suspension of license, or section 4.07.011, revocation of license, or any provision of this article,
that notice of the issuance of that citation was not given to the sexually oriented business in accordance with this section.
(Ordinance CO08-10-11-18-C1 adopted 11/18/10)
ARTICLE 4.08 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 4.09 FOOD ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS*
Sec. 4.09.001 Adoption of food establishment rules and definitions
The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the Texas Board of Health found in 25 Texas Administrative
Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175 regarding the regulation of food establishment in this jurisdiction.
Authorized agent or employee. The designated employees of the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance CO23-03-07-10.9.A. adopted 7/10/03)
Food establishments. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, or otherwise provides food for human consumption such as a: food service
establishment, retail food store, catering operation, institution, temporary food establishment, mobile food establishment, and/or roadside food
vendor. (Ordinance CO03-14-11-20-C1 adopted 11/20/14)
Food handler. Any person in a food establishment who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating
or cooking utensils, or who is employed in an area in which food or drink is prepared, served, transferred, stored, packed, sold, or otherwise handled.
Health official. The authorized representative of the Williamson County and Cities Health District (WCCHD).
State laws and rules. The state laws found in Chapter 437 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative
Code Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175.
Regulatory authority. The WCCHD.
Working days. The days that WCCHD is open to conduct business with the public.
Sec. 4.09.002 Permits
A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the WCCHD. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or
from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. All permits expire on December 31 each year. A valid permit
must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article.
Sec. 4.09.003 Application for permit and fees
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/526
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by WCCHD. The
application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An
incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or
revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an
initial permit.
(b) Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, WCCHD shall inspect the proposed food establishment to
determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules may be denied a permit or the
renewal of a permit.
(c) The fee schedule can be found in the appendix of this code.
Sec. 4.09.004 Review of plans
Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to WCCHD for review
before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that twenty (20) percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is remodeled. The plans
and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the
type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by WCCHD if they meet the requirements
of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion.
Sec. 4.09.005 Registration of food handlers
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person operating any food establishment, to work or employ a food handler until such food handler has received
a food handler's registration certificate from the WCCHD that is valid during the time of such employment.
(1) Issuance of registration certificates and payment of fees. WCCHD shall issue food handler's registration certificates to food handlers
who attend a food handler's class throughout the county, or who satisfactorily pass a test from a “trainer” that became certified through
this office.
(2) Education and examination of applicant. No food handler's registration card shall be issued by WCCHD to any person required by
law or by this article to have or exhibit such certificate until the applicant shall have met the following requirements:
(A) Complete a class in basic food sanitation. The schedule, time and location of class sites will be announced by the director,
environmental division, WCCHD. The primary emphasis of this orientation will be directed toward the food workers' sanitation
practices and behavior when working in a food establishment. It will be the responsibility of the person in charge of the food
establishment to ensure that safe food practices are in use at all times.
(B) Complete a “Train the Trainer” class. Food establishments who wish to train their own food handlers may do so after meeting
the following conditions:
(i) A food establishment employee must complete a two (2) hour “train the trainer” class. They may then train their own
employees on site and administer the test supplied by WCCHD to their employees; or
(ii) A food establishment employee who is certified to teach the Texas state certified food protection management class must
submit an outline of the class they will be teaching and a copy of the test to be given to the employees after the class is
completed at their site.
(C) WCCHD reserves the right to suspend this option as a method for obtaining food handler cards.
(3) Display of food handler cards. Upon completion of the prescribed orientation and the necessary administrative processing, each
individual will be issued a food handler card that will be posted at the place of employment in a location readily accessible to the health
official for verification.
(4) Managers and supervisory personnel. Managers, assistant managers, and shift supervisors who have completed the Texas state
certified food protection managers course will not be required to obtain a food handler's card from WCCHD, but most post their
certification from the state with the employee's card.
(5) Issuance and effective period of food handler's cards. After the above has been accomplished, the applicant shall thereupon be
issued a food handler's registration certificate by WCCHD, which shall be valid for the time period stipulated on the certificate.
Sec. 4.09.006 Suspension of a permit
(a) WCCHD may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food
establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice in writing to the person in charge.
When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing within five (5) working days of a request for a hearing.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of
the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the hearing
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/526
officer by the holder of the permit within five (5) working days. If no written request for hearing is filed within five (5) days, the suspension is
sustained. WCCHD may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
Sec. 4.09.007 Revocation of a permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory
authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that
the permit shall be revoked at the end of the five (5) working days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with
the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such five (5) day period.
(b) If no request for hearing is filed within the five-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
Sec. 4.09.008 Enforcement of article
(a) Food establishments shall be inspected a determined number of times during the calendar year according to risk factors set by the TDH. Highrisk
establishments, that prepare and serve potentially hazardous food and/or serve a highly susceptible population, shall be inspected a minimum of
four (4) times a calendar year. Establishments that serve only prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous foods shall be inspected a minimum of two (2)
times a calendar year.
(b) Additional inspections of food establishments shall be performed as deemed necessary to protect against public health hazards or nuisances.
Additional fees are charged to the establishment for these visits. Visits associated with unsubstantiated complaints received by this office will not
require an additional fee.
(c) Following are guidelines for enforcement of these rules in an establishment that earns more than thirty (30) demerits on multiple inspections
during a twelve (12) month period:
(1) First failure. “UNSATISFACTORY” placard shall be posted on front door or window and shall not be covered from sight, defiled,
or removed until an inspection is performed earning thirty (30) or fewer demerits. The follow-up inspection will occur within two (2)
working days of the failed inspection.
(2) Second failure within twelve (12) months of first failure. “UNSATISFACTORY” placard shall remain/be posted on front door or
window and shall not be covered from sight, defiled, or removed until an inspection is performed earning thirty (30) or fewer demerits.
The permit shall be suspended and the operations of the establishment shall cease immediately. The establishment shall remain closed for
a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours and fulfill the following requirements before reopening:
(A) The management of the establishment must meet with and submit a written plan of action to the director of the environmental
division or his appointee. The plan of action shall address critical violations of the previously failed inspections.
(B) A reinstatement fee as set forth in the fee schedule, Appendix A, will be paid to the WCCHD Environmental Division located
at 303 Main, Georgetown, TX 78626.
(C) A follow-up inspection will be conducted within one working day of fulfillment of the requirements listed under (A) and (B).
(D) The establishment shall be placed on a thirty (30) day inspection schedule until two (2) consecutive inspections result in a
score of thirty (30) or fewer demerits.
(E) Third failure within twelve (12) months of first failure. “UNSATISFACTORY” placard shall remain/be posted on front door
or window and shall not be covered from sight, defiled or removed. The person in charge shall be notified in writing of the intent of
WCCHD to permanently revoke their permit.
Sec 4.09.009 Penalties
In addition to any other penalties herein before provided and unless another penalty is in this article provided, whoever shall do any act or thing
required by the terms of this article, or in anywise violate the provisions thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set
forth in section 1.01.009 of this code. It shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege or to prove that the act or omission was knowingly done or
omitted.
(Ordinance CO23-03-07-10.9.A. adopted 7/10/03)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE 5.01 FIRE CODE
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/526
Sec. 5.01.001 Adopted
There is hereby adopted the 2015 edition of International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council, including appendices “B” through
“I,” be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City and within 5,000 feet thereof regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor and each and all regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 5.01.002 of this
Article. One (1) copy of said Code is on file in the office of the Fire Marshal and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein.
Sec. 5.01.002 Amendments
The 2015 International Fire Code shall be amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Cedar Park, herein after referred to as “this
Code.”
(2) Section 101.2 Scope. The provisions of this Code shall supplement any and all laws relating to fire safety and shall apply to all
persons without restriction, unless specifically exempted. This Code establishes regulations affecting or relating to structures, processes,
premises and safeguards regarding:
(3) Section 105.6.49 Mobile food establishments. An operational permit is required for the operation and maintenance of a mobile food
establishment. Small, light-weight vendor push-carts, as determined by the Fire Code Official, are not covered under this permit.
(4) Section 109.4 Violation; penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of
the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense
punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(5) Section 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $200.00
or more than $2,000.00.
(6) Section 202, General Definitions, shall be amended by adding or amending definitions to read as follows:
Jurisdiction is the City of Cedar Park, Texas.
Fire prevention division. The division of the Cedar Park Fire Department that is designated as the entity responsible for reviewing,
applying and enforcing this Code and investigating or causing to be investigated all fires within the jurisdiction of the City, and
areas outside the City as delegated by special agreement.
Mobile food establishment. A food establishment designed to be readily moveable.
(7) Section 319 Mobile food establishments. Shall be added to read as follows:
319.1 Permits. An operational permit is required to operate a mobile food establishment in accordance with section 105.6.49.
319.2 Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers required in mobile food establishments in accordance with 319.2.1 through 319.2.4.
319.2.1. All mobile food establishments shall have a minimum 2A:10B:C portable fire extinguisher mounted in a conspicuous
location near the exit.
319.2.2 Mobile food establishments utilizing portable generators shall have a minimum 3A:40B:C fire extinguisher in lieu of
the extinguisher required by 319.2.1.
319.2.3 In addition to the fire extinguisher requirements above, all mobile food establishments that include deep fat fryers shall
require at least one (1) class K fire extinguisher per the requirements of section 904.12.5.2.
319.2.4 All fire extinguishers shall be installed and maintained in accordance with 906.2 and NFPA 10.
319.3 Use of Liquefied Petroleum Gas in Mobile Food Establishments. Use of LPG for mobile food establishments shall comply
with State of Texas Railroad Commission adopted standards.
319.4 Baffles and closures. Baffles and closures shall comply with sections 319.4.1 through 319.4.2.
319.4.1 All deep fat fryers shall have a minimum 8-inch steel baffle between the fryer and the surface flames of an adjacent
appliance, or shall maintain a minimum 16-inch separation from the adjacent appliance.
319.4.2 A positive closing lid shall be required on the fryer with latching mechanisms that secure it in the open and closed
positions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/526
319.5 Emergency Egress. Emergency egress shall comply with section 319.5.1 through 319.5.2.2.
319.5.1 Mobile food establishments shall have a clear, unobstructed height over the aisle-way portion of the unit of at least 74
inches from floor to ceiling, and a minimum of 30 inches of unobstructed horizontal aisle space to exit(s).
319.5.2 If travel distance exceeds 10 feet from any portion of the interior of a mobile food establishment to an exit, a minimum
of 2 exits shall be required. The exits shall be remote from each other and shall be so arranged as to provide a means of
unobstructed travel to the outside of the unit.
319.5.2.1 The size and arrangement of the second egress shall be approved by the Fire Code Official, taking into account
the hazards present.
319.5.2.2 The latch mechanism of any exit shall be operable by hand, and shall not require the use of a key or special
knowledge to operate from the inside. At least one exit shall be labeled with a sign reading “EXIT” with a minimum of
4-inch letters.
319.6 Generator refueling. Refueling of generators shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a
location not less than 20 feet from the mobile food establishment. Fuel shall be stored in a UL or FM approved flammable liquid
safety container in an approved location.
(8) Section 503 Fire Apparatus Access Roads, shall be amended to read as follows:
Section 503.1, “Where required,” shall be amended by adding a new subsection 503.1.4, so that such subsection shall read as
follows:
503.1.4. Maintenance generally.
(a) The Fire Code Official shall report any negligent surface conditions, markings, or signs to the owner or person in control
of property upon which a fire lane exists and shall issue instructions for repair.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of property upon which a fire lane has been designated or exists to
fail to maintain the surface of the fire lane in good condition, free of potholes and other nonapproved obstructions.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of property on which a fire lane has been designated or exists to
fail to maintain any marking of the fire lane as required by this Code in a condition which is not clearly legible.
Section 503.2.3 shall be amended by adding a new subsection 503.2.3.1, so that such subsection shall read as follows:
503.2.3.1 Fire apparatus access roads shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete designed to meet the criteria of 503.2.3.
Section 503.3 Marking. Where required by the Fire Code Official, approved striping or, when allowed by the Fire Chief, signs, or
both, or other approved notices shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction
thereof. Signs, notices and striping shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when
necessary to provide adequate visibility.
Subsection 503.3.1 Striping shall be added to read as follows: Fire apparatus access roads shall be marked by painted lines of
red traffic paint six inches in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words “FIRE LANE TOW-AWAY ZONE” shall
appear in four inch white letters at thirty-five (35) feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes.
Curb facing shall be used when available; fire lane striping shall be continuous throughout the designated fire lane and shall
lay down along backside of head in parking spaces.
Subsection 503.3.2 Signs shall be added to read as follows: Signs shall read “FIRE LANE TOW-AWAY ZONE” and shall be
twelve (12) inches wide and eighteen (18) inches high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders
in red, using not less than two (2) inch lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the
sign shall be six feet, six inches above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty (50) feet apart. Signs may be
installed on permanent buildings or walls if approved by the Fire Code Official.
Section 503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner,
including parking, stopping or standing of any nonemergency vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in a fire lane. The minimum
widths and clearances established in section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in section 503.3 shall be
maintained at all times. The operator of a premises shall maintain, free of obstruction, all fire lanes on the premises. No person may
mark, post or otherwise identify a nonfire lane private vehicular passageway as a fire lane or in such a manner as tends to create
confusion as to whether the passageway is a fire lane. Any unauthorized vehicle on a fire lane is:
(1) Subject to removal by the operator of the premises, with the expense of removal and storage to be borne by the
registered owner of the vehicle;
(2) Subject to citation, as well as removal, by the Fire Code Official or a police officer; and
(3) Prima facie evidence that the person in whose name the vehicle is registered is guilty of a violation of the parking
provisions of this section.
(9) Section 505.1.1 Shall be added to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/526
In buildings containing more than one occupancy, suite numbers identifying each occupant shall be placed on each exterior door
(minimum 3 inch numbers). Each number shall have a minimum stroke width of 1/4". Numbers shall contrast with the background
and be of a material as approved by the Fire Code Official.
(10) Section 507.5.1.1 Hydrant ant for standpipe systems. Buildings equipped with a standpipe system installed in accordance with
section 905 shall have a fire hydrant within 100 feet (30.480 mm) of the fire department connections. This hydrant shall not substitute for
the hydrant(s) required by section 507.5.1.
(11) Section 507.5.1.2 Hydrant for fire department connections for automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be added to read as
follows:
A fire hydrant shall be located no further than one hundred (100) feet from the Fire Department Connection and shall be located on
the same side of the fire apparatus access road as the Fire Department Connection. This hydrant shall not substitute for the
hydrant(s) required by section 507.5.1.
(12) Section 507.5.3 Private fire service mains and water tanks. Private fire service mains and water tanks shall be periodically
inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with NFPA 25 at the following intervals:
1. Private fire hydrants (all types): Inspection annually and after each operation; flow test and maintenance annually.
2. Fire service main piping: Inspection of exposed, annually; flow test every 5 years.
3. Fire service main piping strainers: Inspection and maintenance after each use.
4. Private fire hydrants or those hydrants supplied through or by a fire pump shall be painted red. (Or equal).
5. All private fire hydrant locations shall be identified by the installation of a blue reflective marker, according to City
specifications.
6. A fire hydrant shall be located no further than one hundred (100) feet from the FDC and shall be located on the same side of the
fire apparatus access road as the FDC.
(13) Section 509.2.1 Sprinkler riser rooms, shall be added to read as follows:
Sprinkler risers shall be contained in rooms with a minimum fire resistive rating of 1-hour and shall have access from the exterior of
the building being served. Riser room shall be large enough to accommodate a 36 inch clear space on at least two sides of the
sprinkler riser. Rooms not dedicated solely as sprinkler riser rooms shall be sized according to the determination of the Fire Code
Official. (Sprinkler riser rooms shall be allowed to accommodate fire alarm control panels without necessitating an increase in the
size of the room, provided that the FACP remains completely accessible). An additional, approved key box may be required to
provide access to the sprinkler riser room where required by the Fire Code Official.
(14) Section 605.1, Abatement of electrical hazards, shall be amended by adding a new subsection 605.1.1, so that such subsection shall
read as follows:
605.1.1 Main electrical shut off. A single means of electrical disconnect shall be provided on the exterior of the building. Shut off
shall be located in an accessible area and properly labeled.
Exceptions:
1. Two means of electrical disconnect may be allowed by the Fire Code Official when the disconnects are located within 3
feet of each other with no other features installed between them and they are clearly marked to indicate that both disconnects
must be utilized to terminate power to the building.
2. Where an enclosed room with an exterior door is provided, an additional, approved key box may be required to provide
access to the electric room where required by the Fire Code Official.
(15) Section 609 Commercial Kitchen Hoods shall be amended to read as follows:
609.2 Where required. A type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking
appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors.
Exceptions: A type I hood is not required for a commercial cooking appliance if:
a. the commercial cooking appliance complies with sections 4.1.1.1 and 4.1.1.2 of NFPA 96;
b. the building containing the commercial cooking appliance is fully sprinklered as required by NFPA 13;
c. the average daily use of the commercial cooking appliance is less than five (5) hours; and
d. certified fire suppression staff is on site at all times during operation of the commercial cooking appliance.
(16) Section 703.1 Maintenance shall be amended by adding new section 703.1.4 Tenant Separations to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/526
Walls separating two or more tenants in a multi-tenant building shall be constructed of a minimum of 2 layers of 5/8" Type X
gypsum board or equivalent (1 layers each side of wall) and shall extend from floor to roof decking and from front to rear. Walls
shall be continuous and shall be sealed in accordance with the 2015 International Building Code, sections 714 and 715.
(17) Section 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided when the
sum square footage of the building or structure, or the sum of all fire areas within the building or structure, reaches or exceeds 12,000
square feet. Where specific occupancy thresholds require automatic fire sprinklers at lower square footages as described in sections
903.2.1 through 903.2.12, those requirements will prevail. Fire walls shall be not used to expand the square footage of a building without
providing an automatic fire sprinkler system when the specific thresholds described herein have been reached.
Occupancy Evaluation
Occupancy Group (and occupancy example)
New Amendment
(by square footage)
A-1 (theater) 12,000
A-2 (restaurant) No amendment
A-3 (dance hall, church) 12,000
A-4 (arena) 12,000
A-5 (outdoor stadium) No amendment
E (schools, day cares) 12,000
F-1 (factory, moderate hazard, brewery) 12,000
F-2 (factory, low hazard, ceramics) 12,000
H (haz-mat storage or generation) No amendment
I (nursing home) No amendment
M (retail store) 12,000
R (hotel) No amendment
S-1 (storage, moderate hazard, furniture) 12,000
S-2 (storage, low hazard, food products) 12,000
Commercial parking garage No amendment
B (business office) 12,000
(18) Section 907 Fire Alarm and Detection Systems shall be amended as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/526
A new subsection 907.1.4 Design standards shall be added to read as follows: All alarm systems, whether new or replacement, that serves
twenty-five (25) or more alarm initiating devices shall be an intelligent addressable fire detection system.
907.6.1 Wiring. Wiring shall comply with the requirements of the National Electrical Code as amended, and NFPA 70 and NFPA 72,
as amended. Wireless protection systems utilizing radio-frequency transmitting devices shall comply with the special requirements
for supervisions of low-power wireless systems in NFPA 72.
(19) Chapter 61 Liquefied petroleum gases. This section will be deleted in its entirety due to State regulations that disallow
jurisdictions from adopting ordinances related to the LPG industry that are more stringent than State requirements. This industry is
regulated by the Railroad Commission.
(20) Appendix D, section D103 Fire Apparatus Access Road Minimum Specifications shall be amended as follows:
D103.4 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet shall be provided with width and turn-around
provisions in accordance with table D103.4 and the approval of the Fire Code Official.
Sec. 5.01.003 Geographic limits
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015 edition of the International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited shall be amended to read as follows:
The geographic limits for the storage of class I and class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings are hereby established
and applicable to storage of 10,000 gallons or more. Storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is
prohibited within each and every zoning district within the City of Cedar Park, with the exception of those districts which are zoned
for industrial use. Installation of above around tanks in industrial districts shall be permitted at the discretion of the Fire Marshal or
the Fire Chief following his/her review of the proposed installation area. When used in conjunction with Chapter 22, above-ground
storage tanks will be allowed at the discretion of the Fire Marshal or the Fire Chief Tanks shall not be located within 100' of the
property line of any group E, I or R occupancies.
Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited shall be amended to read as follows:
The geographic limits for the storage of class I and class II liquids in above-ground tanks are hereby established and applicable to
storage of 10,000 gallons or more. Storage of class I and II liquids in above ground tanks is prohibited within the City of Cedar Park,
with the exception of areas that are zoned for industrial use. Storage of class I and II liquids may be permitted at the discretion of the
Fire Marshal or Fire Chief following his/her review of the proposed location and the fire protection for the storage area. Storage
shall not be allowed within 100' of the property line on any group E, I or R occupancies.
Section 5806.2 Limitations shall be amended to read as follows:
The geographic limits for the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers are hereby established and applicable to
storage of 10,000 gallons or more. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited
within the City of Cedar Park, with the exception of areas zoned for industrial use. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids may be
permitted at the discretion of the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief following his/her review of the proposed location and the fire protection
for the storage area. Storage shall not be allowed within 100' of the property line of any group E, I or R occupancies.
(Ordinance CO20-18-03-22-E3 adopted 3/22/18)
ARTICLE 5.02 BLASTING OPERATIONS
Sec. 5.02.001 License Required for Blasting Operations
(a) It shall be unlawful to engage in blasting operations or in any other activity in which explosives are used in the city or within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction other than those associated with current rock mining operations.
(b) This section shall apply only to current licensees involving rock mining operations provided that said licensee continues to meet all
requirements for licensing and continues to adhere to all applicable local, state and federal laws including but not limited to those governing the
transportation, storage and use of explosives.
(Ordinance CO51-04-09-09-10A adopted 9/9/04)
Sec. 5.02.002 License application; fee
(a) Qualifications. In order to qualify for a city blaster's license, the applicant must:
(1) Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age;
(2) Be able to understand and give written and oral directions in the English language;
(3) Have a working knowledge of applicable safety regulations;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/526
(4) Be qualified by reason of training, knowledge and experience in the use, transportation, storage and handling of explosives; and
(5) Pass a written examination pertaining to the safety and use of explosives.
(b) Applications. Applications for a blaster's license shall be made in writing to the city. Each application shall set forth the location at which such
explosives are to be kept and shall state whether such explosives are to be in bulk, barrels, canisters, cartridges or other manner, and the maximum
amount to be kept on hand at any one time and shall contain such other information as may be required by the city.
(c) License fee. A license fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code must be submitted with the application. No
application will be reviewed or processed unless said fee is paid.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.202)
Sec. 5.02.003 Permits
(a) Classes of explosive permits. Four (4) classes of explosive permits are utilized in order to accommodate the various types and related time
limits of blasting operations. The following is a list of the permit classes, time limits, fees and types of blasting operations for which the permits are
intended:
(1) Class A.
(A) Good for ten (10) calendar days.
(B) Fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code for each permit.
(C) Used to accommodate blasting for residential swimming pools or other short term blasting operations.
(2) Class B.
(A) Good for forty-five (45) days.
(B) Fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code for each permit.
(C) Used to accommodate blasting for residential swimming pools or other short term blasting operations.
(3) Class C.
(A) Good for one hundred-twenty (120) days.
(B) Fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code for each permit.
(C) Used to accommodate blasting for subdivision utility construction.
(4) Class D.
(A) Good for one (1) year.
(B) Fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code for each permit.
(C) Used to accommodate blasting for quarry or similarly fixed blasting operations.
(b) Permit Application. The same permit application form will be used for all classes of permits. Additional information, including detailed
blasting plans or a detailed blasting procedure, may be required on those projects where close tolerances, proximity, personnel and operating
conditions dictate.
(c) Bond or Insurance Requirements. Before a permit may be issued for the use of explosives, the applicant must file with the city a public liability
insurance policy showing evidence of insurance covering the period of the permit, having not less than $300,000.00/$1,000,000.00 bodily injury
protection and $300,000.00 property damage protection for the purpose of payment of all damages to persons or property which arise from or are
caused by any act authorized by the permit from which any legal judgment results. A greater amount of coverage may be specified when conditions
at the location or use so indicate.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.203)
Sec. 5.02.004 Storage
It shall be unlawful to store or keep in the city any black powder in excess of five (5) pounds, guncotton, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin,
fulminate of mercury or any other explosive or substance, compound, mixture or article having properties of such a character that alone or in
combination or in contiguity with other substances or compounds, may decompose suddenly and generate sufficient heat, gas or pressure to produce
rapid flaming combustion or to administer a destructive blow to persons or property. (1998 Code, sec. 5.204)
Sec. 5.02.005 General requirements
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/526
(a) Blasting operations, including use, job-related transportation, and on-site storage of explosives must be conducted by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed blaster.
(b) Charging and loading of holes and other handling of explosives may be performed by persons not holding a blaster's license, provided that such
operations are under the direct supervision of a licensed blaster of the city.
(c) Vehicle operations transporting explosives between job sites, on the job site, and picking up explosives are not required to be licensed blasters,
but must be under the supervision of a licensed blaster who is also responsible for the safe condition and proper marking of any vehicle transporting
explosives under his supervision.
(d) Blasting operations shall be limited to between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.205)
Sec. 5.02.006 Employees
(a) Filing of names with the City Secretary. A blaster's license shall not be issued unless the licensee shall file with the city the name of the person
or persons designated by such licensee to perform any of the following functions:
(1) Handling of explosives;
(2) Loading of holes;
(3) Discharging of explosives; and
(4) Having charge of magazines.
(b) Minimum requirements. No person shall be designated to perform any of the above functions unless he is:
(1) At least twenty-one (21) years of age; helpers and assistants may be eighteen (18) years of age, if working under the direct
supervision of a qualified blaster;
(2) Able to understand, read and write the English language;
(3) Of temperate habits;
(4) Familiar with the laws and provisions of the regulations governing the storage and use of explosives; and
(5) Capable of performing the duties incidental to his work without unnecessary hazard to himself or others.
(c) Certificate of fitness. A certificate of fitness shall be issued to any qualified person so designated by any licensee or applicant for a license. It
shall be unlawful to engage in any of the activities described in this section unless each person designated in accordance with this subsection shall
have first received a certificate of fitness from the City Secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.206)
Sec. 5.02.007 Inspection and monitoring
(a) The city may at its option, observe any blasting operation at any time and may monitor or require monitoring of any blasting operation.
(b) The contractor shall maintain accurate records throughout any blasting operation showing the type of explosive used, number of holes, pounds
of explosives, charge per hole, depth of hole, total pounds of explosives, charge per shot, delays used, date and time of blast, weather conditions and
such other information as is necessary to accurately describe the blasting operation. Records are to be available for inspection and review at all times.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.207)
Sec. 5.02.008 Revocation of blasting permit and suspension of blaster's license
(a) Failure to keep the records referred to in section 5.02.007(b) above, may be cause for the revocation of the blasting permit and suspension of
the blaster's license.
(b) Any violation of any part of this section may be cause for the suspension or revocation of the blaster's license.
(c) A blasting permit shall be automatically suspended upon cancellation, suspension or lapse of insurance coverage. Such suspension may be for a
period of up to thirty (30) calendar days from the date of loss of insurance coverage, after which time the affected permits shall be revoked, and a
new application must be made and approved before blasting operations may be resumed.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.208)
Sec. 5.02.009 Enforcement official
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/526
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal or any other person designated by the City Manager to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.209)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.03.001 Office of the fire marshal
The office of the fire marshal is hereby created. The term “fire marshal” when used herein, shall include the fire marshal and his designees. The fire
marshal shall be appointed by and hold office at the will of the fire chief, and he shall perform such duties and responsibilities as assigned by the fire
chief. The fire marshal and his designees, who shall be the fire inspectors and fire investigators assigned under him, shall have all the rights,
privileges and obligations of a peace officer as prescribed by law. The duties of fire marshal and his designees shall be assigned from the appropriate
rank in the fire department as described in article 9.11 of this code.
Sec. 5.03.002 Fire marshal to investigate all fires
The fire marshal shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which
property has been destroyed or damaged. The fire marshal shall keep a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics, circumstances and
evidence in a secure manner, either physically or electronically.
Sec. 5.03.003 Fire marshal to take testimony and furnish evidence
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony on oath of all persons supposed
to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation and if he shall be of the opinion that there is
evidence sufficient to charge any person with arson, fraud, or other criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be
lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with
the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.
Sec. 5.03.004 Fire marshal to summon witnesses
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify under sworn oath in relation to any matter which is by the
provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any evidence deemed pertinent thereto. The fire
marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him.
Sec. 5.03.005 Unlawful to disobey any lawful order of the fire marshal
Any witness who refuses to be sworn or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said fire marshal, or who fails or
refuses to produce any evidence pertaining to any matter under investigation or inquiry, or who interferes with any fire marshal investigation or
inquiry, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to section 1.01.009 of this code, as amended; and it shall be the duty of the fire
marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted; provided, however, that any person so convicted shall have the right to appeal.
Sec. 5.03.006 Investigations by fire marshal to be confidential
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be confidential. Persons other than those required to be
present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not
allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined.
Sec. 5.03.007 Fire marshal's right to enter buildings where fire has occurred
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of the day and night, when necessary, in the performance of his duties imposed on him by the
provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building, property or premises where any fire or explosion has occurred, and other buildings,
properties, and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion.
Sec. 5.03.008 Fire marshal shall make periodic inspections and reports; aggrieved persons may appeal
The fire marshal shall have the right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within
the city and make or cause to be made an examination of businesses and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto.
(Ordinance CO41-14-04-10-C8 adopted 4/10/14)
ARTICLE 5.04 ARSON REWARD*
The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to anyone who secures and furnishes information necessary to and which
results in the arrest and conviction of any person or persons who commit the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/526
standing offer and shall be paid out of the contingency fund of the city. The City Council shall be the sole and exclusive judge in determining
eligibility for the reward offered herein. (1998 Code, art. 5.400)
ARTICLE 5.05 FIREWORKS
Sec. 5.05.001 Unlawful
(a) City limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to sale, possess, store, use, or explode any fireworks within the corporate limits of the City.
(b) Within 5,000 feet of City limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, use, or explode any fireworks within the 5,000 feet
outside the corporate limits of the City. This subsection shall not apply within any portion of such five thousand foot area which is contained within
the territory of another municipality.
(c) Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (b) if the alleged possession and/or storage of fireworks
is incident to the sale of fireworks purchased outside the corporate limits of the City. Possession and/or storage is incident to the sale of fireworks if
the possession and/or storage of the fireworks:
(1) Is within five (5) hours of the purchase of the fireworks as supported by a receipt or other evidence; or
(2) Is by a vendor licensed or permitted to sell fireworks in the State.
(d) Nuisance. A violation of this section is hereby defined to be a nuisance.
Sec. 5.05.002 Possession, sale or use of fireworks declared a nuisance
The doing or performing of any act in violation of the above is defined as a nuisance pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 217.042.
Sec. 5.05.003 Display permits
The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized to issue permits for the possession, use, and discharge of supervised display of fireworks in the corporate
limits of the City and within 5,000 feet outside the corporate limits of the City, to qualifying operators approved by the Fire Marshal. Applications for
display permits shall be made in writing to the Fire Marshal at least ten (10) days in advance of the date of display. The permittee shall furnish a bond
or certificate of insurance in a minimum amount determined by the Fire Marshal or the principal sum required by article 5.01 of this Code, as
amended, whichever is greater, for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property by reason of the
permitted display and arising from any acts of the permittee, his agents, employees or subcontractors. Such applicant shall identify his previous
experience in handling and discharge of fireworks or shall otherwise demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the Fire Marshal his competency to
handle said fireworks. In the event the Fire Marshal denies a permit to the applicant, said applicant may appeal the Fire Marshal's decision to the Fire
Chief by filing a written appeal with the department stating the grounds for appeal. Said appeal shall be heard by the Fire Chief not later than fifteen
(15) days after the date said written appeal is filed with the department.
Sec. 5.05.004 Enforcement
The Chief of Police or Fire Marshal or their designee(s) are hereby authorized to seize, take, remove or caused to be removed at the expense of the
owner, any stock of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, held, possessed or discharged by any person in violation of this article.
Sec. 5.05.005 Display permit fee
A nonrefundable display permit fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this Code shall be assessed when such permit is
requested. No permit shall be issued prior to payment of the display permit fee.
(Ordinance CO37-15-08-27-C4 adopted 8/27/15)
ARTICLE 5.06 OPEN BURNING
Sec. 5.06.001 Permit required; exceptions
There shall be no open burning of materials within the city limits and within 5,000 feet thereof without first obtaining a permit from the office of the
fire marshal and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. An exception shall be a
recreational fire as defined by the adopted fire code of the city, and shall be such that the size of the fuel load shall not exceed 3 feet in diameter and
2 feet in height, and shall be only natural wood materials, shall not be for the purpose of land clearing or waste disposal, and shall comply with all
rules set forth by this article, the fire code and the State of Texas, including the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. Such recreational fires
shall be supervised by a competent adult with an ample water supply, shall be located no closer than 25' to a structure, and shall be sufficiently
supervised and contained such that no spread may occur to a distance closer than 25' to a structure or other combustibles, and such that a nuisance is
not created. (Ordinance CO41-14-04-10-C8 adopted 4/10/14)
ARTICLE 5.07 EMERGENCY AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/526
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.07.001 Organization
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the
duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. He/she may delegate authority for execution[; however, responsibility] shall remain
with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated
by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization
shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
Sec. 5.07.002 Director - powers and duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or
recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a
disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by
the City Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of 7 days
except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City Secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this division.
Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of
the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the City Secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city's emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency
management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the
city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the
provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other
local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said
city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of
private contributions, which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as
provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (chapter 418 of the Government Code).
Sec. 5.07.003 Plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the
organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees
to carry out the provisions of this division. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division
of emergency management of the state. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of
the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned
by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this division and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/526
Sec. 5.07.004 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in effect, they shall supersede and
override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
Sec. 5.07.005 Liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the
agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents
thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this division shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real
estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect,
designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or
practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or
injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the
property of such person.
Sec. 5.07.006 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this division
without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior
and specific approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public
funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property.
Sec. 5.07.007 Offenses; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the
enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of
the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine not to exceed five hundred and no/100 dollars
($500.00).
Sec. 5.07.008 Limitations
This division shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation.
(Ordinance CO02-13-10-03-C2 adopted 10/3/13)
Secs. 5.07.009–5.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Homeland Security
Sec. 5.07.031 National Incident Management System (NIMS)
The city hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) dated March 1, 2004. (Ordinance CO63-05-11-17-2C adopted 11/17/05)
ARTICLE 5.08 COST RECOVERY
Sec. 5.08.001 Fee collection
(a) The owner or occupant of a structure, vehicle, or property to which the fire department provides fire suppression, emergency medical services,
vehicle extrication, hazardous material mitigation, or other fire department services, (collectively referred to in this article as “emergency response
services”) or any person that causes the need for the fire department to respond and/or provide any emergency response service (the “responsible
party”) shall pay the cost of such service, which shall include both the base response fees and the cost recovery fees. The fire chief or their designee
is hereby authorized and directed to establish and maintain a cost recovery fee schedule for emergency response services, and the fees stated therein
shall not exceed the city's actual expense in providing such emergency response services. The itemized billing fee schedule shall at all times be
maintained on file with the fire department and city's website, shall be prima facie evidence of the fees established, and shall have the same legal
effect as if adopted by ordinance of the City Council.
(b) Within thirty (30) days of the date of providing emergency response services, the fire chief or his designee shall submit an invoice for all costs,
fees, charges and expenses related to the provisions of such services to the owner, occupant, or other responsible party or their designated agent,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/526
representatives and insurance companies. All such bills are to be paid within sixty (60) days of the receipt thereof; interest shall accumulate thereafter
on any unpaid balances at the rate of ten percent (10%).
(c) In addition, any bills, fines or penalties, including but not limited to clean up costs, fees or expenses, that are imposed upon the city, state or
federal agencies and related to the same situation or occurrences may be billed separately within thirty (30) days of receipt and shall be paid as
provided in subsection (b) above.
Sec. 5.08.002 Base fee schedule
The base response fees will be collected in the amounts set forth in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code (article 15.000).
(Ordinance CO59-14-07-24-C1, exh. A, adopted 7/24/14)
Sec. 5.08.003 Enforcement
The city may enforce the provisions of this article by civil actions in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due
hereunder, plus attorney fees, costs and expenses and any other relief that may be appropriate. (Ordinance CO65-04-11-18-10A adopted 11/18/04)
CHAPTER 6
SEASONAL, TEMPORARY AND MOBILE BUSINESS AND EVENTS
ARTICLE 6.01 NONPROFIT SEASONAL FUNDRAISERS
Sec. 6.01.001 General provisions
(a) This article is intended to provide a safe, orderly means for local nonprofit, locally recognized charitable groups to conduct seasonal
fundraisers. All regulations of this article are deemed necessary for the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the volunteers and their
patrons. Nonprofit seasonal fundraisers are permitted in LR, GR, CS, PS districts, or any other zoning district of the city subject to approval by the
Development Services Committee. Denial of a request by the Development Services Committee may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(b) This article shall apply to only seasonal or periodic fundraisers conducted by nonprofit or charitable institutions. At least eighty (80) percent of
the net proceeds from each fundraiser must go directly to the nonprofit group or charitable cause represented. Examples of fundraiser events
permitted under this article are pumpkin sales, booster club carwashes, and public school sponsored concessions.
(c) Solicitation in the public right-of-way, including street medians, is prohibited.
(d) The sale of used clothing and/or accessories, used furniture, used household and/or sporting goods is prohibited except for church or school
sponsored events located and managed at the school or church location that is benefiting from the proceeds.
Sec. 6.01.002 Permit required for nonprofit seasonal fundraisers
(a) A permit issued by the city building inspection department shall be required for any nonprofit charitable fundraiser to insure the health, safety
and welfare of the volunteers and of the public. Any sponsor or organization making application for permit approval to conduct a fundraiser shall
submit a written application for a permit that shall include:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The application shall show satisfactory written proof of the applicant's authority to represent the organization or sponsor the
applicant represents.
(3) The name and address of the sponsor or organization represented by the applicant.
(4) The kinds of goods to be sold or services to be offered at the event.
(5) The dates and times of the event.
(6) A layout drawing to scale depicting the location of the event and the traffic access and circulation planned.
(7) Evidence that the required conditions of this article have been met.
(8) No permit shall be issued until such application has been filed with the city for a period of not less than fourteen (14) calendar days.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/526
(b) Any fundraiser shall provide evidence to the city that the following regulations have been met:
(1) Written permission from the property owner for the dates, times, and activities approved by the owner to be conducted on the
premises.
(2) A temporary access barrier is provided to prohibit pedestrian or vehicular traffic from imposing on any adjacent residential uses and
approved by the fire marshal.
(c) Nonprofit fundraisers shall be permitted only if all of the following site facilities and approved permits are secured for the entire duration of the
event:
(1) Adequate, available off-street parking article 14.05.
(2) A safe access driveway and traffic circulation plan; approved by the Planning Department.
(3) Electrical permits, plumbing permits, sign permits, and other permits as applicable that are required by code.
(4) Health permits (food handlers), any other county, state, or federal permits are prominently displayed.
(5) Bathroom facilities for employees/volunteers.
(6) Handicapped accessibility compliance when applicable.
ARTICLE 6.02 SEASONAL RETAIL BUSINESSES
Sec. 6.02.001 General provisions
(a) This article is intended to provide a safe, orderly means for seasonal retail businesses to conduct business within the corporate limits of the city.
All regulations of this article are deemed necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the businesses as well as the citizens
of the city. Seasonal retail businesses are permitted in GR, CS and PS districts.
(b) Seasonal retail businesses shall be defined as those retail businesses that establish a business within the city for at least five (5) days each week
for the period in which the business is in operation.
(c) A seasonal retail business shall be in operation for a minimum of thirty (30) consecutive days and for maximum of sixty (60) consecutive days
per calendar year.
(d) The sale of used clothing and/or accessories, used furniture, used household and/or sporting goods is prohibited. Examples of seasonal retail
businesses permitted under this article could include Christmas tree sales, or snow cone sales.
(e) The site is adequately served by utilities and sanitary facilities.
Sec. 6.02.002 Permit required for seasonal retail businesses
(a) A permit issued by the city's building inspections department shall be required for any seasonal retail business. Any individual making
application for permit approval to conduct a fundraiser shall submit a written application to the building official for a permit that shall include:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The application shall show satisfactory written proof of the applicant's authority to represent the organization or sponsor the
applicant represents.
(3) The name and address of the sponsor, company or organization for whom the applicant represents.
(4) The kinds of goods to be sold or services to be offered.
(5) The dates of operation and business hours.
(6) A layout drawing to scale depicting the location of the event and the traffic access and circulation planned.
(7) Evidence that each of the required conditions in this article has been addressed.
(8) No permit shall be issued until such application has been filed with the city for a period of no less than fourteen (14) calendar days.
(b) Any seasonal retail business shall provide evidence to the city that the following regulations have been met:
(1) Written, signed permission from the property owner giving his approval for the seasonal retail business to be conducted on the
premises is provided. The permission letter must include the dates, times, and activities of the seasonal retail business that is requesting
the permit.
(2) Documentation from the owner of the seasonal retail businesses that provides evidence of full insurance coverage, including
liability.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/526
(3) The establishment of a barrier restricting pedestrian or vehicular traffic from imposing onto the property of any adjacent residential
uses. If such barrier is temporary with the business, it shall be removed on or before the last day the business is permitted for operation.
(c) Seasonal retail businesses shall be permitted only if all of the following site facilities and approved permits are secured for the entire duration
of the event:
(1) Adequate, available off-street parking, calculated at a ratio of 1 per 100 square feet of vendor space, with a minimum 5 spaces
required.
(2) A safe access driveway and traffic circulation plan; approved by the Planning Department.
(3) Tent permits, when applicable.
(4) Electrical permits, plumbing permits, sign permits, and other permits as applicable that are required by code.
(5) Location and placement of dumpsters, carts and/or barrels for trash and recycling shall be established at a capacity level adequate to
keep all such materials within their appropriate containers. Businesses that include food items shall have the containers emptied a
minimum of twice weekly. All dumpsters shall be located no closer than twenty (20) from the property line of any residence and at a
location not visible from any public street. All containers shall be hauled away no later than one (1) day after the close of business.
(6) Health permits (food handlers), any other applicable county, state, or federal permits shall be prominently displayed at all times.
(7) Bathroom facilities for employees/patrons when applicable.
(8) Handicapped accessibility compliance when applicable.
(9) Within the GR district, seasonal retail businesses must be located on a site containing a minimum 80,000 sf anchor tenant. If located
within thirty (30) feet of a primary entrance of an 80,000, or greater sf anchor, a seasonal business shall be exempt from the 60-day per
calendar year limitation established by section 6.02.001(c).
(10) One seasonal retail business per property shall be permitted.
(11) Along with every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, the permittee shall be issued an acknowledgment of permit
certificate that shall be posted in a prominent place at the business. This certificate shall contain the following:
(A) Name of the permittee;
(B) Name of the business approved by permit;
(C) Date of expiration of permit;
(D) Permitted hours of operation;
(E) Signature of the building official or his designee; and
(F) Signature of the fire marshal or his designee.
(G) It shall be unlawful for the permittee to engage in his business without having such a certificate in his possession and
prominently posted at his business.
(H) Each permit issued under these provisions shall not be transferable or assignable and shall give to no person other than the
permittee, authority to transact any business in the city.
(I) Each permit required by this article shall be valid for a period of one calendar year and may be removed by the city for good
cause. Any such business that opens without a permit under the regulations of this chapter shall be considered in violation. Any such
business that operates without compliance to all the regulations of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter.
ARTICLE 6.03 SPECIAL EVENTS
Sec. 6.03.001 Definition
Special event. An event including street fairs, races, runs, arts and crafts shows, carnivals, circuses, rallies, public entertainments, parades, block
parties requiring neighborhood road closures, or other events that:
(1) Interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
(2) Require City services, including but not limited to, street closure, provision of barricades, parking arrangements, or Police services.
Sec. 6.03.002 General regulations
(a) This Article is intended to provide a safe, orderly means for special events to be held within the corporate limits of the City. All regulations of
this Article are deemed necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the volunteers, members, and their patrons.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/526
(b) The duration of the special event shall not exceed the time period specified on the permit, not to exceed a maximum of nine (9) consecutive
days. Exceptions may be made by the Director of Development Services or their designee based on the determination that the exception is in the best
interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
(c) The site of the special event shall be adequately served by utilities and sanitary facilities, which may be provided by the applicant.
(d) A special event for the purpose of selling used clothing and/or accessories, used furniture, used household and/or sporting goods is prohibited.
(e) Special events that require road or lane closure in residential-zoned areas shall not be held within at least twelve (12) calendar days of another
event requiring the closure of that same road. Exceptions may be made by the Director of Development Services or their designee based on the
determination that the exception is in the best interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
Sec. 6.03.003 Exemptions
(a) The following events are exempt from the provisions of this Article:
(1) Events which are officially hosted by the City;
(2) Events which are solely confined to property, excluding right-of-way, owned by governmental entities; and
(3) Funeral processions.
(b) The following events are exempt from special event fees:
(1) Nonprofit organizations; and
(2) Other tax exempt entities.
Sec. 6.03.004 Permit required for special events
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a special event without a valid special event permit from the City unless exempted per section
6.03.003.
Sec. 6.03.005 Relationship to City Fire Code
This Article is separate and independent of the requirements of Article 5.01. Events governed by Article 5.01 shall obtain a separate permit under the
requirements of that Article, regardless of whether the event is governed by this Article.
Sec. 6.03.006 Filing period
An application for a permit under this Article shall be filed within the following filing periods:
(1) At least thirty (30) calendar days before the date of the special event if City services are requested;
(2) At least fourteen (14) calendar days before the date of all other special events; or
(3) If the circumstance precipitating the special event occurs within a period of time rendering compliance with the applicable time
period requirement pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) herein impossible, a period of time determined by the Director of Development
Services or their designee based on the determination that the different period of time is in the best interest of the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the City.
Sec. 6.03.007 Contents of application
Any person desiring to conduct a special event in the City shall first file an application for permit with the City's Development Services Department,
which application shall include:
(1) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the applicant;
(2) If the special event is to be held for or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization and name, address, telephone number, and email address of the authorized representatives of such organization;
(3) If the special event is to be held by or for any other person other than the applicant, a written statement from that other person
showing authority to make the application;
(4) If any portion of the special event, including parking, is to be held on private property, written permission for the holding of the
special event or parking from the owner of the property or an authorized representative;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/526
(5) The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the person who will be the point of contact for the special event and
who will be responsible for its conduct;
(6) A description of planned activities at the special event;
(7) The dates and times the event will start and terminate;
(8) The time at which on-site activities in preparation for the event will begin and end;
(9) The proposed location of parking areas and the number of spaces provided for the special event in accordance with requirements
stated in section 6.03.014;
(10) A layout drawing to scale depicting the location, size and number of stages, seating, tents, awnings, canopies, food service booths,
first-aid stations, portable restrooms, or other temporary structures;
(11) A layout drawing to scale depicting the location of the event and the access for and circulation of traffic in compliance with the
standards provided in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices (MUTCD);
(12) The proposed location of entrances and exits and a plan of evacuation in case of emergency, which shall include a plan for
directing the arrival of emergency services through the event to the site of the emergency;
(13) The approximate number of people who will be attending the special event, including the maximum number of people expected at
peak times, event staff and performers, if any, and, if applicable, the types of animals that will be involved with the special event;
(14) If food or beverages will be served or sold, copies of any licenses or permits required by Article 4.09 or Article 6.06 of this Code;
(15) Copies of any required electrical permits, plumbing permits, or other permits required by this Code of Ordinances;
(16) A communications plan specifying how applicant will notify the public about the special event, including the number, size,
material and location of any planned signage, and, if applicable, start and end times in which amplified sound will occur;
(17) A copy of a certificate of insurance pursuant to section 6.03.019, herein and as amended;
(18) A surety bond or cash deposit pursuant to section 6.03.021, herein and as amended;
(19) An application fee pursuant to section 2.200 of Appendix A of this Code, as amended;
(20) If necessary, proof of acquisition of adequate Police services pursuant to section 6.03.022, herein and as amended; and
(21) Any other information which the City finds necessary under the standards of issuance.
Sec. 6.03.008 Denial of application
A special event permit shall not be issued if:
(1) The event will require the diversion of a number of Police Officers, fire protection or Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
personnel so as to:
(A) Unduly interfere with the provision of these services to the City; or
(B) Interfere with the efficient response movement of firefighting equipment and services en route to a fire;
(2) The occurrence of the event is likely to result in injury to persons or property;
(3) The applicant fails to submit a completed application pursuant to section 6.03.006, herein and as amended;
(4) The contents of the submitted application do not comply with the requirements of this Article, as amended, this Code, as amended,
or State or Federal law;
(5) The proposed event includes vendors who have not provided evidence that the business is fully insured, including for liability;
(6) The proposed event conflicts in date, time or location with another special event, parade or assembly for which a permit has already
been granted or is being held by the City;
(7) The proposed event will unduly interfere or disrupt the educational activities of a school when such school is in session;
(8) The proposed event does not comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act;
(9) The applicant has previously been convicted of violating this Article;
(10) The applicant has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding 12 months;
(11) The applicant has failed to pay any additional costs assessed by the City for a previous special event; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/526
(12) The Director of Development Services Department or their designee has determined that the event is not in the best interest of the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
Sec. 6.03.009 Notice of denial of application
If the City denies the application, the City shall notify the applicant of this action stating the reasons for the denial of the permit no fewer than five
(5) calendar days before the date of the special event, or as soon as reasonably possible.
Sec. 6.03.010 Revocation of permit
The Director of Development Services Department or their designee may revoke a special event permit if the Director of the Development Services
Department or their designee finds:
(1) The applicant failed to comply with, or the special event violates, any provision stated in this Article, any ordinance of the City, or
any other applicable law;
(2) The applicant made or permitted the making of a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a
special event;
(3) The applicant is unable or unwilling to pay any additional fees as may be required by the City to cover the cost of City services
related to the special event;
(4) The applicant failed to provide any additional information requested by the City;
(5) The event substantially interrupts the safe and orderly movement of traffic near its location or route, unless the traffic variances are
those pursuant to the issued special event permit; or
(6) The event is not in the best interest of the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
Sec. 6.03.011 Appeal of revocation
Any person or entity whose permit has been revoked as provided in section 6.03.010, may within, five (5) business days after the receipt of a notice
thereof, appeal to the Director of Development Services or their designee for a hearing thereon and the decision of the Director of Development
Services or their designee shall be final. If the appeal is filed during the occurrence of the special event, the Director of Development Services or
their designee shall hear the appeal as soon as practically possible. Otherwise, the Director of Development Services or their designee shall hear the
appeal within ten (10) business days.
Sec. 6.03.012 Permit to be maintained on-premises
The special event permit shall be maintained at all times on the premises, and shall be made available to any Police Officer, Fire Marshal or other
authorized City employee or representative, upon request.
Sec. 6.03.013 Notice to abutting property owners
At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the special event, the permittee shall send written notice of the event to each residential property
owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, of real property within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the
special event is proposed. The notice may be served by its deposit in the municipality, property addressed with postage paid, in the United States
mail. Block parties requiring road closures that do not require City services are exempt from this requirement.
Sec. 6.03.014 Applicant parking requirements
(a) An applicant shall submit, as part of an application for a special event permit, evidence that sufficient parking will be available to accommodate
the projected number of users with a ten percent surplus. The number of spaces deemed sufficient will be determined by the nature of the event,
number and age of people attending, including event staff, participants and performers during peak times. If said parking is to be on private property
adjacent to the special event, written evidence that the applicant has a right of possession of said property through ownership, lease, license, or other
property interest must be provided. When the location is not an established parking area, a plan shall be submitted which will show how the needed
parking will be achieved and arranged. The number of parking spaces and layout of parking area, including aisle widths, size of parking spaces and
whether parking attendants will be provided, shall be included in the application for permit.
(b) When adequate parking is not available at or immediately adjacent to the site of the special event, off-site parking may be used. Plans shall be
submitted which will show how off-site parking and transfer of attendees will be accomplished.
Sec. 6.03.015 City authority over parking
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/526
The City shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary as determined by the Police Department, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
along a street or highway or part thereof adjacent to the site of the special event. The City shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.
Sec. 6.03.016 Water usage and disposal of wastewater
(a) Any special event or related activity desiring use of water from the City water system must coordinate with the Public Works Department to
obtain a temporary meter. Deposit for the meter and payment for water used shall be in accordance with ordinances of the City.
(b) An applicant shall submit a plan for the disposal of wastewater and the plan shall be approved by the Public Works Department.
Sec. 6.03.017 Waste collection and solid waste
An applicant shall provide for the collection of all solid waste resulting from such special event.
Sec. 6.03.018 Noise regulations
During the special event, the permit holder shall comply with all applicable noise regulations of the City as set forth in chapter 8, Article 8.08 of this
Code.
Sec. 6.03.019 Liability insurance
When a special event is partially or fully contained on City property or City rights-of-way, the applicant for a special event permit shall furnish the
City with a certificate of insurance in amounts of not less than $500,000.00 for one person and $1,000,000.00 for any one accident. Block parties
requiring road closures that do not require City services are exempt from this requirement.
Sec. 6.03.020 Indemnification
When a special event is partially or fully contained on City property, an applicant shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its
officers, employees, agents, and representatives against all claims of liability and causes of action resulting from injury or damage to persons or
property arising out of the special event.
Sec. 6.03.021 Surety bond/cash deposit
(a) When a special event is partially or fully contained on City property, a surety bond or cash deposit in the penal sum of $2,000.00 shall
accompany each application conditioned that no damage will be done to the City property, streets, sewers, trees, or adjoining property and that no
paper, litter, or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the City property, streets or upon any private property by the applicant. The surety bond
or cash deposit shall be returned to the permittee within ten (10) business days after said special event permit expires upon certification by the City of
compliance with all conditions of this Article. In the event the actual cost for policing and cleaning is less than this amount, the remainder shall be
refunded to the permittee by the City. In the event that the actual cost exceeds this amount, the permittee shall pay such additional sum to the City
within ten (10) business days from the date of notification. Nothing herein shall preclude the City from enforcing any legal or equitable remedy
against the permittee in addition to the bond. Block parties requiring road closures that do not require City services are exempt from this requirement.
(b) The Director of Development Services or their designee, shall have the right to lower or waive the surety bond or deposit for nonprofits and
tax-exempted entities.
Sec. 6.03.022 Police services; additional costs
(a) The Police Department shall determine whether and to what extent additional Police services are reasonably necessary for the special event for
traffic-control and public safety. The Police Department shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the special event, and
the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. If additional Police services for the special event are deemed
necessary by the Police Department, they shall so inform the applicant. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the Police services deemed
necessary by the Police Department.
(b) In the event the City determines, upon a review of the application, that a Special Event may require the special attention and involvement of
City personnel or facilities, the City shall so notify the applicant. In such event, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant and the
City shall agree upon the cost of policing, and cleaning, and the closure of roads, and the applicant shall pay that amount to the City upon application.
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to pay any additional costs to the City incurred as a result of the
special event within five (5) business days of the date upon which the City informs the permittee of the amount of such additional costs. Nothing
herein shall preclude the City from enforcing any legal or equitable remedy against the permittee for recovery of such additional costs.
Sec. 6.03.023 Offenses and penalty
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/526
(a) A person commits an offense if they commence or hold a special event without a special event permit or with a special event permit that has
expired or been revoked, or occurs in violation of this Article.
(b) Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be charged with a class C misdemeanor; and upon conviction shall be fined as
provided for in section 1.01.009 of this Code for each day that a violation exists, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(c) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this Article.
(d) It is hereby determined that this Article governs fire safety, public health, and sanitation and, therefore, any person violating or failing to
comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalty for such type of violation as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this
Code.
(Ordinance CO44-16-05-12-C3 adopted 5/12/16)
ARTICLE 6.04 PEDDLERS*
Sec. 6.04.001 Definitions
Canvasser. Any person who, without invitation, travels door-to-door and attempts to make personal contact with an occupant or distributes written or
printed material for the primary purpose of attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue
or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against such cause, or advertising or notifying of a
noncommercial event or service.
Flyer. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, handbill or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature, other than those advertising or notifying of a noncommercial event or service,
delivery notices, newspapers, or newsletters.
Peddler. Any person who, without invitation, travels from door-to-door, and offers goods, services, wares, subscriptions, photographs, or other
merchandise for sale, or any person engaging or engaged in the business of distributing flyers, or advertising a commercial event, good or service.
The term shall not include a canvasser, as defined herein.
Solicitor. Any person who, without invitation, travels from door-to-door and requests the donation of money, property, or anything of value, or the
pledge of a future donation of money, property, or anything of value. The term shall not include a canvasser, as defined herein.
Sec. 6.04.002 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person to be a peddler or solicitor within the City without first applying for and obtaining a permit to do so from the City.
Sec. 6.04.003 Permit application
Any person desiring to be a peddler or solicitor within the City shall first submit to the Director of Development Services, or their designee, a
completed application on the official form, and pay the applicable fee in accordance with the fee schedule in appendix A of this Code, as amended.
Sec. 6.04.004 Issuance of permit
No permit shall be issued until such application has been filed with the City for a period of not less than seventy-two (72) hours. Within that seventytwo
(72) hours of the filing of the permit application, the Director of Development Services, or their designee, will either issue a permit or notify the
applicant that the application does not comply with the requirements of the Department of Development Services and specifically point out what
information or explanation has not been furnished that is required before a permit is issued. Each permit issued under the provisions of this article
shall contain the name of the permittee, permit number, date of expiration of permit, and the signature of the Director of Development Services, or
their designee. The permittee shall display the permit on their person so that it remains clearly visible at all times.
Sec. 6.04.005 Revocation of permit
Any permit issued pursuant to this article is subject to revocation, by the Director of Development Services, or their designee, upon discovery of any
false or misleading statements contained in the application, violation of this article, for failure of the permit holder to fulfill obligations which he
incurs to purchasers or potential purchasers, or for other good cause. Upon revocation of such permits the permit holder may appeal such revocation
within ten days to the City Manager, or her/his designee, who will conduct an investigation at a time and place designated for the purpose of
determining the existence of good cause for the revocation.
Sec. 6.04.006 When permit not required
The permit required by section 6.04.004 and the bond required by section 6.04.007 shall not be required of the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/526
(1) Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares and merchandise to persons engaged in the business of
buying, selling and dealing in the same within the City; and
(2) Sale of goods, wares and merchandise, the proceeds of which are to be used and applied to some locally recognized charitable,
educational, religious or philanthropic purpose, including adult-sponsored youth scouting and extra-curricular activities.
Sec. 6.04.007 Surety bond required
Peddlers who require cash deposits or advance payments for future delivery or who require an agreement to finance the sale of goods or services for
future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall, as a condition of a permit, file a bond with the Development Services Department
in the sum of $1,000.00 per peddler, executed by such applicant as principal and a surety company licensed to do business as such in this State. No
application shall be accepted, and no permit shall be issued hereunder, without a surety bond as set forth herein. Such surety bond shall be
conditioned on the final delivery of goods or services in accordance with the terms of any order obtained.
Sec. 6.04.008 Permit not transferable
Each permit issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable or assignable and shall give to no person other than the permittee,
authority to transact any business in the City as a peddler.
Sec. 6.04.009 Term of permit
Each permit required by this article shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) calendar days.
Sec. 6.04.010 Hours restricted
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or canvasser to engage in the business of peddling at any time between the earlier of 8:00 p.m. or thirty
(30) minutes after sunset and the later of 7:00 a.m. or thirty (30) minutes after sunrise.
Sec. 6.04.011 Peddling on public property restricted
(a) Unlawful to sell, exhibit or advertise on public property. Unless otherwise permitted by this Code, no person shall sell, exhibit or advertise for
sale on any street, sidewalk, alley, median, parkway or portion of public right-of-way within the City limits any goods, wares, merchandise of any
kind or character; or to use any part of the streets, sidewalks or alleys within the City as a place to carry on such trade, profession or business.
(b) Unlawful to solicit for contributions on public property. No person shall have the right to solicit for contribution or donations on any street,
sidewalk, alley, median, parkway or portion of the public right-of-way within the City; or to use any part of the streets, sidewalks or alleys within the
City as a place to carry on such solicitation.
(c) Chief of Police authorized to grant permission for use of public right-of-way. Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b), upon application to the
Chief of Police, or their designee, in writing, and based upon a showing of good cause or public need, the Chief of Police, or their designee, shall
have the authority to grant permission to any person, firm, corporation, association or organization the right to conduct such trade, profession,
business or solicitation on a public right-of-way, designating the exact location, time and duration of such permit.
Sec. 6.04.012 Peddling and soliciting prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to go upon any private property if there is placed on such property in a conspicuous place upon or
near the main entrance to the residence, a sign or card, not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size, bearing the words “no trespassing,”
“no peddlers,” “no advertisements,” “no solicitation,” “no handbills,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such
property do not desire to be approached by a peddler.
Sec. 6.04.013 Distribution of flyers
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed, deposited, placed, thrown scattered, or cast any flyer upon any
private property except by handing or transmitting such flyer directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private
property, or by placing or depositing the same in a manner to secure and to prevent such flyer from being blown or drifting about such property,
except that mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by applicable Federal or State law.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed, deposited, placed, thrown, scattered, or cast any flyer upon any
private property if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such property in a conspicuous place upon or near the main
entrance to the residence, a card, not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size bearing the words “no trespassing,” “no peddlers,” “no
advertisements,” “no solicitation,” “no handbills,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such property do not desire to
have any such flyers left upon such property. The letters on such cards shall be not less than two-thirds (2/3) of an inch in height.
Sec. 6.04.014 Refusing to leave
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/526
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor who enters upon any private property to not immediately leave such property after having been
notified or requested to leave by the owner, occupant, or person in charge or control of such property.
Sec. 6.04.015 Provisions cumulative
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative of State law, including but not limited to Texas Penal Code section 42.01 regarding disorderly
conduct and Texas Penal Code section 30.05 regarding criminal trespass.
Sec. 6.04.016 Penalty; enforcement
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or agent to fail to comply with the requirements of this article or any provision thereof, and each such
failure shall be punished as a class C misdemeanor by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this Code.
Each such person, firm, corporation, or agent shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which
any violation of this article is committed or continued. Any complaint related to the violation of this article or any provision thereof shall be filed
with the municipal court clerk.
(Ordinance CO30-15-07-23-C2 adopted 7/23/15)
ARTICLE 6.05 FARMERS MARKET
Sec. 6.05.001 General provisions
(a) This Article is intended to provide a safe, orderly means for a farmers market to operate within the corporate limits of the City. All regulations
of this section are deemed necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the businesses as well as the citizens of the City.
Farmers markets are permitted in LB, PO, GB, HC, PS, and OR districts.
(b) Farmers markets shall be defined as markets selling only products locally grown or produced by individual vendors. Locally is defined as being
within a 150-mile radius of the City.
(c) A farmers market shall be in operation for a maximum of two (2) days per week.
(d) Hours of market operation shall be limited to the period between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. including set up and tear down.
(e) The site is adequately served by utilities and sanitary facilities.
(Ordinance CO17-18-02-08-E1 adopted 2/8/18)
Sec. 6.05.002 Prohibited activities
The following activities are expressly prohibited on any premises occupied by a farmers market, including non-business hours devoted to set-up and
tear down.
(1) Possession, consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages.
(2) Possession, consumption or sale of illegal drugs.
(3) Sale of live animals.
(4) Resale of goods.
(5) Sale of firearms.
Sec. 6.05.003 Permit required
(a) A permit issued by the city's building inspections department shall be required for any farmers market. Any individual making application for
permit approval to conduct a farmers market shall submit a written application to the building official for a permit that shall include:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The application shall show satisfactory written proof of the applicant's authority to represent the organization or sponsor the
applicant represents.
(3) The name and address of the sponsor or organization the applicant represents.
(4) The kinds of goods to be sold or services to be offered.
(5) The dates of operation and business hours.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/526
(6) A layout drawing to scale depicting the location of the event and the traffic access and circulation planned.
(7) Evidence that each of the required conditions in this article has been addressed.
(8) No permit shall be issued until such application has been filed with the city for a period of no less than fourteen (14) calendar days.
(b) Any farmers market shall provide evidence to the city that the following regulations have been met:
(1) Written, signed permission from the property owner(s) giving his approval for the farmers market to be conducted on the premises
is provided. The permission letter must include the dates, times, and activities of the farmers market.
(2) Documentation from the applicant of the farmers market that provides evidence of full insurance coverage, including liability.
(3) The establishment of a barrier restricting pedestrian or vehicular traffic from imposing onto the property of any adjacent residential
uses. If such barrier is temporary with the market, it shall be removed at close of business.
(c) Farmers market shall be permitted only if all of the following site facilities and approved permits are secured for the entire duration of the
event:
(1) Adequate, available off-street parking calculated at 1 space per vendor plus 1 space per 200 square feet of gross area of the market,
with a minimum ten (10) parking spaces required.
(2) A safe access driveway and traffic circulation plan, approved by the Planning Department.
(3) Tent permits, when applicable.
(4) Electrical permits, and other permits as applicable that are required by code.
(5) Signs associated with a farmers market and allowed by subsections (A), (B), (C), or (D) below shall be exempt from permit
requirements:
(A) One (1) on-site banner not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size, located on private property such banner to be placed
not more that twenty-four (24) hours prior to market opening and removed promptly at close of business.
(B) Banners or signs displayed on or within vendor booths, canopies or kiosks.
(C) Incidental information signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in size and displayed in areas restricted to pedestrian and
vendor activity.
(D) Signs displayed solely for purposes of traffic control or identifying designated parking and/or loading areas.
(6) Location and placement of dumpsters, carts and/or barrels for trash and recycling shall be established at a capacity level adequate to
keep all such materials within their appropriate containers. Businesses that include food items shall have the containers emptied at close
of business. All dumpsters shall be located no closer than twenty (20) [feet] from the property line of any residence and at a location not
visible from any public street. All containers shall be hauled away no later than the close of business.
(7) Health permits (food handlers), any other applicable county, state, or federal permits shall be prominently displayed at all times.
(8) Bathroom facilities for employees/patrons as specified on the permit application but in no case less than one (1) designated toilet
facility. Toilet facilities may be either portable or with written consent, provided by adjacent businesses.
(9) Handicapped accessibility compliance when applicable.
(10) Along with every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, the permittee shall be issued an acknowledgment of permit
certificate that shall be posted in a prominent place at the market. This certificate shall contain the following:
(A) Name of the permittee and contact information (i.e. cell phone number that will be on the person during market hours of
operation);
(B) Name of the farmers market;
(C) Date of expiration of permit;
(D) Permitted hours of operation;
(E) Signature of the building official or his designee; and
(F) Signature of the fire marshal or his designee.
(G) It shall be unlawful for the permittee to engage in his business without having such a certificate in his possession.
(H) Each permit issued under these provisions shall not be transferable or assignable and shall give to no person other than the
permittee, authority to transact any business in the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/526
(I) Each permit required by this article shall be valid for a period of one calendar year and may be removed by the city for good
cause. Any such market that opens without a permit under the regulations of this chapter shall be considered in violation. Any such
market that operates without compliance to all the regulations of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter.
(Ordinance CO58-09-08-27-C2 adopted 8/27/09)
ARTICLE 6.06 MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 6.06.001 Purpose
(a) This article is intended to provide a safe, orderly means for mobile food establishments (“MFE”) to conduct business within the corporate
limits of the city. All regulations of this article are deemed necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the businesses as
well as the citizens of the city.
(b) No MFE shall operate without an MFE permit issued by the city subject to this article.
(c) The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Director of Development Services or their designee (“director”).
Sec. 6.06.002 Definitions
Mobile food establishment (MFE). A food establishment designed to be readily movable. It may be a motor vehicle, cart or trailer which is towed by
a motor vehicle. This definition does not include a seasonal retail business or a peddler as defined in this chapter, as amended.
Semi-stationary MFE. A MFE which remains in a single location for an excess of 15 minutes.
Transient MFE. A MFE which is not stationary in any single location for greater than 15 minutes.
Sec. 6.06.003 Permit required
(a) Semi-stationary and transient MFE permits shall be issued by the Director of Development Services or their designee following review of a
complete application for compliance with this article, and subject to payment of any associated fees established in appendix A of this code.
(b) The MFE permit is valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance.
(c) The MFE permit runs with the establishment, not with the land.
(d) The same MFE may be issued both a semi-stationary and a transient MFE permit, provided separate applications are submitted and approved
for each permit.
(e) The issued MFE permit must be displayed at all times during operation.
Sec. 6.06.004 Requirements
(a) All MFE shall comply with the following requirements upon application for an MFE permit:
(1) All sales from a MFE, when located within the city limits, shall be billed as taxable to the city. The city reserves the right to perform
audits to ensure that the city is the location for sales tax revenue and, the city reserves the right to revoke the MFE permit for
noncompliance;
(2) A mobile food establishment permit has been issued by Williamson County and Cities Health District; and
(3) Written consent of the owner of the property(ies) upon which the MFE is to be located is provided.
(b) MFE shall not:
(1) Cause adverse on-site or off-site traffic impacts;
(2) Encroach on a landscape/pedestrian setback along a designated corridor roadway;
(3) Encroach on a landscaped compatibility buffer established in the site development ordinance;
(4) Include drive-through service; or
(5) Operate in required off-street parking spaces, driveways, or fire lanes.
Sec. 6.06.005 Semi-stationary MFE regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/526
(a) Semi-stationary MFE shall be considered an accessory use, unless operating within an approved mobile food establishment court. MFE shall
not be considered an accessory structure.
(b) Semi-stationary MFE shall only be permitted:
(1) In transitional office, general office, business, public services, hospital, transitional commercial, local retail, general retail,
commercial services, heavy commercial, light industrial, general industrial, heavy industrial, mixed use, open space recreation, as well as
nonresidential areas within planned development zoning districts or the downtown district; and
(2) Outside of dedicated rights-of-way.
Sec. 6.06.006 Transient MFE regulations
(a) Transient MFE shall only be permitted:
(1) Outside of dedicated rights-of-way or in rights-of-way that are not identified by the city as an arterial roadways on the city's
roadway plan;
(2) To operate at any time between thirty (30) minutes prior to sunrise and thirty (30) minutes after sunset.
(b) Transient MFE shall not:
(1) Remain stationary at any one location for more than 15 minutes; or
(2) Be located within a residential zoning district unless within a right-of-way.
Sec. 6.06.007 Noncompliance
(a) For each violation of this article, the director shall forward written notice of violation to the MFE permit holder advising of the nature and date
of the alleged violation, opportunity for a hearing before the director, and penalties for continued noncompliance. The notice of violation shall be
delivered to the MFE permit holder, either by (1) personal service; (2) certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the MFE permit holder's
last known address; or (3) posting on the MFE or premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the MFE or premises, in which case a
copy of the NOV shall also be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the MFE permit holder's last known address.
(b) For each alleged violation under this article, the director shall provide an opportunity for a hearing at which the MFE permit holder may
present to the director evidence of the nonexistence or remedy of the alleged violation. An MFE permit holder may request a hearing in writing to the
director not more than five (5) business days after the date of the notice of violation, and the hearing shall be held within a reasonable time of the
director's receipt of such written request, which shall not exceed ten (10) business days. If not requested in writing within five (5) business days of
the date of the notice of violation, the right to a hearing shall be deemed waived. Following the hearing or waiver, the director's determination shall
be final.
(c) If the director determines that a MFE permit holder has violated any provision of this article, the director may suspend the MFE permit until all
violations have been remedied. If the director determines that there are severe or repeated violations, the director may revoke the MFE permit
indefinitely.
(d) The holder of a suspended MFE permit may at any time submit to the director a written request for reinstatement evidencing remedy of all
violations. The director shall reinstate the MFE permit if all violations have been remedied. The holder of a revoked MFE permit may not re-apply
for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of revocation.
(e) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director may immediately suspend or revoke a MFE permit without warning, notice, or hearing if the
director finds it necessary to address an imminent risk to public health, safety, or welfare. In such circumstances, the director must advise the MFE
permit holder of all measures required to correct any existing violation(s) and/or provide an opportunity for a post-suspension/revocation hearing
before the director within a reasonable time after the suspension or revocation, which shall not exceed ten (10) business days.
(f) The remedies and penalties provided in this article are not exclusive and shall be cumulative of any other remedies and penalties available
under federal, state, or local law.
(Ordinance CO03-14-11-20-C1 adopted 11/20/14)
CHAPTER 7
CODE OF CONDUCT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/526
Sec. 7.01.001 Definitions
Candidate for municipal office. Any person who files for election or appointment to a position on the City Council, including the Mayor.
Deliver. Transmitting by mail, personal delivery, or e-mail or any other means of electronic transfer pursuant to the City Secretary's Campaign
Finance Filing Policy.
Municipal officer. The Mayor and any member of the City Council.
Sec. 7.01.002 Financial statement required
(a) A municipal officer or a candidate for a municipal office filled by election shall file a financial statement as required by this Article.
(b) The statement must:
(1) Be filed with the City Secretary; and
(2) Comply with sections 572.022 and 572.023, Government Code.
Sec. 7.01.003 Filing dates; timeliness of filing
(a) A municipal officer or candidate for municipal office filled by election shall file the financial statement required by this Article by not later
than March 1st of each year reflecting the officer's or candidate's financial situation as of December 31st of the previous year and financial activity
between January 1st and December 31st of the previous year.
(b) A candidate for municipal office filled by appointment shall file the financial statement required by this Article not later than the 10th day after
the deadline for filing the application for the appointment.
(c) A person is considered to have timely filed a financial statement under this Article if:
(1) The statement is personally delivered not later than 5:00 p.m. of the 5th day after the stated deadline for filing the statement; or
(2) The City Secretary has adopted rules and procedures to provide for the electronic filing of the statement and the statement is
electronically filed in accordance with those rules and procedures not later than midnight of the 5th day after the stated deadline for filing
the statement.
(c) If the deadline for filing a statement under this Article falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal City, state or national holiday, then the deadline is
extended to the next regular business day.
Sec. 7.01.004 Form of statement
(a) The PFS-LOCAL Form designed by the Texas Ethics Commission under chapter 572, Government Code, shall be used for filing the financial
statement required under this Article.
(b) The City Secretary shall deliver at least one copy of the form and instruction guide to each municipal officer or candidate for a municipal office
who is required to file under this Article not later than the 10th day before the deadline for filing the statement under section 7.01.003. The City
Secretary may choose one or more methods to deliver the form.
Sec. 7.01.005 Duplicate or supplemental statements
If a person has filed a financial statement under one provision of this Article covering the preceding calendar year, the person is not required to file a
financial statement required under another provision of this Article covering that same year if, before the deadline for filing the statement under the
other provision, the person notifies the City Secretary in writing that the person has already filed a financial statement under this Article covering that
year.
Sec. 7.01.006 Public access to statements; retention
(a) Financial statements filed under this Article are public records. The City Secretary shall maintain the statements in separate alphabetical files
and in a manner that is accessible to the public during regular office hours.
(b) Until the first anniversary of the date a financial statement is filed, each time a person, other than the City Secretary or their employee who is
acting on official business, requests to see the financial statement, the City Secretary shall place in the file a statement of the person's name and
address, whom the person represents, and the date of the request. The City Secretary shall retain that statement in the file until the first anniversary of
the date the requested financial statement is filed.
(c) The City Secretary may, and on notification from a former municipal officer or candidate for municipal office shall, destroy any financial
statements filed by the officer or candidate after the second anniversary of the date the person ceases to be an officer or candidate, as applicable.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/526
Sec. 7.01.007 Notification to prosecuting attorney
The City Secretary shall maintain a list of the municipal officers and candidates for municipal office required to file a financial statement under this
Article. Not later than the 10th day after each applicable filing deadline, the City Secretary shall provide to the City Attorney a copy of the list
showing for each municipal officer and candidate for municipal office:
(1) Whether the officer or candidate timely filed a financial statement as required by this Article; or
(2) Whether the officer or candidate did not timely file a financial statement as required by this Article.
Sec. 7.01.008 Offense; criminal penalty
(a) A municipal officer or a candidate for municipal office commits an offense if the officer or candidate knowingly fails to file a financial
statement as required by this Article.
(b) An offense under this Article is a class C misdemeanor punishable subject to the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009 of this Code.
(Ordinance CO14-18-01-18-E1 adopted 1/11/18)
ARTICLE 7.02 REVOLVING DOOR POLICY
Sec. 7.02.001 Definitions
Close relative. A person related to the former official in the first degree by consanguinity or affinity, as determined under chapter 573 of the
Government Code.
Former official. A former Mayor, Councilmember, City Manager, City Attorney, or Department Director, or anyone acting on behalf of such persons,
including any entity recognized by law, such as a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint stock company,
receivership, or trust, that the person or the person's close relative owns or controls, directly or indirectly, or for which the person or the person's
close relative serves as an officer, director, principal, manager, employee, or agent.
Sec. 7.02.002 Prohibitions
(a) For a period of two (2) years after leaving office or employment, a former official:
(1) Shall not solicit, propose, lobby on, or participate in a contract with the City, or enter into a contract with the City for the sale to the
City of any goods or services other than real estate;
(2) Shall not sell or lease any real estate to the City unless the City Council has designated the property for acquisition and would
otherwise have to acquire the property through its power of eminent domain;
(3) Shall not appear before or communicate with any City official or employee with intent to influence any decision, determination, or
approval on behalf of any person or entity in connection with any matter on which the person or entity seeks official action; and
(4) Shall not hold any compensated office or employment position with the City.
(b) No former official shall ever represent a person or receive compensation for services rendered on behalf of any person regarding any particular
matter in which they participated while serving the City, either through personal involvement or because the matter was within their official scope of
authority or responsibility.
(c) No former official shall ever use any confidential information to which he has had access by virtue of his official capacity and which has not
been made public concerning the property, operations, policies, or affairs of the City, to advance any personal financial interest in violation of Texas
Penal Code, section 39.06, and/or City Charter, section 11.09(a), as amended.
Sec. 7.02.003 Exception for engagement of staff consultants
This Article shall not prohibit the City's engagement of a former City Manager, City Attorney, or Department Director as a consultant due to their
unique knowledge, experience, skills, and/or familiarity with matters of City business, as continuation of the same or substantially similar service for
which they were previously employed by the City, within the two (2) year period after leaving employment for a term of not more than six (6)
months, subject to approval via majority vote of the City Council.
Sec. 7.02.004 Violation; penalty
(a) Any bid, proposal, contract offer, or lease offer submitted in violation of this Article shall be disqualified, and any contract or decision,
determination, or approval procured in violation of this Article shall be voidable via majority vote of the City Council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/526
(b) A violation of this Article shall be enforceable as a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) in accordance with the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, section 1.01.009, general penalty for violations of code, and shall
restart the two-year period under section 7.02.002 from the date of the violation.
(c) The foregoing provisions are cumulative, and not exclusive, of State law, the City Charter, and any other provision of the Cedar Park Code of
Ordinances.
(Ordinance CO53-18-09-27-E3 adopted 9/27/18)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES*
ARTICLE 8.01 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Definitions
Arrow. A slender shaft usually pointed at one end and feathered at the other for shooting from a bow.
Blow gun. A long, tube-like weapon through which darts or pellets are blown.
Bow. A device for shooting arrows, a flexible, curved strip of wood or other material, with a taut cord connecting the two ends.
Commercial shooting gallery. A commercial shooting gallery that possesses a permit from the city allowing the discharge of a firearm, bow and
arrow, crossbow or blow gun on the premises.
Crossbow. A medieval weapon consisting of a bow set transversely on a stock.
Firearm. Any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning
substance.
Private shooting gallery. A shooting gallery maintained for personal, noncommercial use that possesses a permit from the city allowing the discharge
of a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow or blow gun on the premises.
Urgent necessity. The exercise of a right conferred by the laws of the State of Texas, including but not limited to, lawful arrest, lawful prevention of
crime, and lawful exercise of the right to self defense.
(1998 Code, sec. 7.101)
Sec. 8.01.002 Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow or blow gun within the corporate limits of the city. (1998 Code,
sec. 7.102)
Sec. 8.01.003 Exceptions
(a) The provisions of section 8.01.002 shall not apply in the event of urgent necessity nor to a person discharging a firearm, bow and arrow,
crossbow, or blow gun in a commercial or private shooting gallery.
(b) The provisions of section 8.01.002 shall not apply to a person who discharges a shotgun, rifle, pistol, bow and arrow, crossbow, or blow gun
within the limits of a rural/agricultural district established under chapter 11, Zoning.
(c) The provisions of section 8.01.002 shall not apply to peace officers discharging their weapons in the normal and lawful course of duty.
(1998 Code, sec. 7.103)
Sec. 8.01.004 Application for shooting gallery permit
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial or private shooting gallery within the city without first obtaining a permit from the
chief of police.
(b) An application for a shooting gallery permit must be accompanied by the permit fee and shall include such information as is necessary to assure
the safe operation of the gallery and compliance with all appropriate laws and regulations of the city, including:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/526
(1) The name, address, social security number and Texas driver's license number of the owner of the property upon which the shooting
gallery will be located.
(2) The name, address, social security number and Texas driver's license number of the owner or the person in possession of the
premises where the shooting gallery is to be located.
(3) Clear and legible drawings with description definitely showing location, construction and layout of the shooting gallery.
(4) Proof of liability insurance coverage in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 per person, and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence with
such insurance showing the city as an additionally insured party.
(1998 Code, sec. 7.104)
Sec. 8.01.005 Permits for shooting galleries
(a) The construction design, building materials and location of any shooting gallery shall conform to the guidelines of the National Rifle
Association's Range Manual.
(b) Before a commercial or private shooting gallery permit is issued by the city to any person, the chief of police shall determine that the applicant
is of good moral character and that the applicant will comply with the National Rifle Association Range Manual Guidelines for the operation of
commercial or private shooting galleries to maintain safe and nonhazardous conditions in and about the shooting gallery. The chief of police shall
prescribe such additional requirements in the permit as are necessary to insure the safe operation of such shooting gallery.
(c) Such permit shall provide that the shooting gallery shall not be conducted in a manner which would constitute a nuisance or annoyance to
persons in the vicinity, and such permit shall not be assignable or transferable.
(d) A permit issued under this section shall be displayed in such a fashion that the public may observe it.
(e) Any such permit must be renewed annually.
(f) No commercial shooting gallery shall operate in any residentially zoned area.
(g) An applicant for a private shooting gallery permit shall agree by the acceptance of such permit that no charge of any character will be made for
the use of such private shooting gallery, and the issuance of a permit for a private shooting gallery shall not authorize the operation of a commercial
shooting gallery.
(1998 Code, sec. 7.105)
Sec. 8.01.006 Permit fee
A non-refundable fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code shall be paid to the city with each application for issuance
or renewal of a commercial or private shooting gallery permit. (1998 Code, sec. 7.106)
ARTICLE 8.02 SMOKING OR USING ELECTRONIC VAPING DEVICES IN CITY BUILDINGS PROHIBITED
Sec. 8.02.001 Definition
The term “electronic vaping device” shall have the meaning set forth in article 4.08 of this code, as amended.
Sec. 8.02.002 Offense
It shall be an offense for a person to possess a burning tobacco product, smoke tobacco, or operate an electronic vaping device in any city building
belonging to or in use by the city.
Sec. 8.02.003 Defense to prosecution
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the city building in which the offense takes place does not have prominently displayed a
reasonably sized notice that smoking is prohibited by city ordinance.
Sec. 8.02.004 Penalty
A violation of this article shall be a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code per violation per day.
(Ordinance CO57-14-07-10-F1 adopted 7/10/14)
ARTICLE 8.03 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO CONDUCT IN PARKS, RECREATION AREAS, AND CAVE PRESERVES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/526
Sec. 8.03.001 Miscellaneous
It shall be unlawful for any person in a city park, recreation area, or cave preserve to:
(1) Walk, bring or allow an unleashed or unsecured dog, except within a designated off-leash area.
(2) Fail to pick up and properly dispose of pet waste deposited by their pet.
(3) Damage, cut, carve or remove any tree, plant or wood.
(4) Light, build or maintain fires except in designated BBQ grills or fire rings.
(5) Wade or swim in areas other than swimming pools or water playscapes unless posted to allow such activities.
(6) Enter or remain in any area which is closed or posted “Closed to the Public.”
(7) Park a vehicle or allow a parked vehicle to remain in any area which is closed or posted “Closed to the Public.”
(8) Carry, possess, or discharge a gun, bow and arrow, air or gas weapon, paintball gun or marker, or any instrument with a propelling
force, spring, air or gas that is capable of being used for the purpose of hunting, except the holder of a valid concealed handgun license
(“CHL”) shall not be prohibited from carrying or possessing a firearm pursuant to such CHL.
(9) Do any of the following without first obtaining a special permit as set out under section 8.03.004 of this article:
(A) Sell, offer or solicit any goods or merchandise.
(B) Hold, conduct or address any public assemblage, meeting or gathering, or take part in public debate or discussion.
(C) Provide entertainment or exhibitions.
(D) Posses, discharge, or cause to be discharged any fireworks, torpedo, rocket, explosive or other substance capable of explosion.
(E) Distribute, post or affix any printed or written matter, sample or device.
(F) Camp, as defined in article 8.10 of this code.
(10) Dump or dispose of trash, garbage, unsightly matter, brush or waste except that which is generated by park visitors and disposed of
properly in receptacles provided for park use purposes.
(11) Hit a golf ball, except in areas designated and posted for that purpose.
(Ordinance CO45-12-03-22-C1 adopted 3/22/12)
Sec. 8.03.002 Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to:
(1) Drive any motor vehicle on any area except on designated roads or parking areas, or other such areas as may be specifically
designated as a temporary road or parking area.
(2) Operate or use any type of motorized vehicle, motor assisted scooter or motor assisted skateboard, including but not limited to,
motorcycles, motorbikes and minibikes on any trail, sidewalk, cave preserve or park area not designated for such use. Vehicles providing
maintenance, police, fire and life-safety services are allowed.
(3) Park a motor vehicle anywhere except in a designated parking area.
(4) Wash any vehicle.
(5) Ride a bicycle on or along a water embankment grassy area or trail if ridden in such a manner as to interfere with other allowed uses
or without personal regard for the safety of others.
(Ordinance CO43-04-06-10-9H adopted 6/10/04)
Sec. 8.03.003 Swimming pools and water playscapes
(a) Prohibited activities. It shall be unlawful for any person inside a fence generally surrounding a city-owned or operated swimming pool, or near
a water playscape to:
(1) Possess or consume alcoholic beverages.
(2) Possess or use glass containers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/526
(3) Bring any pet, bicycle, skateboard, scooter, motorized vehicle, motor-assisted scooter or motor-assisted skateboard of any kind.
(4) Violate any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this section and applicable to that facility.
(b) Establishment of other rules and regulations. The Parks and Recreation Department may adopt additional rules, regulations and policies
governing the management, operation, and use of city-owned or operated swimming pools and water playscapes. A current copy of those rules and
regulations shall be maintained on file at each facility and at the administrative offices of the city's Parks and Recreation Department and made
available on the city's website.
(c) Offense and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section or any rule, regulation or policy adopted
pursuant to this section. Each violation may constitute grounds for temporary or permanent suspension of use and access, and/or be punishable as a
class C misdemeanor, which upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009
of this code.
(Ordinance CO52-14-06-12-C3 adopted 6/12/14)
Sec. 8.03.004 Permits for activities not permitted
Special permits for activities not permitted in city parks or recreation areas under this article shall be obtained by making application to the director
of parks and recreation and approved by the City Council, in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file application stating the following:
(A) The name and address of the applicant.
(B) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(C) The day and hours for which the permit is requested.
(D) The specific location where the permit is requested.
(E) Other information necessary for permit issuance determination.
(F) Variances required from park rules and regulations.
(2) Standards for issuance. A special permit shall insure that the proposed activity or use:
(A) Will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment.
(B) Will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.
(C) Is not anticipated to include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(D) Will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city.
(E) Is not in conflict with another scheduled activity.
Sec. 8.03.005 Closing hours
Parks are open from dawn to 10:00 p.m. unless otherwise posted. The city parks and recreation advisory board may designate different hours for
swimming pools or other parks hours with programming conflicts. Hours shall be duly posted at or near the pool, park or facility entrance where the
operational hours vary. In the event of an emergency, or for good cause, a city official may close any park or recreation facility.
Sec. 8.03.006 Cave preserves
(a) Cave preserves are conservation and park preserve areas set aside to protect certain endangered species or species of concern, pursuant to the
Federal Endangered Species Act, Section 10 (A) and an incidental take permit issued by the Federal Department of the Interior. Persons depositing
foreign material, committing vandalism or any other acts of mischief, which may harm the Federally Protected Species within cave preserves, may be
criminally prosecuted under the penalty provisions of the Endangered Species Act. Punishment of up to one year in prison and fines of up to $25,000
per offense may be levied against violators.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person in a cave preserve area to:
(1) Violate any regulations under this article.
(2) Damage any vegetation within the critical habitat area or within cave preserves.
(3) Introduce foreign materials including chemicals, sewage, petroleum products, pesticides, etc. into caves, critical habitat areas or
within cave preserves.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/526
(4) Dump or dispose of trash, junk, garbage, refuse, unsightly matter, brush or other materials within caves, critical habitat area or cave
preserves.
(5) Enter caves without authorization.
(6) Take, remove, or otherwise harm any species within the caves without a U.S. Fish & Wildlife permit issued for the purpose of
scientific investigation.
(7) It shall be unlawful to operate or use any type of motorized vehicle, motor assisted scooter or motor assisted skateboard, including
but not limited to, motorcycles, motorbikes and minibikes in cave preserves. Vehicles providing maintenance, police, fire and life-safety
services are allowed.
(Ordinance CO43-04-06-10-9H adopted 6/10/04)
Sec. 8.03.007 Skate park facility
(a) Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning
as they have in common usage and so as to give this section its most reasonable application:
Skate park facility. Skating features and structures located at Brushy Creek Sports Park located at 2310 Brushy Creek Road, Cedar Park, Texas, and
depicted in the map attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance CO32-10-06-03-C1, and incorporated herein.
Skate park pavilion. Covered picnic area (including picnic tables and benches) located adjacent to the skating surfaces of the state park facility as
depicted in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance CO32-10-06-03-C1. The skate park pavilion is not a skating surface.
Skating surfaces. Any and all concrete, metal, and tile surfaces located in the bowl and street course features and structures in the skate park facility,
depicted as the highlighted portion of Exhibit A attached to Ordinance CO32-10-06-03-C1.
(b) Hours of operation. The skate park facility is open daily from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. The city reserves the right to close the skate park facility
at any time and under any conditions deemed necessary by the city for public safety, to conduct scheduled maintenance and/or for programmed
events.
(c) Mandatory requirements for use.
(1) The skate park facility is an unsupervised facility. All users skate at their own risk.
(2) Only skateboards and in-line skates are permitted on skating surfaces.
(3) Skaters under the age of 12 years old must be accompanied by a parent, adult guardian, or adult instructor at all times.
(4) All skaters are required to wear protective helmets at all times, and are highly encouraged to wear other protective equipment, such
as knee, wrist, and elbow pads. Parents or guardians shall require children to wear protective helmets while using the skate park facility.
(5) Spectators must remain outside of the skating surfaces.
(6) Competitive events or demonstrations require prior approval of the Parks and Recreation Department and issuance of a special
permit as set out under section 8.03.004 of this article.
(d) Prohibited activities in skate park facility. It shall be unlawful for any person in the skate park facility to:
(1) Be on or at skate park facility property when it is closed;
(2) Possess or consume alcohol or tobacco of any kind;
(3) Abuse drugs of any kind;
(4) Place any graffiti, tagging, or stickers on any surface;
(5) Carry, possess, or discharge any gun or weapon of any kind;
(6) Engage in horseplay, pushing, shoving, or fighting;
(7) Skate in or on any part of the skate park pavilion area, including picnic tables and benches;
(8) Make, build, place, or attach any modifications or obstacles, including but not limited to, any ramps, jump surfaces, rails, in any part
of the skate park facility; or
(9) Conduct or operate any competitive events or demonstrations without having first obtained a special permit as set out under section
8.03.004 of this article.
(e) Prohibited activities on skating surfaces. It shall be unlawful for any person on any skating surface in the skate park facility to:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/526
(1) Operate or use any wheeled recreational equipment other than skateboards and in-line skates, including, but not limited to, bicycles,
any type of motorized vehicle, motor-assisted scooter, motor-assisted skateboard, motorcycle, motorbike or minibike;
(2) Permit pets or animals of any kind; or
(3) Bring or consume food, beverages, or chewing gum.
(f) Offense and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulation posted by the city at the skate park facility or any provision of
subsections (c)–(e) of this section. Each violation shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(g) Criminal trespass warning. In addition to a penalty under subsection (f) of this section, and pursuant to section 30.05 of the Texas Penal Code,
as amended, any peace officer or employee of the city aware of any person:
(1) Violating any provision of this section or any posted city regulation pertaining to the skate park facility; or
(2) Behaving in any manner reasonably determined by the peace officer or city employee to endanger the health and safety of skate
park facility users, may issue an oral or written forty-eight (48) hour criminal trespass warning to the responsible individual.
(Ordinance CO32-10-06-03-C1 adopted 6/3/10)
Sec. 8.03.008 Dog park facility
(a) Hours of operation. The dog park facility is open daily from dawn to dusk. The city reserves the right to close the dog park facility at any time
and under any conditions deemed necessary by the city for public safety, to conduct scheduled maintenance, and/or for programmed events.
(b) Mandatory requirements for use.
(1) This facility is for use by dogs, their owners/handlers, and their human guests only. No other animals or uses are permitted.
(2) Leashes may be removed inside the fenced off-leash areas of the facility only.
(3) All dogs must be under control and in view of the owner/handler at all times. Dogs must be supervised by persons sixteen (16) years
of age or older.
(4) All children under sixteen (16) years of age must be accompanied by an adult responsible for the child's behavior and safety.
Children are not allowed to chase dogs in the facility.
(5) Limit of two (2) dogs per person in the facility at any time.
(6) Dog owners/handlers are liable for any injuries or damage caused by their dogs.
(7) Dog owners/handlers are responsible for picking up and disposing of their dog's waste, repairing any damage done by their dogs
and removing their dog's toys from the facility.
(8) All dogs must have current vaccinations and registration and must wear a collar with current rabies vaccination and registration
tags. Dog owners/handlers must have a current rabies vaccination certificate available and comply with current city park animal control
ordinances.
(9) Aggressive or dangerous dogs are prohibited in the facility. Dogs showing any aggressive behavior shall be leashed and removed
from the facility immediately.
(10) Dogs under four (4) months of age are not allowed in the facility.
(11) Dogs using the facility must not be in heat and must be healthy and free of parasites.
(12) The small dog off-leash area is for dogs less than thirty (30) pounds only. The large dog off-leash area is for dogs weighing thirty
(30) pounds or more. Small dogs are permitted in the large dog off-leash area but enter at your own risk.
(13) Dog owners/handlers must carry leashes (one per dog) while in the facility.
(14) No food (dog or human) or training treats allowed in the facility.
(15) Glass containers, alcohol and tobacco of any kind are prohibited in the facility.
(16) Bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades and motorized vehicles are prohibited in the facility.
(17) Professional trainers are not allowed to use the facility for training purposes. Competitive events or demonstrations require a
special use permit from the city. Competitive events or demonstrations require prior approval of the Parks and Recreation Department and
issuance of a special permit as set out under section 8.03.004 of this article.
(c) Offense and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulation posted by the city at the dog park facility or any provision of
subsection (b) of this section. Each violation shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/526
accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(d) Criminal trespass warning. In addition to a penalty under subsection (c) of this section, and pursuant to section 30.05 of the Texas Penal Code,
as amended, any peace officer or employee of the city aware of any person:
(1) Violating any provision of this section or any posted city regulation pertaining to the dog park facility; or
(2) Behaving in any manner reasonably determined by the peace officer or city employee to endanger the health and safety of dog park
facility users;
May issue an oral or written forty-eight (48) hour criminal trespass warning to the responsible individual.
(Ordinance CO28-11-05-26-C2 adopted 5/26/11)
ARTICLE 8.04 JUVENILE CURFEW*
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
Curfew hours.
(1) 11:00 p.m. Sunday evening until 6:00 a.m. Monday morning;
(2) 11:00 p.m. Monday evening until 6:00 a.m. Tuesday morning;
(3) 11:00 p.m. Tuesday evening until 6:00 a.m. Wednesday morning;
(4) 11:00 p.m. Wednesday evening until 6:00 a.m. Thursday morning;
(5) 11:00 p.m. Thursday evening until 6:00 a.m. Friday morning;
(6) 1:00 a.m. Saturday morning until 6:00 a.m. Saturday morning; and
(7) 1:00 a.m. Sunday morning until 6:00 a.m. Sunday morning.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent loss of life or serious bodily injury that
creates a substantial risk of death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a juvenile; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a juvenile has been placed by a court.
Juvenile. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a juvenile.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a Police Officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
Sec. 8.04.002 Offenses
(a) A juvenile commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/526
(b) A parent or guardian of a juvenile commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the juvenile to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a juvenile to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
Sec. 8.04.003 Exemptions
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation under section 8.04.002 if the juvenile:
(1) Is accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian;
(2) Is on an errand at the direction of the juvenile's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) Is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Is engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from any employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Is involved in an emergency;
(6) Is on the sidewalk abutting the juvenile's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the juvenile's presence;
(7) Is participating in a work-study program; or attending a sponsored activity or event through the juvenile's school, the City, a
religious or civic organization, or other person or entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile, including travel without detour or stop to
a destination as required by such coursework, program, activity, or event;
(8) Is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or
(9) Is married or has been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
(b) It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation under section 8.04.002(c) if the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the Police Department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 8.04.004 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this Article, a Police Officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this Article unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and
that, based on the juvenile's response and other circumstances, no affirmative defense in section 8.04.003 is present.
Sec. 8.04.005 Penalties
(a) A person who violates a provision of this Article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this Code.
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the Municipal Court shall waive original jurisdiction over a juvenile
who violates section 8.04.002(a) of this Article and shall refer the juvenile to juvenile court.
(Ordinance CO11-19-02-28-E1 adopted 2/28/19)
ARTICLE 8.05 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Antique vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Code enforcement division. The City of Cedar Park Code Enforcement Division, including its employed individual officers.
Demolisher. Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor
vehicles.
Inoperable. Any motor vehicle not capable of self-propelled movement, operation, and function.
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/526
(1) Displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate or does not display a license plate or motor vehicle
inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
Motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act.
Motor vehicle collector. A person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles and acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or
special interest vehicle or part thereof for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Police department. The City of Cedar Park Police Department, including its employed individual peace officers.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic
interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
Sec. 8.05.002 Officers designated
The City Manager or their designee shall direct administration of this article by regularly salaried employees of the city, except that any authorized
person may be directed to remove junked vehicles or parts thereof.
Sec. 8.05.003 Right of entry
The police department, code enforcement division, or other duly authorized agent responsible for enforcing this article may enter upon private
property for the purposes specified in this article and to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles, and to
remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance, in accordance with this article, and to serve such necessary orders
and to execute such necessary instruments in order to obtain possession of and/or convey title to such vehicle or parts thereof.
Sec. 8.05.004 Junked vehicles declared a public nuisance
Pursuant to Texas Transportation Code, section 683.072, as amended, junked vehicles, including parts thereof, which are visible from a public place
or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite
vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the
economic welfare of the state, by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the municipalities in
the state, and such vehicles are therefore declared to be a public nuisance.
Sec. 8.05.005 Unlawful to create or maintain nuisance
It shall be unlawful to place, maintain, or permit to remain upon public or private property within the city any junked vehicle or part thereof. An
offense under this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00, as provided by Texas Transportation Code, section
683.073, as amended.
Sec. 8.05.006 Notice of violation, to abate nuisance, and right to hearing
(a) Upon complaint or observation that a nuisance, as defined herein, exists in the city, the police department, code enforcement division, or other
duly authorized agent responsible for enforcing this article shall give or cause to be given to the person maintaining or suspected of maintaining such
nuisance, a written notice stating the nature of the public nuisance, its location, and that it must be removed and abated by the tenth (10th) day after
the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and further, that a request for hearing to contest the alleged violation must be made
in writing before the expiration of said ten-day period. Such notice shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-day return
requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to:
(1) The last known registered owner of the alleged junked vehicle;
(2) Each lienholder of record; and
(3) The owner or occupant of the private property on which the alleged junked vehicle is located, or if the alleged junked vehicle is
located on a public right-of-way, of the property adjacent to the public right-of-way.
(b) If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not
earlier than the eleventh (11th) day after the date of the return.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/526
Sec. 8.05.007 Public hearing; order by municipal judge
(a) If requested in writing within ten (10) days by any person receiving notice, as provided in section 8.05.006, a public hearing shall be held
before the judge of the municipal court of the city. At the hearing, the alleged junked vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the
owner, to be inoperable. The relocation of an alleged junked vehicle to another location in the city has no effect if the junked vehicle constitutes a
public nuisance at the new location.
(b) If the judge finds that a public nuisance exists, the judge shall order the owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which the vehicle is located to abate and remove such junked vehicle within ten (10) days after the order is given. Such order shall include the
vehicle's description, vehicle identification number, and license plate number, if available.
Sec. 8.05.008 Duty to abate
In the event any person receiving notice fails to request a public hearing as provided in section 8.05.006, it shall be the duty of such person to remove
and abate such nuisance within the ten-day period. After a vehicle has been removed in accordance with or under the terms and provisions of this
section, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable.
Sec. 8.05.009 Abatement by city
(a) If, after the expiration of the ten (10) days provided in the notice under section 8.05.006 with no request for a hearing, or after the expiration of
ten (10) days from the date of the municipal court judge's order under section 8.05.007 for the removal and abatement of the public nuisance, such
nuisance has not been removed or abated, the police department, code enforcement division, or other duly authorized agent responsible for enforcing
this article may remove or cause to be removed the junked vehicle which was the subject of such notice or order.
(b) Notice identifying the junked vehicle or part thereof shall be given to the state department of motor vehicles not later than the fifth (5th) day
after the date of removal.
(c) A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated
by the city.
(d) Any proceeds from the city's removal of a junked vehicle or part thereof pursuant to this section shall be applied to reimburse the city for all
costs incurred in the investigation, notification, hearing, and removal procedures under this article.
Sec. 8.05.010 Exemptions
This article shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or
other public or private property;
(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area are maintained in an orderly manner, not a health
hazard, and screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery; or
(3) A licensed antique or special interest vehicle or part thereof stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the
vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area are maintained in an orderly manner, not a health hazard, and screened from ordinary public
view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or a fitted car cover manufactured for such purpose,
concealing the entire body of the motor vehicle, and being secured to the motor vehicle by elastic, velcro, ties, or other similar means.
(Ordinance CO64-12-09-27-C1 adopted 9/27/12)
ARTICLE 8.06 PROPERTY TO BE KEPT FREE OF UNWHOLESOME CONDITIONS*
Sec. 8.06.001 Unwholesome conditions specified; unlawful to maintain
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or occupant of any land, tract, or lot or any portion thereof regardless of size within the corporate limits of
the city with the exception of agricultural areas, to fail to maintain said property free of weeds, grass and undergrowth over twelve (12) inches tall.
Or for any property owner to fail to maintain said property free from household trash, garbage, used building materials and supplies, used and/or
discarded household fixtures or appliances, toxic materials, stagnant water, dead animals, brush piles, debris, rubbish, materials which may constitute
a fire hazard, and any other matter or materials which may be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
Sec. 8.06.002 Abatement of unwholesome conditions; notice
(a) In the event that the owner of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion thereof, situated within the corporate limits of the city shall fail to
comply with section 8.06.001 of this article, then the city shall give notice to such person setting forth the noncompliance with this article. Such
notice shall be in writing and may be served upon such person in any one or more of the following ways:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/526
(1) Personally given to the owner in writing;
(2) Addressed to the owner by letter to the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which
the property is located; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or if the owner's post office address is unknown, notice may be given by publication at least
once in the city's official newspaper or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation
relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(b) If notice is mailed to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a) and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or
“unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected and the notice is considered as delivered.
(c) In the notice herein provided for, the city shall have the right to inform the property owner that if he or she commits another violation of the
same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may, without further notice, correct the violation at the owner's
expense and assess the expense against the property.
Sec. 8.06.003 Abatement expenses; property assessments; lien
If the owner does not comply within seven (7) days after the proper giving of notice as hereinabove mentioned, the city may cause any of the work or
improvements mentioned or required in section 8.06.002 hereof to be done initially at the expense of the city, on the account of the owner, lessee or
occupant of the property on which such work or improvements are done, and cause all of the actual cost to the city to be assessed on the real estate or
lot on account of which such expense is incurred. The City Manager shall file a statement of expenses incurred under this section giving the amount
of such expenses, the date on which such work was done and a description of the premises upon which such work was done or improvements made
with the County Clerk. The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which such work was done or improvements made to
secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of article 4436, Revised Civil Statutes, which lien shall be second only to tax
liens and liens for street improvements, and such amount shall bear ten (10) percent interest from the date the statement was filed. For any such
expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city, and the
statement of expenses so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or
improvements.
Sec. 8.06.004 Dangerous weeds
Should the violation consist of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height which are deemed by the city to be an immediate danger to the
health, life or safety of any person, the city may immediately abate said nuisance with no notice to the property owner.
Sec. 8.06.005 Penalty
Any person who violates the provisions of section 8.06.004 of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction shall be
fined as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code for each day that a violation exists, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Furthermore, any person who obstructs or attempts to obstruct the city, any of its
employees or authorized agents from enforcing the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as
provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code.
Sec. 8.06.006 Maintenance of property
(a) Sidewalks, alleys, rights-of-way. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a clean and litter-free manner, including
sidewalks, grass strips, one-half (1/2) of alleys, curbs and rights-of-ways up to the edge of the pavement of any public street.
(b) Sweeping into sidewalks or streets. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of yard refuse, clippings,
or litter from any building or property.
(c) Places where water may accumulate. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies any lot within the corporate city limits of the
ETJ (extra-territorial jurisdiction) to permit or allow holes or places on such lot where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit the
same to remain.
(d) Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Scatter refuse about or litter any public or private street or area or place; or
(2) Cast, throw, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse or trash in such manner that it may be carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place or into any occupied or unoccupied premises,
commercial or residential, within the city.
(Ordinance CO26-07-06-07-3A adopted 6/7/07)
ARTICLE 8.07 ALARM SYSTEMS, OPERATION AND SERVICE FEES*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/526
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Alarm notification. A notification intended to summon the police or fire department, which is designed to be initiated purposely by a person or by an
alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion or fire.
Alarm site. A single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one owner.
Alarm systems. Any mechanical or electrical device which is used to protect buildings or premises from criminal acts or unauthorized entries by
warning persons of a crime or unauthorized entry, or fire, through the emission of a sound or the transmission of a signal or message. An “alarm
system” definition does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is used for a habitation at a permanent site.
Automatic alarm notification. An alarm notification sent over telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message, or
coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system was/is designed to detect.
Central station. An office to which remote and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits, and/or where
guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
Chief. The chief of police, or fire chief of the city or his authorized representative.
False alarm notification. An alarm to the police or fire department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of emergency.
Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity.
(1998 Code, sec. 4.1201)
Sec. 8.07.002 Applicability
(a) This article shall apply to any person who operates or causes to be operated an alarm system at any alarm site.
(b) This article shall not apply to alarm systems operated by local, state, or federal governmental entities and shall not apply to those private alarm
systems which do not summon the police or fire departments by any means.
(1998 Code, sec. 4.1202)
Sec. 8.07.003 Operation and maintenance of systems
(a) Any person who owns or operates an alarm system shall:
(1) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notification;
(2) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that insures proper operation of the alarm system;
(3) Avoid manually activating an alarm system for any reason other than occurrence of an event which the alarm system was intended
to report;
(4) Notify the police department prior to activation of any alarm system for the purposes of testing or maintenance; and
(5) Adjust the system mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than fifteen (15) minutes after being activated.
(b) A person who owns or operates a local alarm system shall adjust the system mechanism so that, upon activation, the local alarm will not
transmit another alarm signal without first being reset.
(c) A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall:
(1) Communicate alarm notification to the city in a timely manner and form.
(2) Comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief.
(d) A person who owns or operates an alarm system at any alarm site shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating
instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combinations, or passwords need not be included in these instructions.
(1998 Code, sec. 4.1203)
Sec. 8.07.004 Police response
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/526
(a) The response, if any, made to a signal from an alarm system shall be subject to the policies and procedures of the police department and will be
in accordance with the priorities set for police response.
(b) Any and all liability and consequential damages resulting from any failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental
immunity as provided by law is retained.
(1998 Code, sec. 4.1204)
Sec. 8.07.005 False notifications and service fees
(a) Except as provided below, the owner of an alarm system or alarm site shall pay a fee for each false alarm notification emitted from an alarm
system which is responded to upon call as follows:
(1) No fee will be charged to the owner of a burglar alarm system or other type of alarm system unless five other false alarms have
occurred from such system during the preceding 12-month period.
(2) The sixth and any subsequent false alarm which is emitted from a burglar alarm system or other type of alarm system within a 12-
month period shall result in a service fee to the owner, provided for in the fee schedule in the appendix of this code, per event.
(b) If the responding police or fire officer determines that an alarm notification was caused by an emergency, that notification shall not be
considered in determining when a service fee will be assessed.
(c) An alarm notification shall not be considered in determining when a service fee will be assessed if the owner can demonstrate that the alarm
notification was the result of severe weather affecting either the alarm system or the telephone lines delivering such notification.
(1998 Code, sec. 4.1205)
ARTICLE 8.08 NOISE REGULATIONS
Sec. 8.08.001 General regulations
(a) Scope. This article applies to the control of all sound and noise existing within the City limits and any part of the City's extraterritorial
jurisdiction within six hundred (600) feet of the City limits.
(b) Overview. This article is designed to regulate sound and noise through the use of objective standards to promote compliance and enforceability,
which will enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City.
Sec. 8.08.002 Definitions
Daytime. For nonresidential property, the continuous time period between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday; and for residential property, the continuous time period between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. each day.
dB(A). The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network as designated and defined by the
American National Standards Institute.
dB(C). The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the C-weighting network as designated and defined by the
American National Standards Institute.
Decibel (db). The unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location.
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an engine or motor.
Nighttime. For nonresidential property, the continuous time period from 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday until 7:00 a.m. of the following day
and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday until 7:00 a.m. of the following day; and for residential property, the continuous period from 10:00 p.m. until
7:00 a.m. of the following day.
Nonresidential property. A property that is not a residential property as defined in this article.
Public right-of-way. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place normally accessible to the public, which is owned or
controlled by any government entity.
Real property line. Either:
(1) The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another; or
(2) The vertical and horizontal boundaries of each unit of a multi-unit building which is under separate ownership or tenancy.
Residential property. Any real property developed and used for human habitation that contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation, unless such premises are actually occupied and used primarily for purposes other than human habitation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/526
Sound equipment. A loud speaker, public address system, amplification system, musical instrument, radio, CD player, or other sound-producing
device.
Sound level. The instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels obtained by the use of a sound level meter.
Sound level meter. An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and weighting
network used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to type 1 or type 2 standards as specified in the latest version of the American National
Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI Standard S1.4-1983).
Zoning ordinance. The zoning ordinance of the City of Cedar Park, Texas, as set forth in chapter 11 of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as
amended.
Sec. 8.08.003 Restrictions on decibel levels
(a) Scope. This article applies to the control of all sound and noise existing within the City limits and any part of its extraterritorial jurisdiction
within six hundred (600) feet of the City limits.
(b) Nonresidential noise source maximum decibel levels. No person shall cause, allow, or permit the making of a noise from a nonresidential
property in the City limits and any part of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction within six hundred (600) feet of the City limits which exceeds the
following sound pressure levels as measured pursuant to subsection (d) herein:
(1) Daytime: 75 dB(A) or 85 dB(C); or
(2) Nighttime: 65 dB(A) or 75 dB(C).
(c) Residential noise source maximum decibel levels. No person shall cause, allow, or permit the making of a noise from a residential property in
the City limits and any part of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction within six hundred (600) feet of the City limits which exceeds the following
sound pressure levels as measured pursuant to subsection (d) herein:
(1) Daytime: 70 dB(A) or 80 dB(C); or
(2) Nighttime: 50 dB(A) or 60 dB(C).
(d) Noise measurement. Measurement of noise pursuant to this article shall be in accordance with this section.
(1) Method of measurement. Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American
Standards Association. The measuring instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. Prior to taking a
measurement of the noise in question, the environment shall be observed to determine whether background noise is so close to the level of
the sound being measured rendering a proper measurement impossible. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper
representation of the noise being measured. The microphone shall be screened from wind and water and otherwise used in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications.
(2) Location of measurement. Measurement of noise shall be taken along the real property line of the property where the noise is being
produced at the location that is both closest to the location of the complainant's property and the origin of the noise, and if protected by
sound mitigating devices, such as a wall or landscaping, also from the location closest to the origin of the noise that is not protected by
sound mitigating devices, with the determinative measurement being the greater of the two.
(e) Declaration of nuisance. A violation of this section is hereby declared a nuisance.
Sec. 8.08.004 Special exceptions
(a) Application. A person seeking a special exception under this section shall complete and file a written application for a special exception with
the Police Department on the form provided by the Police Department and pay the applicable fee in accordance with the fee schedule in appendix A
of this Code, as amended. An application for special exception shall include:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a business, the application shall be filled out by the
owner or duly authorized agent of the business and shall list the name, address, and telephone number of the business, the responsible
owner of the business, and the operator of the business, if different;
(2) The nature and location of the noise source for which the application is made;
(3) The time during which the noise will be generated and the level of noise that will occur;
(4) A signed statement that the applicant has obtained a copy of this Article and related rules and agrees to comply with this article, the
related rules provided, and the terms and conditions of a special exception issued to the applicant;
(5) The reason for which the special exception is requested, including the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client, or the
public if the special exception is not granted; and
(6) A description of noise control measures to be taken for the applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom and the
schedule under which said measures will be implemented.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/526
(b) Restrictions on approval of special exception. No special exception shall be approved unless the City Council is satisfied based upon the
application and other proof provided by the applicant that:
(1) Noise levels occurring during the period of the special exception will not constitute a danger to public health;
(2) Compliance with this Article would impose an unreasonable hardship on the applicant or the public without greater benefits to the
public; and
(3) The applicant has fully complied with the application procedures.
(c) Considerations in determining whether to approve a special exception. In making the determination of whether to grant a special exception, the
City Council shall consider:
(1) The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the health and welfare or the reasonable use of property that is caused or
threatened to be caused;
(2) The value to the community of the activity for which the special exception is sought;
(3) The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise control measures; and
(4) Proximity to residences at which reasonable persons would be disturbed by the noise.
(d) Other restrictions.
(1) The City Council shall consider each application on the same basis as that used for other similarly situated applicants and shall
make each special exception decision free from consideration of race, sex, national origin, religion, the content of speech, or any other
factors not provided for in this article;
(2) No special exception shall be approved for the operation of sound equipment at nighttime from a motor vehicle; and
(3) No special exception shall be approved if the applicant has been convicted of more than two violations under this Article at the
location for which the special exception is sought in the six months prior to the date on which the application is submitted.
(e) Approval or denial of special exception.
(1) The City Council shall grant or deny the Special Exception within sixty (60) business days of receiving the properly completed
application. An application for the same applicant or location may not be submitted for a period of sixty (60) business days following the
denial of an application.
(2) If the City Council determines a special exception should be issued pursuant to the criteria established in this section, a special
exception shall be issued which states the type of sound allowed, the location at which the sound will be allowed, the maximum decibel
level to be allowed, the times at which the sound will be allowed to be produced, and the expiration date of the special exception.
(f) Time and frequency limits on special exceptions. Applicant shall apply for a special exception under one or the other, but not both, of the
subsections below:
(1) Multiple events. Applicants applying for a special exception for multiple events at the same site within one (1) calendar year shall
apply for one (1) special exception for all events within the one (1) calendar year. A new special exception application shall be required
for a new special exception to be approved for any subsequent year. Any such special exception shall terminate upon change in the owner
or operator of the establishment listed on the application and a new special exception application by the new owner will be required to
obtain a new special exception.
(2) Single event. Special exceptions for single events shall be issued for the duration of each individual event and no such special
exception for a single event shall be issued for the same location within thirty (30) business days of the date of expiration of the previous
special exception.
(g) Revocation of special exception. The special exception may be revoked by the City Council after a public hearing if the terms of the special
exception are violated; if it is learned that there were material misrepresentations made in the special exception application; or if there is a material
change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the City Council in granting the special exception.
Sec. 8.08.005 Exemptions
It is a defense to prosecution of a violation under this article if the violation is based on a sound listed in this section.
(1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to an emergency.
(2) Sound produced by emergency vehicles.
(3) Sound produced by a motor vehicle motor in good working order while the motor vehicle is moving on a public right-of-way, public
waterway, airport runway, or railroad. This does not include sound produced by sound producing equipment within the motor vehicle or
attached to the motor vehicle.
(4) Sound produced by any governmental entity in the performance of a governmental function.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/526
(5) Sound generated at a scheduled stadium event or event at the Cedar Park Center; by parade spectators and participants in the parade
route during a permitted parade; by outdoor celebration participants for the general welfare of the public.
(6) Sound generated at a religious event, during the daytime, held on premises that are regularly used for worship services.
(7) The use and operation of bells or an amplified, mechanical bell system in connection with the use and occupancy of a church
structure.
(8) Sound generated from persons of reasonable behavior playing at a park or playground.
(9) Sound generated by the steam engine from the Austin Steam Train.
(10) Sound generated by a manufacturing or industrial entity that is generated for the purpose of the business.
(11) Construction work that:
(A) Is within six hundred feet (600') of any dwelling or dwelling unit occupied as a residence, construction activity of any nature,
at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(B) Is located six hundred feet (600') or more from a dwelling, or dwelling unit occupied as a residence.
(C) In cases of urgent necessity or in the interest of public safety and convenience, the City Manager or his/her designee, may
issue a permit allowing construction, exceeding the decibel limitations under this article, to take place between the hours of 8:00
p.m. of a given day and 7:00 a.m. of the following morning. The City Manager may at his/her discretion attach one or more of the
following conditions to any permit issued.
(i) Specified hours during which construction activities may take place.
(ii) Prior written notification of the time, date and estimated duration of the permitted construction activity, said notice to be
provided at the permit holder's expense, to persons residing within a given distance of the construction site.
(iii) Any other condition or restriction deemed necessary for protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(12) Sound generated by any utility or roadway maintenance or repairs in residential areas during the daytime and emergency repairs
related to public health, safety and welfare of the residents, which are allowed at all hours.
(13) The sounding of any horn or signal device from a motor vehicle as a warning device.
(14) Sound generated by the collection of garbage, waste, or refuse in an area zoned for commercial uses or other business uses as
defined by the zoning ordinance, or between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in any areas zoned for residential uses as defined by the
zoning ordinance or within three hundred (300) feet of an area zoned for residential uses as defined by the zoning ordinance.
(15) Sound generated by lawn or landscaping equipment in good working order operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Sec. 8.08.006 Enforcement, violation and penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct, resist or oppose any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
(b) Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be charged with a class C misdemeanor; and upon conviction shall be fined as
provided for in section 1.01.009 of this Code for each day that a violation exists, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ordinance CO26-17-03-09-H4 adopted 3/9/17)
ARTICLE 8.09 CHILD SAFETY ZONES *
Sec. 8.09.001 Definitions
Child sex offender. A person who is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the “database”) because
of a conviction(s) involving a minor.
Day-care center. A facility providing care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for 13 or more children for less than 24 hours a day.
Minor. A person under the age of 17.
Park. A parcel of land, community park, neighborhood park, playground, swimming pool, indoor facility, outdoor facility, recreation center, field,
athletic field, hike and bike trails, greenbelt areas and any other area in the City-owned, leased and/or used by the City, and devoted to active or
passive recreation, including any related facilities, parking lots and/or amenities, save and except any of the foregoing that has a stadium, arena
and/or permanent seating and primarily used for sporting events, special events and/or other entertainment any of which is not managed by the City.
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/526
Premises where children commonly gather. Areas including all improved and unimproved lots where the following are located or planned to be
located: a public park, private or public school (excluding in-home schools), day-care center, or private recreational facility, including a park, pool,
playground, skate park, or youth athletic field owned by a residential property owners association, or for which an entrance, admission, or rental fee
is charged.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and
which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or
nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence.
Sec. 8.09.002 Residency requirements
(a) It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,500 feet of any premises where
children commonly gather.
(b) It shall be unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that
it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary
residence pursuant to the terms of this article, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, is located
within 1,500 feet of any premises where children commonly gather.
Sec. 8.09.003 Halloween
A child sex offender shall not on each October 31st leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise invite trick-or-treaters to the premises.
Sec. 8.09.004 Evidentiary matters; measurement
(a) For the purpose of determining the minimum distance of separation under this article, the distance shall be measured by following a straight
line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly
gather, as described hereinabove, or, in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to
the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein.
(b) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the City, and it shall be reviewed and updated not less than annually for changes.
Said map will be available to the public on the City's website at the Cedar Park Police Department.
(c) Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined in this article.
Sec. 8.09.005 Affirmative defenses
The following shall be affirmative defenses to prosecution under this article that any of the following conditions apply:
(1) It shall be an affirmative defense under section 8.09.002 if the person required to register on the database established the permanent
or temporary residence and has complied with all of the child sex offender registration laws of the State, prior to the date of the adoption
of this article, provided, however that if the person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence
through a lease or other rental arrangement in effect on the effective date of this article, this affirmative defense shall not apply upon
termination of the lease/rental arrangement that is in effect on the effective date of this article.
(2) It shall be an affirmative defense under section 8.09.002 if the premises where children commonly gather was designated, declared
and/or determined after the child sex offender established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all child sex offender
registration laws of the State provided, however, that if the person required to register on the database established the permanent or
temporary residence through a lease or other rental arrangement in effect on the effective date of this article, this affirmative defense shall
not apply upon termination of the lease/rental arrangement that is in effect on the effective date of this article.
(3) It shall be an affirmative defense under sections 8.09.002 and 8.09.003 if the information on the database is incorrect, and, if
corrected, this article would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database.
Sec. 8.09.006 Penalty provision
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be charged with a class C misdemeanor; and upon conviction shall be fined as provided
for in section 1.01.009 of this Code for each day that a violation exists, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ordinance CO01-15-10-08-F3 adopted 10/8/15)
ARTICLE 8.10 CAMPING IN PUBLIC AREAS
Sec. 8.10.001 Definitions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/526
Camp. To use an area for sleeping and/or living accommodation purposes, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Making preparations to construct a temporary shelter, such as the setting up of a tent, laying down of bedding, lying in or on a cot,
sleeping bag, bedroll or other similar sleeping equipment, or the construction of a temporary shelter with other materials such as
cardboard or newspapers;
(2) Parking of a motor vehicle, motor home, or trailer for the apparent purpose of overnight occupancy;
(3) Storing or accumulating clothing, food, beverages or other personal belongings;
(4) Digging or earth breaking; or
(5) Using any tent or temporary shelter.
Public area. Any outdoor area to which the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, rights-of-way, parks, recreation areas, cave
preserves, parking lots, alleyways, pedestrian ways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport
facilities, and retail shopping establishments.
Sec. 8.10.002 Prohibitions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in a public area within the city limits.
(b) The activities listed in section 8.10.001 under the definition of “camp” shall constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all
circumstances, that the person, in conducting these activities, is in fact using the area for living accommodation purposes regardless of the intent of
the person or the nature of any other activities in which they may also be engaging. Camping does not include the act of merely falling asleep in a
public place.
Sec. 8.10.003 Affirmative defenses
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this article if the person was camping in an approved area designated by the city, on
property owned by the person or on property for which the person has received prior permission from the owner or agent in charge of the property.
(b) It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this article if the person:
(1) Is traveling through the city in a motor vehicle;
(2) Is on a trip which has a point of origin and a point of destination outside of Williamson or Travis County, Texas and the contiguous
counties;
(3) Parks the motor vehicle at a location not greater than one-half mile off the most direct route of the trip;
(4) Parks the motor vehicle for the purpose of resting or sleeping in the vehicle because further operation would endanger himself or
others due to the need for sleep;
(5) Sleeps or rests in the motor vehicle or in a trailer directly attached to the motor vehicle for a period not longer than four (4) hours;
and
(6) Is not intoxicated.
Sec. 8.10.004 Penalty
The violation of any provision of this article shall be unlawful and a class C misdemeanor offense. Each day or part of a day during which the
violation is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense, and each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009.
(Ordinance CO45-12-03-22-C1 adopted 3/22/12)
ARTICLE 8.11 OPERATING UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS OVER SPECIAL EVENTS
Sec. 8.11.001 Definitions
Aircraft. Any device invented, designed, used or intended to be used to fly in the air by mechanical means.
Special event. Shall have the meaning ascribed by Texas Government Code, section 423.009(a)(2), as it may be amended: a festival, celebration, or
other gathering that:
(1) Involves:
(A) The reservation and temporary use of all or a portion of a public park, road, or other property of a political subdivision; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/526
(B) Entertainment, the sale of merchandise, food, or beverages, or mass participation in a sports event; and
(2) Requires a significant use or coordination of a political subdivision's services.
Unmanned aircraft system. An aircraft and all its associated systems and components that may be operated by remote control or without direct
human intervention from within or on the aircraft.
Sec. 8.11.002 Nuisance defined; violation; penalty
(a) Nuisance. A violation of this section is hereby defined to be a nuisance pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 217.042.
(b) Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to deploy, launch, fly, or otherwise operate an unmanned aircraft system from or over the location
of a special event held within the City limits or in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction within 5,000 feet thereof for the duration of the event without
a valid permit issued pursuant to section 8.11.003.
(c) Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be charged with a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be
fined as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this Code for each day that a violation exists; a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Sec. 8.11.003 Permit
(a) Any person desiring to operate an unmanned aircraft system from or over the location of a special event shall first submit to the Director of
Parks and Recreation, or their designee, a completed application for a permit on an official form, and shall pay the permit fee in accordance with the
fee schedule in appendix A of this Code, as amended.
(b) The number of permits issued shall be limited to ten (10) per special event.
(c) The application for a permit shall include:
(1) The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the applicant;
(2) The name, address, telephone number, email address, and business name, if applicable, of the operator if the operator is different
from the applicant;
(3) The manufacturer, model name, and serial number of the unmanned aircraft system to be flown;
(4) The FAA UAS registration number of the aircraft, if applicable; and
(5) The proposed location, date and times of operation.
(d) The application and permit fee shall be submitted not less than fourteen (14) days before the date of the special event.
(e) The Director of Parks and Recreation, or their designee, shall issue a permit to the first ten (10) applicants for a special event upon receipt of a
completed permit application and payment of the permit fee. The permit shall be issued not less than ten (10) days after receipt of the completed
permit application and permit fee. The permit shall contain the permit number, the name of the operator, date and times of permitted operation, and
the signature of the Director of Parks and Recreation, or their designee.
(f) The operator shall carry the permit on their person at all times while operating the unmanned aircraft system for the duration of the special
event.
Sec. 8.11.004 Exceptions
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to an unmanned aircraft system operated by or on behalf of:
(1) A law enforcement agency for a law enforcement purpose; or
(2) The City.
(Ordinance CO46-17-08-10-E1 adopted 8/10/17)
ARTICLE 8.12 ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS
Sec. 8.12.001 General regulations
(a) Applicability. The use of land, buildings, and other structures in the City and within 5,000 feet outside the corporate limits of the City shall be
established and conducted to comply with the environmental performance standards of this Article.
(b) Compliance determination.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/526
(1) Measurement. A determination of the existence of any objectionable element shall be made at the location of the use creating the
objectionable element, unless the performance standard measurement criteria specifies another location.
(2) Cost of determination.
(A) Cost paid by violator. Upon a finding of a violation of this Article by a court of competent jurisdiction, the cost for any
technical study conducted by or on behalf of the City to determine the existence of an alleged violation shall be borne by those
parties responsible for the violation.
(B) Cost paid by City. If it is determined that no violation exists, the costs of the determination shall be borne by the City.
(c) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be
fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(d) Nuisance declared. Any violation of this Article shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated.
(e) Proof of permits. The City reserves the right to make inspections at any time to ensure compliance with all of the standards found in this
Article, and may request proof of the issuance of permits from any other applicable governmental agency within the corporate and extraterritorial
limits of the City.
Sec. 8.12.002 Exemptions
The following activities and uses are exempt from the performance standards of this Article:
(1) Temporary construction;
(2) Excavation and grading associated with development for which applicable permits have been issued;
(3) The construction of public streets or utilities; and
(4) Agricultural activities, such as plowing and tilling.
Sec. 8.12.003 Odorous matter
(a) Any use in the City shall comply with the performance standards herein specified for the emission of odorous matter.
(b) Emission of any odors discernible even without the aid of instruments shall be prohibited beyond the boundaries of any development within
this district.
(c) Determination of odor threshold. The odor threshold shall not be exceeded at the boundary line of the districts referred to in subsection (a). In
any case where the operator of an odor- emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer where specific measurement of odor concentration is
required, the method and procedures specified by American Society for Testing Materials ASTMD 1457-57 entitled “Standard Method for
Measuring Odors in Atmosphere” shall be used.
(d) Emission of odorous matter regulated. No use shall be operated in any zoning district of the City in such a manner that the emission of odorous
matter occurs in such quantity or volume as to be the source of discomfort or hazard beyond the bounding property lines of such use.
Sec. 8.12.004 Toxic and noxious matter
(a) No use in the City shall emit a concentration across the bounding property line of such operation of use of toxic or noxious matter which will
exceed ten (10) percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are established
and/or amended by the Texas State Department of Health, or as they may be amended in “Threshold Limit Values, Occupational Health Regulation
No. 3,” or by the minimum standards of all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, standards, and guidelines.
(b) The storage, use and transportation of hazardous chemicals, poisonous gases, acids or radioactive material in any district shall be subject to
approval of the Fire Marshal of the City and in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, standards, and guidelines.
Sec. 8.12.005 Smoke, particulate matter and other air contaminants
(a) All uses within the City shall operate in compliance with the most current regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) pertaining to the control of air pollution and any other applicable regulatory governmental agency.
(b) Dust and air contaminants from open storage. Open storage and open processing operations including on-site transportation movements which
are the source of windborne dust or other particulate matter, or which involve dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment such as
used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage, or sandblasting shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate air
contaminants so generated are not transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four
grains per 1,000 cubic feet of air. All other visible emissions of air contaminants shall conform to the most current regulations of the TCEQ and any
other applicable regulatory governmental agency.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/526
(c) All operations which involve the emission of particulate matter or other air contaminants shall register with the Fire Marshal before obtaining a
certificate of occupancy.
(d) These regulations apply, as herein provided, to:
(1) Visible emissions from all operations.
(2) Particulate matter from all operations.
(3) Hydrocarbons and carbonyl, including but not limited to that from incineration or salvage operations.
(4) Sulfur dioxide from all operations. No operation shall cause, create or allow any emission of sulfur compounds calculated as sulfur
dioxide from any emission point in excess of 2,000 ppm (vol.).
(5) Fumes and gases from all operations.
(6) Air contaminants which can cause injury, detriment, or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public, or which
endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any such person or to the public, or which cause or have a natural tendency to cause
injury or damage to business or property.
Sec. 8.12.006 Fire and explosive or hazardous matter
All uses and operation involving the use, storage or handling of explosive or flammable and hazardous matter shall be in compliance with the fire
protection code of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended and shall be subject to approval by the Fire
Marshal and nothing herein specified shall mitigate, interfere with or alter any provision of the fire protection code as it may apply to the use, storage
or handling of explosives or flammable and/or hazardous material.
Sec. 8.12.007 Allowable displacement of earthborn vibrations
(a) No operation or use in the City shall at any time create earthborn vibration which when measured at the bounding property line of the source
operation exceed the limits of displacement set forth in Column I of the following table. Nor may it cause, at any single-family, duplex or
multifamily residence district boundary, continuous earthborn vibrations higher than the limits set forth in Column II.
(b) Discrete pulses that do not exceed one hundred (100) impulses per minute may not produce higher than twice the displacement specified in the
table. As used in this section, the term “displacement” means the maximum amount of motion in any direction as determined by a three component
simultaneous measuring system. “Three-component measuring system” means instrumentation that can measure earthborn vibrations in a horizontal,
as well as, in a vertical plane.
(c) Vibration regulations: Any operation or activity shall not cause earthborn vibrations in excess of the values set forth in the table below. Column
I shall apply at or beyond the lot line; Column II shall apply at or beyond a residence district boundary line. Vibration shall be expressed as
displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three-component measuring system.
Frequency
(cycles per second)
I. Displacement
(inches)
II. Displacement
(inches)
0 to 10 .0008 .0004
10 to 20 .0005 .0002
20 to 30 .0002 .0001
30 to 40 .0002 .0001
40 and over .0001 .0001
(d) Impact vibrations, that is, discrete pulses that do not exceed one hundred (100) pulses per minute, shall not cause in excess of twice the
displacement values above.
(e) As used in this section, the term “displacement” means the maximum amount of motion in any direction as determined by a three component
simultaneous measuring system. “Three- component measuring system” means instrumentation that can measure earthborn vibrations in a horizontal,
as well as, vertical plane.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/526
Sec. 8.12.008 Electromagnetic interference
No use or operation shall be conducted which adversely affects the performance of electromagnetic devices or receivers of electronic signals,
including televisions and radios, outside of the boundaries of the property on which the operation occurs.
Sec. 8.12.009 Heat and glare
No light or general industrial use may cause heat at the lot line so intense as to be a hazard.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1 adopted 11/9/17)
CHAPTER 9
HUMAN RESOURCES
ARTICLE 9.01 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 9.02 RESERVED†
ARTICLE 9.03 EMERGENCY ACTION BY OFFICER, AGENT OR EMPLOYEE OF THE CITY
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations is hereby authorized to act in such a reasonable and prudent
manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and to the extent to which
the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this article. Neither the city nor the
employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. (1998 Code, art. 8.1100)
ARTICLE 9.04 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.04.001–9.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Providers of Professional Services
Sec. 9.04.031 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended.
Business. A corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm, organization or other legal entity carrying on business.
Confidential information. Information which by law or practice is not available to the public.
Controlling interest. A financial interest in business which is greater than twenty (20) percent.
Financial interest. Any interest which may yield, directly or indirectly, any monetary or other material benefit to a professional or to the
professional's spouse or minor children.
Official act. An official decision, approval, disapproval or recommendation.
Professional. Every licensed professional (attorneys, architects, engineers, etc.) who provides services to the city and is paid by the city for such
services on a fee or contract basis. Such term does not include salaried employees of the city who are also licensed professionals.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.1201)
Sec. 9.04.032 Conflict of interest
(a) A professional shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any official act directly affecting a business in which he or she has a
financial interest. No professional shall acquire a financial interest at a time when he or she believes or has reason to believe that it will be directly
affected by his or her official act.
(b) Every professional who has a financial interest which he or she believes or has reason to believe may be affected by an official act taken within
the scope of his or her professional service to the city shall disclose the precise nature and value of such interest. The disclosures shall be made in
writing to the City Secretary at the time the conflict occurs and during the month of January every year thereafter while such affected financial
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/526
interest continues. The information on the disclosures, except for the valuations attributed to the reported interests, shall be made available by the
City Secretary for inspection; provided, however, the valuation shall be confidential. The filing of disclosures pursuant to this section is a condition
of entering upon and continuing to provide professional services to the city.
(c) The city shall not enter into any contract with a business in which a professional providing services to the city has a controlling interest,
involving services or property of a value in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) unless the contract is made after public notice and competitive
bidding.
(d) Any purchase order or contract entered into by the city with a business in which a professional providing services to the city has a controlling
interest is void if the professional failed to comply with the provisions of this section prior to the city entering into such contract or purchase order.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.1202)
Sec. 9.04.033 Confidential information
No professional shall, before or after termination of his relationship with the city, disclose or use confidential information acquired by virtue of his or
her employment by the city, provided that disclosure may be made when required by state law, federal law or by a court order. (1998 Code, sec.
8.1203)
Sec. 9.04.034 Penalty for violation
Any professional violating any provision of this article shall be fined as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code of ordinances for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1998 Code, sec. 8.1204)
Secs. 9.04.035–9.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. City Officials and Employees
Sec. 9.04.061 Gifts, relationships and disclosure requirements
(a) Chapter 176 of the Texas Local Government Code pertaining to gifts, relationships and disclosure requirements of elected city officials and city
employees is hereby adopted in its entirety.
(b) Chapter 176 of the Texas Local Government Code requires the filing of a conflicts disclosure statement when an elected city official or city
employee receives one or more gifts, as that term is defined therein, that have an aggregate value of more than $250.00 in a twelve-month period and
that same $250.00 is hereby established as the maximum aggregate amount a city elected official or city employee may receive in one or more gifts
in a twelve-month period preceding the date that the official or employee becomes aware that the gift(s) is from persons or businesses that do
business with the city or that enjoy a franchise, privilege, license or easement from the city.
(Ordinance CO10-08-03-13-3A adopted 3/13/08)
Sec. 9.04.062 Prohibited gift amount
An elected or appointed officer, board or commission member or employee of the city who exercises discretion in connection with contracts,
purchases, payment, claims or other pecuniary transactions of the city is prohibited from soliciting, accepting or agreeing to accept gift or benefit
from a person or entity he knows is interested in or likely to become interested in any contract, purchase, payment, claim or transaction involving the
exercise of his discretion which would be in violation of title 8, chapter 36 of the Texas Penal Code as hereafter may be amended.
Sec. 9.04.063 Reporting of gifts
(a) All gifts and benefits that are within the provisions of section 9.04.061 received by an elected city official or a city employee shall be reported
to the City Secretary annually during the last week in October, 2008 and annually thereafter.
(b) For purposes of the reporting of gifts in accordance with section 9.04.061 a gift is defined as anything reasonably regarded as having a
pecuniary gain or advantage and specifically does not include but is not limited to the following:
(1) Any gift or benefit of such a limited value as given or being of such a condition, type or character that no reasonable person could
believe that it would have the effect of influencing any decision making process in favor of the donor;
(2) Gifts given on special occasions between employees and/or elected officials;
(3) Gifts or books, pamphlets, articles or other such materials, to the extent allowed by law, which contain information directly related
to the official job duties of an employee or elected official and are used in performing his or her job duties;
(4) A gift or other economic benefit conferred on account of kinship or a personal, professional, or business relationship independent of
the official status of the recipient, provided acceptance of the gift or economic benefit will not violate this policy or any law (e.g. sections
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/526
825.0032, 572.001, 572.051, and 660.016 of the Texas Government Code) or create a conflict under this policy or under the common-law
conflict of interest doctrine;
(5) Receptions and business meals and other permitted gifts or economic benefits may be attended or accepted to the extent that they
violate no law. Section 572.051 of the Texas Government Code prohibits acceptance of gifts, favors or services that may “reasonably tend
to influence” or that the employee “knows or should know are intended to influence his official conduct” and also prohibits benefits “for
official action in favor of another”;
(6) Reimbursement of reasonable expenses for travel authorized in accordance with city policies;
(7) A public award or reward for meritorious service or professional achievement, provided that the award or reward is reasonable in
light of the occasion;
(8) A loan from a lending institution made in its regular course of business on the same terms generally available to the public;
(9) Admission to an event in which the city official or employee is participating in connection with official duties;
(10) Campaign contributions received and reported in compliance with the Texas Election Code.
(c) The City Secretary shall prepare and make available the reporting form that will include the date, value, contributor and accumulated total
amount of the reportable gifts.
(Ordinance CO35-08-06-05-3D adopted 6/5/08)
ARTICLE 9.05 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 9.06 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 9.07 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 9.08 RESERVED†
ARTICLE 9.09 INDEMNIFICATION AND LEGAL DEFENSE OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
For the purposes of this article the term “officer” shall include any elected or appointed official of the city; and the term “employee” shall include all
employees of the city. Among the duties of the City Attorney shall be that of representing as counsel, without charge to the persons involved, any city
officer or employee in connection with any claim, suit for damages, or other action against such person arising in connection with the performance by
such officer or employee of his or her public duties; provided that such employee or officer may have his or her own counsel to assist in the defense,
at the expense of the employee or officer. Any officer or employee who is held liable for the payment of any claims or damages, by way of judgment
or settlement, shall be entitled to indemnification of the city, where the acts resulting in such liability were done in good faith, without malice, and
within the scope of authority of the employee or officer. Nothing in this article shall be construed as waiving the city's defense of governmental
immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought against the city or such officer or employee. The provisions of this article shall apply
only where the city has been given notice of any actions brought against any city employee or officer, based upon any action of such employee or
officer within the scope of this authority as such. Nothing in this article or in any ordinance of the city, and nothing in any agreement with the City
Attorney shall be construed to require the City Attorney to provide legal services in any manner which would cause the attorney to be involved in a
conflict of interest. (1998 Code, art. 8.900)
ARTICLE 9.10 PARTICIPATION IN THE TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.10.001 Authorized
The City Council, on behalf of the city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now
existing and those hereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act. (1998 Code, sec. 8.1001)
Sec. 9.10.002 Notification
The City Manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate
and have the employees of the city covered in said system. (1998 Code, sec. 8.1002)
Sec. 9.10.003 Membership
Each person who becomes an employee of a participating city on or after the effective date of participation of such city whose position shall require
more than 1,000 hours per year shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his or her employment. (1998
Code, sec. 8.1003)
Sec. 9.10.004 Deposits
In accordance with the provisions of the TMRS Act, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service
of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of seven percent (7%) of their individual earnings. (1998 Code,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/526
sec. 8.1004; Ordinance G-01-10-11-9.A. adopted 10/11/01)
Sec. 9.10.005 Prior service credits
Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed “prior service credit” (as defined in section 63.101 of the TMRS Act) at the rate of one
hundred percent (100%) of the “base credit” of such member, calculated in the manner prescribed in section 63.105 of said act. (1998 Code, sec.
8.1005)
Sec. 9.10.006 Current service annuity reserve
For each month of current service rendered to this city by each of its employees who are members of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city
will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that is one hundred percent
(100%) of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the
municipality accumulation fund. (1998 Code, sec. 8.1006)
Sec. 9.10.007 Remittance of contributions
The City Secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the
city contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said
board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of this
city the prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service
compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required
of the city under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System. (1998 Code, sec. 8.1007)
Sec. 9.10.008 Supplemental death benefits fund
The city hereby elects to participate in the Supplemental Death Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System for the purpose of
providing in-service death benefits for each of the city's employees who are members of said system, and the purpose of providing post-retirement
death benefits for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of the city, in the amounts and on the terms provided for in sections
62.004, 64.601 through 64.405, 65.314, 65.502 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statues of Texas, 1925, as amended. (1998 Code, sec. 8.1008)
Sec. 9.10.009 Granting additional benefits
Pursuant to the provisions of sections 64.202(f), 64.204, 64.405, 64.406 and 64.410 of Subtitle G of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas,
1925, as amended by the 70th Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular Session, which Subtitle shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the
City adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system
shall herein be referred to as the “System”):
(1) Any employee of this City who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the
member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in that System performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have
participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under section 64.202(f) of the TMRS Act.
(2) If a “vested member,” as the term is defined in section 64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die before becoming eligible for service
retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's
accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed with the
system, elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of said section 64.204(b). If
the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service
retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during
the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint
and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving
spouse.
(3) At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (2) applies may, upon
written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu
of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly
benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the
estate of such spouse.
(4) The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at
the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(5) Any employee of this City who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a “standard occupational disability
retirement annuity” under section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an optional occupational disability retirement annuity under section 64.410
of the TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of
the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to said board of trustees:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/526
(A) That the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment;
(B) That the disability is likely to be permanent; and
(C) That the member should be retired.
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of section 64.409 of the TMRS Act.
(6) The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5) above are in lieu of the disability
program heretofore provided for under sections 64.301 to 64.308 of the TMRS Act.
(Ordinance CO12-17-12-07-E1 adopted 12/7/17)
Sec. 9.10.010 Authorization of updated service credits (1990)
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each
member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st
day of January, 1989, by reason of service in the employment of the city and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with
said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 63.402 of said title) in an
amount that is one hundred percent (100%) of the “Base Updated Service Credit” of the member, (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section
63.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit or antecedent service
credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in section 63.601 of said title, any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is eligible for
updated service credits on the basis of service with this city and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another
participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1985, shall be credited with
updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said 63.601.
(c) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 63.401 of said title, the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal
Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date
aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(d) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service credits granted hereby shall be and
become effective on the 1st day of January, 1990.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.1010)
Sec. 9.10.011 Increase in current service annuity reserve (1990)
Effective January 1, 1990, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System, the City will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that
is 200% of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the City's account in the
municipality accumulation fund. (Ordinance CO12-17-12-07-E1 adopted 12/7/17)
Sec. 9.10.012 Authorization of updated service credits (1991)
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.403 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended,
each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on
the 1st day of January, 1990, by reason of service in the employment of the city and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service
with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of said title) in
an amount that is one hundred percent (100%) of the “Base Updated Service Credit” of the member, (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of
section 853.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit or antecedent
service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of said title, any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is eligible for
updated service credits on the basis of service with this city and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another
participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1990, shall be credited with
updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said 853.601.
(c) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of said title, the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal
Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date
aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.1012)
Sec. 9.10.013 Authorization of updated service credits (1992)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/526
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code as amended
(hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “System”) who
has current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such
allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system,
shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits
on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1992, shall be credited with updated service credits
pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future
grants under this section.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) percent of the “Base Updated Service Credit” of the
member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special service credit, or antecedent
service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(e) The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1992, subject to approval by the board of trustees of
the system. An allowance shall be made hereunder on January l of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e)
of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in
subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(f) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by
employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section
on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.1013)
Sec. 9.10.014 Authorization of restricted prior service credit
(a) On terms and conditions set out in sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as
the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “System”) who is now or hereafter
becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any incorporated
city or town in the United States or of any council of governments in this state for which the person has not otherwise received credit service in the
system, including combined service credit under Chapter 803. The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length of service
requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in
other computations, including computation of updated service credits.
(b) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action under said section 853.305 while still an
employee of this city.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.1014)
Sec. 9.10.015 Authorization of updated service credits (1998)
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended, (hereinafter
referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “System”) who has current
service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by
reason of service in the employment of the city and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is
hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits
on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance
shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said section
853.601, both as to the initial grant thereunder and all future grants under this section.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “Base Updated Service Credit” of the member (calculated as
provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed thereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or
antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(e) The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1998, subject to approval by the board of trustees of
the system. An allowance shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e)
of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in
subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/526
(f) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by
employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section
on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(g) Effective January 1, 1998, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who are members of the Texas
Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or her retirement,
a sum that is 200% of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account
in the municipality accumulation fund.
(1998 Code, sec. 8.1015)
Sec. 9.10.016 Authorization of updated service credits (2002)
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of subtitle G of title 8, Government Code, as amended, (hereinafter
referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar
year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited
service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” [as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of the
TMRS Act].
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits
on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance
shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustments as set forth in said section
853.601, both as to the initial grant thereunder and all future grants under this section.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “Base Updated Service Credit” of the member [calculated as
provided is subsection (c)] of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act.
(d) Each updated service credit be hereby allowed and provided for shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior
service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(e) The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2002, subject to approval by the board of trustees of
the system. An allowance shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e)
of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in
subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(f) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by
employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section
on the full amount of the person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(g) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, the updated service credits granted hereby shall be and become effective on January
1, 2002.
(Ordinance G-01-10-11-9.A. adopted 10/11/01)
Sec. 9.10.017 Increase in retirement annuities
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 854.203 and 853.404 of subtitle G of title 8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter
referred to as the “TMRS Act”), the City hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable
by the System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the City under current service annuities and prior service annuities
arising from service by such employees to the City. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously
granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective
date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 50% of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for
All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13
months before the effective date of the increase under this section.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the
original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the City and of
its account in the benefit accumulation fund of the system.
(f) Dates of increases. The initial increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2018, subject to approval by the Board
of Trustees of the system. An increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1st of each subsequent year until this section
ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the System
has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, and provided further that, as to such subsequent year, the
City has an ordinance in effect that provides for a simultaneous increase in updated service credits as that term is used in the TMRS Act.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/526
(g) Remove maximum contribution rate limit. Pursuant to section 855.407(g) of the TMRS Act the City hereby elects to make future normal and
prior service contributions to its account in the benefit accumulation fund of the system at such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the
City to employees who are members of the System, as the System's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the
amortization period determined as applicable to the City under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are
to be paid out of the City's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of City
contributions.
(h) Effective date. Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the System, this section shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January
2018.
(Ordinance CO12-17-12-07-E1 adopted 12/7/17)
ARTICLE 9.11 MUNICIPAL CIVIL SERVICE*
Sec. 9.11.001 Implementation
Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code relating to municipal civil service is hereby implemented. (Ordinance CO44-03-10-23-10.A.
adopted 10/23/03)
Sec. 9.11.002 Classifications and number of positions
(a) Police Department. Effective October 4, 2018, the classifications and the number of positions in each classification for the Police Department
are as follows:
(1) Assistant Chief 1
(2) Commander 2
(3) Lieutenant 5
(4) Sergeant 14
(5) Corporal 16
(6) Police Officer 58
(Ordinance CO02-18-10-04-E2 adopted 10/4/18)
(b) Fire Department. Effective October 04, 2018, the number of positions in each classification for the Fire Department shall be as follows:
(1) Assistant Fire Chief*** 2
(2) Battalion Chief** 5
(3) Lieutenant* 20
(4) Driver/Engineer 15
(5) Firefighter 42
* A member of the Fire Department classified as a Lieutenant will be appointed as a Fire Inspector.
** A member of the Fire Department classified as a Battalion Chief will be appointed as the Assistant Fire Marshall
*** A member of the Fire Department classified as an Assistant Chief will be appointed as the Fire Marshal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/526
(Ordinance CO03-18-10-04-E3 adopted 10/4/18)
Sec. 9.11.003 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 9.11.003 pertaining to the special appointments by the Chief of Police and deriving from Ordinance CO01-12-10-25-C1, sec. 2, adopted 10/25/12,
was repealed and deleted in its entirety by Ordinance CO42-16-05-12-C1 adopted 5/12/16.
Sec. 9.11.004 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 9.11.004 pertaining to educational incentive or certification pay, was repealed and deleted in its entirety by Ordinance CO28-17-03-23-E1 adopted
3/23/17. Prior to the deletion, this section derived from the following: Ordinance CO61-04-10-21-7B adopted 10/21/04 and Ordinance CO03-09-10-29-C1 adopted 10/29/09.
Sec. 9.11.005 Bilingual and sign language pay
Effective October 1, 2009, the city shall pay the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month to each officer who demonstrates proficiency and is
certified either in Spanish or sign language (ASL) through a testing process. A committee made up of two (2) city officials and two (2) association
members shall establish the standards for eligibility for certification in order to receive the incentive for language skills in Spanish or sign language.
An employee who wishes to be certified in Spanish or sign language must pay the initial fee for the certification process. This fee shall be reimbursed
to the employee by the city, upon receipt of notice that the appropriate testing organization has granted a certificate of proficiency. An employee shall
receive only one incentive payment per month for Spanish or sign language proficiency. (Ordinance CO03-09-10-29-C1 adopted 10/29/09)
Sec. 9.11.006 Wellness program incentive pay
(a) Effective March 1, 2016, the City Council authorizes wellness program incentive pay in the amount of $50.00 per month to each sworn
member of the Police Department pursuant to General Order 2.12.2 Wellness Program, with the incentives being payable beginning the calendar
month following the eligible member's qualifying assessment score.
(b) Only an employee in the Police Department covered by Civil Service, including a probationary Police Officer, is eligible to receive incentive
pay pursuant to this section. The Chief of the Department is not eligible for additional compensation.
(Ordinance CO43-16-05-12-C2 adopted 5/12/16)
CHAPTER 10
TAXATION
ARTICLE 10.01 PROPERTY TAX*
Sec. 10.01.001 Collection expense authorized
Property taxes for 1983 and prior years that remain delinquent on July 1, 1984 shall incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection, said
penalty to be in the amount of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due the City, which fee shall be an authorized
collection expense. Property taxes that remain delinquent on July 1st of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an additional penalty to
defray costs of collection, said penalty to be in the amount of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due the City, which fee
shall be an authorized collection expense.
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 302.001.
Sec. 10.01.002 Exemption for elderly or disabled authorized
The residence homestead property tax exemption for individuals who are disabled shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and the exemption
for individuals who are sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall be thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00).
State law reference—Homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
Sec. 10.01.003 Exemption for homestead authorized
Beginning for the tax year commencing on January 1, 2018, the residence homestead exemption property tax within the City shall be 1% of the
appraised value of the individual's residence homestead or a minimum of $10,000.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/526
Sec. 10.01.004 Penalties and interest
Penalties and interest at the maximum rates allowed by state law shall be assessed against all delinquent property taxes.
(Ordinance CO24-18-04-26-E2 adopted 4/26/18)
ARTICLE 10.02 SALES TAX*
Sec. 10.02.001 Local sales tax adopted
A local sales tax of one (1) percent was adopted by the voters of the city on January 9, 1973. (1998 Code, sec. 1.501)
Sec. 10.02.002 Local sales tax retained on residential gas and electricity
The city, by majority vote of its governing body, hereby votes to retain the taxes authorized by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act (Article 1066c,
Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage or other consumption of
gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by section 6 of House Bill No. 1, Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second Called Session effective
October 1, 1979. (1998 Code, sec. 1.502)
Sec. 10.02.003 Sales tax on telecommunications services
A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications
services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates.
If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. The application
of the exemption provided for in Article 1066c, section 4B(a), V.A.T.C.S. is hereby repealed by the city as authorized by section 4B(b) thereof. The
rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the
legislature of the State of Texas. The City Secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States registered or certified mail a copy
of this section along with a copy of the minutes of the City Council's vote and discussion of this section. This section shall become effective as of
October 1, 1987. (1998 Code, sec. 1.503)
State law reference—Authority of municipality to impose tax on the sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.210.
ARTICLE 10.03 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 10.03.001 Levy; rate; exceptions
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon any person paying the cost of occupancy in any hotel where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars
($2.00) or more per day. Such tax shall be equal to seven percent (7%) of the total cost of occupancy paid.
(b) No tax shall be imposed under this Article upon a permanent resident.
Sec. 10.03.002 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel, and every person facilitating occupancy in a hotel by collecting and remitting to
the owner, operator, manager, or controller of a hotel any portion of the cost of occupancy, shall collect the tax imposed in section 10.03.001 for the
City.
Sec. 10.03.003 Payment and reports
(a) Every person required to collect the tax imposed by this Article shall pay all such tax collected in a quarterly period to the City Manager or
their designee by the last day of the first calendar month following each quarterly period. Payment shall become delinquent on the first day of the
second calendar month following each quarterly period.
(b) Every person required to collect the tax imposed by this Article shall, by the date specified for payment under subsection (a), file a report with
the City Manager or their designee on the form prescribed by the City showing the cost of occupancy paid for all room occupancies in the preceding
quarter, the amount of tax collected on the City's behalf on such occupancies, and any other information as the City Manager may reasonably require,
along with records establishing the validity of any exemption claimed. They shall also submit a copy of the monthly or quarterly report filed with the
state comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax.
Sec. 10.03.004 Rules and regulations
The City Manager shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this Article and
shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable them to determine the correctness of any report filed as required
by this Article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this Article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/526
Sec. 10.03.005 Use of revenue
(a) The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this Article may be used only to promote tourism and the convention
and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following:
(1) The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of
convention or civic center facilities (as such is defined by Texas Tax Code, section 351.001, as amended);
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials of the registration of convention delegates or registrants;
(3) Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the
City or its vicinity;
(4) The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama,
folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures,
radio, television, tape and sound recordings, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these
major art forms;
(5) Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to
encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums which are located in the City or its vicinity that
would be frequented by tourists, convention delegates, or other visitors to the City;
(6) Expenses, including promotion expenses, directly related to a sporting event in which the majority of participants are tourists who
substantially increase economic activity at hotels and motels within the City or its vicinity;
(7) A transportation system used to transport tourists from hotels in and near the City to:
(A) The commercial center of the City;
(B) A convention center in the City;
(C) Other hotels in or near the City; and
(D) Tourist attractions in or near the City, provided that the transportation system is owned and operated by the City or privately
owned and operated but partially financed by the City;
(8) Signage directing the public to sights and attractions that are visited frequently by hotel guests in the City; and
(9) All other uses as may be hereafter authorized by law.
(b) Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended only in a manner which directly enhances and promotes tourism and the
convention and hotel industry as hereinbefore delineated. Such revenue shall not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental
operations of the City which are not directly related to promoting the hotel and convention industry or tourism in the City.
Sec. 10.03.006 Violations; offense; and fine
If any person required by the provisions of this Article to collect the tax imposed in this Article, make reports as required and pay to the City
Manager the tax imposed in this Article, shall fail to collect such tax, shall fail to file such report, or shall fail to pay such tax, such person shall be
charged with a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this Code for each day that a violation
exists, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Sec. 10.03.007 Penalties and interest
(a) Any person failing to file a report as required in this Article or failing to pay to the City Manager or their designee the tax as imposed in this
Article when such report or payment is due, shall forfeit five percent (5%) of the amount due as a penalty. In the event any delinquent tax or report is
not paid or filed within thirty (30) days of the due date, an additional five percent (5%) of such tax shall be due as a penalty. The penalty shall never
be less than one dollar ($1.00).
(b) Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum.
(c) In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may pursue other remedies and penalties as provided by Texas Tax Code section 351.004,
as amended, and other state law.
Sec. 10.03.008 Definitions
Cost of occupancy. All amounts paid by a person as consideration for the use or possession of, or the right to use or possession of, a room, bed,
space, or any other facility used for sleeping in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement. The term
shall include the cost of all conveniences customarily provided by the hotel in connection with sleeping accommodations and the cost of any service
fees paid to any person to secure the right to use or possession of the sleeping accommodations. The cost of occupancy shall not include the cost of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/526
food served by the hotel, nor the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except for those services related to cleaning and
readying the room for use or possession.
Hotel. A building or any other facility in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, lodging house, inn, roominghouse, bed and breakfast, trailer house, trailer motel, and shortterm
rental. The term does not include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, university or college dormitories, or oilfield portable units, as defined
by Texas Tax Code section 152.001, as amended.
Permanent resident. A person who has the right to use or possess a room, bed, space, or any other sleeping facility in a hotel for at least 30
consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period.
Person. Shall have the meaning ascribed by section 1.01.004 of this Code, as amended.
Quarter or quarterly period. Quarters of the calendar year, the first quarter being January 1–March 31, the second quarter being April 1–June 30, the
third quarter being July 1–September 30, and the fourth quarter being October 1–December 31.
Short-term rental. The rental of all or part of a residential property to a person who is not a permanent resident.
Tax. The hotel occupancy tax levied in this Article pursuant to chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(Ordinance CO23-18-04-26-E1 adopted 4/26/18)
ARTICLE 10.04 CREATION OF SPECIAL DISTRICTS
(a) The city shall not consent to the creation of any special taxing or public financing district within the city's corporate limits or the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction unless the City Council finds:
(1) That there are significant special circumstances or conditions affecting the property proposed to be included in the district that
justify an exception to the city's general development policy;
(2) That there are special development considerations affecting the proposed development that shall result in increased development
costs over the usual and customary development costs within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction; and
(3) That the creation of the special taxing or public financing district shall result in higher quality public infrastructure, shall further a
public purpose, and shall provide a public benefit.
(b) The city shall not consent to the creation of any special taxing or public financing district within the city's corporate limits unless, in addition to
the findings set forth in subsection (a) above, the City Council finds:
(1) That the land within the district shall be developed to a higher development standard than that required under the city's applicable
development ordinances;
(2) That the quality of the development over time shall be assured through restrictive covenants applicable to all of the property within
the district that are:
(A) Approved by the City Council; and
(B) Enforceable by a mandatory homeowners' association with assessment power, which the city may compel to perform its
enforcement duties;
(3) That the roads, parks, and utility infrastructure within the district shall generally be of higher quality than that required under
applicable city development ordinances and regulations, so as to reduce operation and maintenance costs to the city over time;
(4) That the creation of the district shall contribute to the economic development of the city and improve the quality of life for residents
of the city; and
(5) That any loss of ad valorem property taxes incurred by the city as a result of the creation of a district shall be made up through the
collection of other taxes generated within such district, particularly sales and use taxes.
(c) The developer of any land included in a district shall provide a larger quantity and higher quality of park and recreational amenities than
otherwise required by city ordinances. All recreational and park amenities located in a district shall be open to all residents of the city.
(d) No gated or limited access residential communities shall be permitted in a district.
(e) The developer of any land included in a district shall demonstrate its financial ability to complete the proposed development in a manner
acceptable to the city, including fiscal posting if required.
(f) No district may construct or bond any water or wastewater treatment facilities. No on-site sewage treatment facilities shall be permitted in any
district. Any district approved by the city shall be a “city-service district” and all water and wastewater services shall be provided by the city on a
retail basis.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/526
(g) Any district created shall contract and agree with the city that it shall become the alter ego of the city for the purpose of constructing and
financing any water, wastewater, and drainage infrastructure within its boundaries. Upon completion of each portion of the water, wastewater, and
drainage facilities, those facilities shall be conveyed by the developer and/or the district to the city for ownership, operation, and maintenance,
subject to the right of the developer to be reimbursed by the district for its funds advanced for the purpose of constructing such facilities, to the extent
permitted by law and further subject to the provisions of this article, the terms of any consent agreement approved by the city, and the administrative
rules of any applicable state commission.
(h) The developer of any land included within a district shall dedicate any easements or rights-of-way required for district purposes or required by
the city for streets or utility facilities within the proposed development at no cost to the district or the city.
(i) Upon approval of the creation of any municipal utility district, the developer and its successors shall strictly comply with sections 50.301–
50.303 of the Texas Water Code [sic], which require certain information to be provided to all purchasers of property within the district, including
specific notice that the utility infrastructure within the district shall be financed through the issuance of bonds. In addition, the developer and its
successors shall provide a supplemental notice advising the purchasers of the overlapping tax rates of the city and the district. Additionally, the
district shall submit to the city a complete copy of each application to the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (the “commission”) for
the approval of a project or bonds at the same time that application is submitted to the commission.
(j) The maximum amount of district bonds, the purposes for which bonds may be issued, and any fees to be paid by the district associated with
those bonds shall be specified in the city ordinance granting consent to the creation of the district. The terms, provisions, and issuance of, all bonds
shall be subject to the review and approval by the city. No bonds shall be issued by any district at any time that the developer or the district is in
default in the performance of its obligations under this article or any consent agreement approved by the city. No bond anticipation notes shall be
issued by a district unless issuance thereof is approved by the city.
(k) The developer shall submit a copy of any proposition proposed to be placed on any district ballot for the approval of bonds to the city for
review and approval at least ninety (90) days before the election is called.
(l) A district created hereunder shall file a copy of each proposed district budget or budget amendment with the city within fifteen (15) days after
approval or adoption. A district created hereunder shall file a copy of its annual audit with the city within 120 days after the end of its fiscal year.
(m) Unless and until the city dissolves a district, the district's bonds, as to both principal and interest, shall be and remain obligations solely of that
district and shall never be construed to be obligations or indebtedness of the city.
(n) The developer of any land included within a district shall pay the city's usual and customary fees and charges for all city reviews, permits,
approvals or inspections required under applicable city ordinances, or required to establish compliance with the terms of any consent agreement
approved by the city. No city fees shall be financed through the issuance of bonds, and no reimbursement of any city fees shall be paid from the
proceeds of bonds issued by a district.
(o) An applicant who desires that the City Council consider the creation of a district shall submit to the city an application fee in the amount of
$15,000.00 before commencing discussions or negotiations with the city over the possible creation of a district. The City Attorney shall promulgate
an application form to be approved by the City Council. An applicant shall also pay all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, legal fees
and expenses, incurred by the city in connection with the review, evaluation, approval, rejection, and/or creation of any proposed district.
Additionally, the applicant shall pay all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to legal fees and expenses, incurred by the city in connection
with the negotiation of any consent agreement concerning the district and the review and approval of all district bonds. The city shall submit periodic
statements to the applicant for payment of fees and expenses incurred hereunder, which statements shall be due and payable as directed by city within
thirty (30) days after issuance thereof. The city shall apply the application fee as a credit to the final statement submitted to the applicant after
creation of a district. Failure to timely pay any billing statement submitted by the city to an applicant shall terminate all negotiations concerning the
creation of a district and consideration thereof by the City Council.
(p) The city shall have the authority to assess and collect ad valorem taxes against the land within any district and any improvements at the city's
full ad valorem tax rate.
(q) No variance to city ordinances shall be permitted in any district created hereunder. However, the city may adopt a master regulating plan or
code for the development of land included within a district, and such master regulating plan or code may establish alternative standards for the
development of land included within a district.
(r) All public facilities and infrastructure improvements within a district shall be designed in accordance with all ordinances and regulations
adopted by the City Council from time to time, as well as any other governmental authority with jurisdiction.
(s) Development of all land located within a district shall occur in accordance with all ordinances and regulations adopted by the City Council
from time to time.
(t) All facilities shall be constructed, all construction contracts awarded, and payment and performance bonds obtained in accordance with the
general law applicable to utility districts. Each construction contract for district facilities shall require:
(1) A one-year contractor's warranty;
(2) At a minimum, the insurance coverage required by the city for public works contracts of a similar nature, and that the city be named
as an additional insured; and
(3) That the contractor provide statutory worker's compensation insurance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/526
The city public works director shall be notified of and invited to attend all pre-construction conferences and bid openings for all district facilities.
(u) Upon completion of any district facilities, the district engineer shall certify that the facilities in question have been completed in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the city and shall certify that all bills have been paid. Upon completion of any district facilities, the district
shall provide the city with as-built construction drawings of the facilities, in the format and quantity required by the city, and all manuals and other
documents or materials in the possession of the developer or the district that are related or beneficial to the operation of the facilities.
(Ordinance O2000-42 adopted 12/14/00)
ARTICLE 10.05 TOURISM BOARD
Sec. 10.05.001 Establishment, ratification, and confirmation
(a) There is hereby established the tourism board of the city which shall be composed of seven (7) members. A minimum of three (3) board
members shall be residents of the city. The other members shall either be residents of the city, the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, or a
representative of a business which contributes to the tourism industry in the city. The members shall serve staggered two-year terms with oddnumbered
seats running from August 1st through July 31st of odd-numbered years and even-numbered seats running from August 1st through July
31st of even-numbered years and until their successors have been appointed and qualified.
(b) A board position shall become vacant if the board member fails to attend three (3) consecutive board meetings without being excused by the
board.
(c) It is the public policy of the city that the board reflects a make up of our community and be balanced according to expertise, interest and
geography. Board appointments shall be made without regard to race, sex, religion or national origin.
(d) The board shall adopt bylaws regulating its activities.
Sec. 10.05.002 Roles and responsibilities
(a) The advisory board shall make recommendations to city staff related to the promotion of tourism in the city and expenditures of hotel and
motel tax revenues in accordance with section 351 of the state of tax code. The proposed annual budget shall use the fiscal year adopted by the city.
The City Council may adopt, reject, or modify the proposed annual budget as it deems necessary and proper.
(b) The advisory board shall establish a historic preservation subcommittee consisting of three (3) board members which reside within the city
limits. This subcommittee shall be tasked with identifying and recommending historic preservation projects to generate tourism within the city, make
recommendations regarding the bestowal of historic designations and certifications of appropriateness and other tasks related to the promotion and
preservation of the city's historic assets as outlined in section 11.02.292.
Sec. 10.05.003 Appointments of board replacements
The City Council shall appoint replacements for, or shall reappoint members of the tourism board whose terms expire, and annually thereafter so [to]
make appointments. Appointment hereunder shall be for two (2) years.
Sec. 10.05.004 Filling of vacancies
Vacancies on the board shall be filled by council appointment to complete the term vacated.
Sec. 10.05.005 Election of officers
The board shall elect officers annually from its members at its first meeting after August 1st of each year.
(Ordinance CO06-13-11-07-C2 adopted 11/7/13)
ARTICLE 10.06 TEXAS ENTERPRISE ZONE PROGRAM
Sec. 10.06.001 City's participation in program
The City Council authorizes the city's participation in the Texas Enterprise Zone Program pursuant to the Texas Enterprise Zone Act, chapter 2303 of
the Texas Government Code, summarizes local incentives available, including tax incentives, and designates a liaison for communication with
interested parties. (Ordinance CO24-10-02-25-F2 adopted 2/25/10)
CHAPTER 11
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/526
ZONING
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Division 1. Title, Purposes, and Application
Sec. 11.01.001 Title
The Cedar Park Zoning Ordinance shall be known as, and may be referred to as “the Cedar Park Zoning Ordinance,” “this ordinance,” or “this
chapter.” (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.01.01.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.01.002 Purpose
The zoning regulations are adopted in accordance with Texas Local Government Code (TLGC), chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.01.01.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.01.003 Application
The regulations of this Chapter are adopted and shall be enforced pursuant to TLGC, chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority. All of the following
are subject to the applicable requirements of this Chapter, and may require one (1) or more development permits:
A. The use of any building, structure, land, or water, including:
1. New uses; and
2. Continuations, structural alterations or enlargements of, additions to, changes in, and relocation of existing uses (which may be
subject to Article 11.07, Nonconformities).
B. The construction, material alteration, repair, relocation, or demolition of buildings or structures.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.01.01.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.01.004–11.01.030 Reserved
Division 2. Jurisdiction and Compliance
Sec. 11.01.031 Jurisdiction
All provisions of this Chapter apply within the corporate limits of the City, as now and hereafter amended. (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A,
sec. 11.01.02.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.01.032 Compliance required
All land, buildings, structures, or appurtenances located within the City, which are occupied, used, erected, altered, or removed, shall be in
conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land, building, structure, or appurtenance is located as
provided in this Chapter. (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.01.02.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.01.033 State and federal law
Unless indicated otherwise, all references to federal, state, and local law shall mean the referenced law in force and effect on the effective date of this
Chapter and as thereafter amended, and shall include, without limitation, all applicable legal regulations, requirements, orders, ordinances, codes,
rules, standards, and guidelines of any nature whatsoever. (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.01.02.03, adopted 11/9/17)
ARTICLE 11.02 ZONING DISTRICTS AND LAND USES
Division 1. Zoning Districts
Sec. 11.02.001 Purpose and applicability
Article 11.02, Zoning Districts and Land Uses:
A. Establishes zoning districts, which provide development standards for each district and are shown on the official zoning map,
section 11.02.003, Official Zoning Map;
B. Defines and regulates land uses as either permanent or temporary; and
C. Defines and regulates each land use as a permitted use, conditional use, special use, or prohibited use within one (1) or more districts
as defined in section 11.02.062, Legend.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.01.01, adopted 11/9/17)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/526
Sec. 11.02.002 Zoning districts
A. District classification. The zoning districts are categorized into 23 different zoning district classifications, which are stated below and described
in table 11.02.002, Zoning District Transitions and Purposes. The classifications include:
1. Interim district:
a. Development Reserve (DR).
2. Residential districts:
a. Estate Residential (ES);
b. Suburban Residential (SR);
c. Semi-Urban Residential (SU);
d. Urban Residential (UR); and
e. Multifamily Residential (MF).
3. Nonresidential districts:
a. Neighborhood Business (NB);
b. Local Business (LB);
c. General Business (GB);
d. Professional Office (PO);
e. Heavy Commercial (HC);
f. Light Industrial (LI);
g. Heavy Industrial (HI);
h. Hospital (H);
i. Public Services (PS);
j. Open Space Greenbelt (OG); and
k. Open Space Recreation (OR).
4. Mixed use districts:
a. Mixed Use (MU);
b. Town Center (TC); and
c. Planning Area (PA).
5. Overlay and special districts:
a. Conditional Overlay (CO);
b. Entertainment Center (EC); and
c. Planned Development (PD).
B. Equivalency table. Table 11.02.002, Zoning District Transitions and Purposes, identifies each of the zoning districts, along with the equivalent
district of the previously adopted zoning ordinance, and a description of the intended purposes of each district.
Table 11.02.002. Zoning District Transitions and Purposes
District
Name Transition
From The purpose of the district is to provide for:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/526
Interim District
Development Reserve
(DR)
DR
RA
Large tracts of undeveloped land generally that may be used for agricultural
uses and/or individual home sites at a very low density. This district may be
assigned to land that is annexed into the City prior to its designation of
permanent zoning in accordance with the future land use plan. Land previously
zoned Rural Agricultural “RA” is now zoned Development Reserve (DR).
Residential Districts
Estate Residential (ES) ES Estate lots for larger single-family detached dwellings.
Suburban Residential (SR) SF
MH
SF-1
Larger sized lots for single-family detached dwellings. Land previously zoned
Large Lot Single-Family “SF”, Large Suburban Lot Single-Family “SF-1” and
Manufactured Home “MH” is now zoned Suburban Residential “SR”.
Semi-Urban Residential
(SU)
SF-2
SF-3
Single-family detached dwellings intended to be located on small undeveloped
and infill tracts. Land previously zoned Large Urban Single-Family “SF-2”
and Urban Lot Single-Family “SF-3” is now zoned Semi-Urban Residential
“SU”.
Urban Residential (UR) TH
DP
CD
Medium density residential attached (townhome) dwellings on individual lots
in a compact neighborhood environment or as a condominium development.
Land previously zoned Duplex Residential “DP”, Town Home Residential
“TH”, and Condominium Residential “CD” is now zoned Urban Residential
“UR”.
Multifamily Residential
(MF)
MF Multifamily tracts that are zoned MF as of the effective date of this Chapter.
These tracts are reflected on the zoning map as “MF.” No new MF zoning will
be permitted after the effective date of this Chapter.
Nonresidential Districts
Neighborhood Business
(NB)
TO
TC
Smaller-scale, low-intensity neighborhood convenience retail and professional
office and service uses, with building and site design standards that are
compatible and cohesive with abutting and adjacent residential uses. The
district is intended for use as a transition between the residential and
nonresidential districts, or in locations that are suitable for such uses by way of
its location, proximity, property size, access to collector or arterial roads, or
other special circumstances. Land previously zoned Transitional Office “TO”,
and Transitional Commercial “TC” is now zoned Neighborhood Business
(NB).
Local Business (LB) LR Office and retail businesses that are intended to serve the overall community,
with a larger market than the immediate neighborhoods in the area. In order to
accommodate the traffic generated from these businesses without negatively
impacting the residential neighborhoods, these uses should be located
primarily at pulse points or activity nodes where collector and arterial
roadways intersect or at arterial roadway intersections. These uses generally
serve a larger market than businesses found in a NB district and generally
serve a more local market than uses found in the GB district.
General Business (GB) GR Moderate and large retail centers, big-box stores, and malls that serve the retail
and service needs of the community and broader region. This district includes
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/526
site and building design and architectural standards to ensure quality,
sustainable development.
Professional Office (PO) GO
BD
Office, research, and technology parks with enhanced site and building
standards to create a high quality, campus-like local and regional employment
center. This district may also provide for some more intensive commercial and
light industrial uses provided their operations are conducted indoors and onsite
storage and truck traffic is limited. Land previously zoned General Office
“GO” and Business “BD” is now zoned Professional Office “PO”.
Heavy Commercial (HC) CS
HC
Larger-scale, higher intensity business, commercial, and industrial-related uses
that are to meet the consumer and employment needs of the community and
broader region. Land previously zoned Commercial Service “CS” and Heavy
Commercial “HC” is now zoned Heavy Commercial “HC”.
Light Industrial (LI) LI
GI
Smaller-scale, limited intensity industrial warehouse and assembly or light
manufacturing uses where the operations of the use are conducted indoors and
where outdoor storage and display is limited or adequately screened from
adjacent streets, uses, and public views. Land previously zoned Light
Industrial “LI” and General Industrial “GI” is now zoned Light Industrial “LI”.
Heavy Industrial (HI) HI The most intense land uses allowed within the City, which may include heavy
manufacturing and operational activities. This district is designed for locations
that provide adequate access for trucks and heavy equipment and do not
impose environmental impacts on adjacent uses.
Hospital (H) H All types of medical institutions, together with facilities for allied health
services in an area or complex that is designed to accommodate tall and highintensity
buildings and uses with adequate provision for high volumes of
traffic and emergency access.
Public Services (PS) PS Public, semi-public, and institutional land uses that are unique in nature and
scale and thus, most appropriate in their own district.
Open Space Greenbelt
(OG)
OSG Greenbelts and passive parklands that incorporate open space planning into the
assignment of land use designations, and develop and implement a system of
“greenway” parks that link home, retail, employment centers, parks, and
nature preserves.
Open Space Recreation
(OR)
OSR A system of active parklands and recreational opportunities throughout the
community that respond to the broad variety of recreational needs of different
age groups and interests of people residing in all areas of the City.
Mixed Use Districts
Mixed Use (MU) MU A mixture of high density residential, commercial, and public or institutional
uses and civic spaces in a compact, urban form. The MU district may include
multifamily units as upper-floor dwellings in a vertically mixed use building
or horizontally as a complex within the urban context. This district in
principally intended for use on infill parcels and for the redevelopment and
revitalization of corridors, although it may also be conditionally approved for
use in other appropriate areas of the City.
Town Center (TC) DD The Town Center Code and the Regulating Plan, as stated in Article 11.02,
division 2, Town Center Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/526
Planning Area (PA) – A zoning district that is consistent with the “planning areas” designated in the
Comprehensive Plan, which includes the following development types:
Entertainment District, Educational Campus, Walkable Mixed Use, and
Business Park.
Special and Overlay Districts
Conditional Overlay (CO) CO An overlay of supplemental standards to those of the underlying base districts
to address the unique conditions or circumstances of a property.
Entertainment Center (EC) ECO An overlay of supplemental standards to those of the underlying base districts
to address high-intensive and large-scale entertainment uses and venues and
their related indoor or outdoor facilities, access and parking requirements, and
levels of impact on surrounding districts and uses and the City at-large. The
land uses in this district stated in Article 11.02, division 3, Land Uses.
Planned Development
(PD)
PD The PD district is principally intended for development areas where it may be
considered warranted due the to the scale of development, the mixture of land
uses, site constraints, unique design considerations, and needed site flexibility.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.01.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.003 Official zoning map
A. Generally. Zoning districts are shown on the map entitled “Official Zoning Map” of the City of Cedar Park, Texas. An official copy of the
zoning map is on file and available for inspection during regular business hours at the Department of Development Services, Cedar Park City Hall
Complex, 450 Cypress Creek Road, Building One.
B. Force and effect. The zoning map and all notations, references, and other information shown on it are a part of this Code and shall have the
same force and effect as the text of this Code, as certified and maintained by the Administrator.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.01.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.004 Assignment of zoning
A. Temporary zoning. Any territory annexed into to the City and brought within its corporate limits shall automatically be zoned Development
Reserve (DR).
B. Permanent zoning.
1. Initiation. The Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council, or the property owner may initiate a request to
permanently zone the property.
2. Assignment. The assignment of zoning shall be pursuant to section 11.01.002, Purpose, and section 11.01.032, Compliance
Required.
3. Procedures. The procedures governing and applicable to the zoning process are stated in Article 11.06, division 3, part II, Public
Hearing Approvals.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.01.04, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.02.005–11.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Town Center Code
Sec. 11.02.031 Purposes
The purposes of the Town Center (TC) district are to:
A. Protect, preserve, improve, and provide for public health, safety, and general welfare of the present and future citizens of the City
along with the owners and future residents;
B. Establish a framework of zoning guidelines and criteria;
C. Allow for mixed-use development, which incorporates compatible residential and commercial uses;
D. Allow for greater design flexibility than what is permitted within the other City zoning districts;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/526
E. Fulfill goals stated in the City Comprehensive Plan;
F. Create development superior to that which would occur using conventional zoning and subdivision regulations;
G. Ensure the safe, orderly, and healthful development and expansion of the City, in accordance with and pursuant to this division of
Chapter 11, Zoning;
H. Conserve and utilize natural resources, appropriately and consistently with the public interest and to enhance the preservation of the
natural environment;
I. Encourage mixed-use, compact development that facilitates the efficient use of services, and thereby encourage high quality
development and innovative design;
J. Provide convenient, safe, and efficient circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
K. Allow for flexible planning and development of mixed uses; and
L. Promote compatible and different levels of residential and commercial uses.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.032 Applicability
A. Generally.
1. The requirements of this division, inclusive of the Regulating Plan, are intended and shall apply to the property, as more particularly
described in the Regulating Plan.
2. The Town Center district is a zoning district that is created in the same manner as other zoning districts.
B. Regulating Plan. The Regulating Plan integrates a mixture of open space, residential, commercial and public uses. Public spaces form a primary
structure and character of the neighborhoods. Streetscapes accommodate both vehicles and the pedestrian by encouraging a walking environment and
providing opportunities for social exchange. Civic buildings are given visual positions of importance in the community. The Regulating Plan is
designed to encourage the integration of varying housing types that offer residential opportunities for a variety of incomes and age groups.
C. Community vision. The Town Center Code establishes in this division (which includes the Regulating Plan) the specifications and regulations
that are intended to achieve the desired community vision.
D. Adoption. Through the previous adoption of the Town Center, the City Council provided for the implementation of the zoning and site
development regulations for the district. Provided, however, unless otherwise expressly stated in this division, the Regulating Plan, or the CPTC
development agreement, the property shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances.
E. Development areas. The property is divided into four (4) development areas:
1. Mixed Residential Area;
2. Town Center Area 1;
3. Town Center Area 2; and
4. Neighborhood Commercial Area.
F. Civic uses. Civic uses will be incorporated within both the Mixed Residential Area and the Town Center Area 1.
G. Land use and site development regulations. In addition to district-wide regulations, each type of area has specific land use and site development
regulations. All development areas shall incorporate open space uses, which may be either public or private in nature. The development areas and
land uses are reflected on the Regulating Plan.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.033 Land use
A. Prohibited uses in the Downtown District. The following uses are prohibited on any portion of property where the Town Center (TC) is
applicable regardless of the designation of the development area or adopted development standards:
1. Motor vehicle sales, service, fueling, storage, repair, parts and accessory sales and automotive and machinery repair or painting,
except that motor vehicle fueling is permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial Area;
2. Wrecking and salvage yards;
3. Sexually oriented businesses;
4. Flea markets, but not excluding temporary or permanent outdoor markets approved by the City for such use;
5. Public storage, commercial warehouses, office warehouses, and mini-warehouses;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/526
6. Pawnshops;
7. Portable building sales or lease;
8. Recreational vehicle parks;
9. Outdoor shooting ranges;
10. Automobile, boat, recreational vehicle, trailer, heavy equipment, and other motorized vehicle sales or lease;
11. Kennels, except as provided herein for development within the Neighborhood Commercial Area;
12. Industrial uses, except those permitted in the Professional Office (PO) district;
13. Funeral homes and mortuaries;
14. Drive-through commercial uses; except as provided for herein for development within the Neighborhood Commercial Area;
15. Any uses involved with hazardous materials;
16. Self-service laundry facilities, except as provided as an accessory use to a residential lodging use;
17. Car washes, except that car washes are permitted within the Neighborhood Commercial Area;
18. Motels;
19. Portable building sales; and
20. Private pitch and putt, golf courses, and driving ranges.
B. Town Center Area 1 and Neighborhood Commercial prohibited land uses. Along with the prohibited uses listed above, single-family detached
residential is also prohibited in both the Town Center Area 1 and Neighborhood Commercial Areas.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.034 General standards
A. Utilities.
1. Utilities shall be located underground with the exception of existing electrical transmission lines and temporary overhead lines
installed for temporary construction site offices.
2. “Dry utilities” (e.g., gas, electric, telephone and fiber optic utilities) shall be located within an alley, if any and if practical.
3. Overhead service to individual lots shall not be permitted.
4. All water, wastewater and drainage utilities shall be located in the front public right-of-way or, if deemed necessary, a public utility
easement and/or drainage easement.
5. Common trenches are allowed if:
a. Safe separation distances are maintained; and
b. Approved by the director of public works.
B. Lot standards.
1. Each lot in a subdivision, except a lot that fronts on a green and abuts a street, shall abut both a dedicated public street and an alley.
Lots that front on a green shall abut a publicly dedicated street in the rear of the lot.
2. Assigned address numbers shall be permanently affixed to all structures in such positions as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street and/or private interior drive and from the alley for all structures located adjacent to said alley.
C. Street standards.
1. Intent. The district street system shall:
a. Consist of a pattern of blocks with a hierarchy of streets, alleys, greens, and landscaped rights-of-way accommodating
automobiles, public transit, bicycles, and pedestrians;
b. Form an interconnected system of streets;
c. Provide opportunities for the public to walk, bicycle, and drive within the district while minimizing conflict between modes of
transportation;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/526
d. Promote an orderly, visually pleasing and active street environment for residents, workers, and visitors; and
e. Accommodate the automobile, but not at the expense of the pedestrian.
2. Pedestrian, bicycle, and transit principles.
a. The district shall provide multiple direct connections to and between local activity centers such as parks, schools, recreation
centers and neighborhood services;
b. Pedestrian and bicycle paths should be integrated in the proposed network;
c. Possible future transit service may also be considered within the proposed network; and
d. The pedestrian network shall:
1. Minimize walking distances;
2. Provide safe and convenient crossings at street intersections; and
3. Provide a streetscape environment that is conducive to pedestrian activity.
3. Street classifications and description of characteristics. Streets are classified according to their functions and character. The four (4)
major street classifications for district roadways are:
a. Parkway/boulevard. Parkways and boulevards are streets that have separated travel lanes. Parkways and boulevards include a
landscaped area between the street sections with parkways typically having a wider section than boulevards.
b. Main street/collector street. Main streets and collector streets provide mobility between areas of the district. Main streets and
collector streets in residential areas should be designed to insure a calm, safe street that enhances the livability and preserves the
character of neighborhoods. Main streets have a more urban character while collector streets have a more residential character.
c. Local street. A local street provides access within a neighborhood. Local streets form the framework and compose the majority
of streets within the district and shape the identity and character of a neighborhood.
d. Alley. An alley is a passageway that provides access to the rear or side of property. Alleys are intended for use at very low
vehicular speeds and provide alternative locations for garbage collection and dry utilities.
4. Alley regulations.
a. Design. Alleys may be designed with an inverted crown.
b. Intersecting alleys or utility easements. Where two (2) alleys intersect or turn at a right angle, a sight triangle of not less than 10
feet measured from the point of intersection of the property or easement line, shall be provided along each property or easement line
where practical.
c. Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys shall not extend more than 150 feet without a turnaround. Dead-end alleys longer than 300
feet shall be approved by the Administrator.
d. Private alleys.
1. The property owners' association (POA) shall maintain all alleys unless otherwise approved by the City.
2. All alleys shall be designated as private alleys; and [sic]
e. Parking. Parking in alleys is prohibited except as approved by the Administrator.
f. Alleys shall be utilized for utility easements in addition to property access, wherever feasible. In the case of a lot that abuts a
green and does not have a fronting street, a water and wastewater easement shall be dedicated within the alley.
g. Alleys shall be shown on all plats for this district.
h. On-street parking shall be striped as indicated in the street classification figures (figures 1–17) stated at the end of this section
unless otherwise approved by the Administrator.
5. Private streets.
a. All streets shall be dedicated to public use unless they are designated as private.
b. Private streets shall:
1. Be labeled on subdivision plats;
2. Be allowed where they are found to be more appropriate due to the type and density of development or other applicable
factors;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/526
3. Be conveyed to and maintained by the property owners' association (POA); and
4. Adhere to the regulations for private streets stated by the Code of Ordinances.
6. Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited within the district except as short stubs to permit future expansion.
7. Cul-de-sacs. The use of cul-de-sacs is prohibited within the district.
8. Median design at intersections. End treatment of medians at intersections shall accommodate:
a. A pedestrian crosswalk;
b. Curb radii as shown on figures 1–17;
c. A cross aisle width roughly equivalent to the width of cross streets; and
d. A vehicle turning at a reasonably slow rate of speed, wherever feasible.
9. Roundabouts. Roundabouts are circular intersections that can be an effective intersection type with lower speeds, and easier decisionmaking
than conventional intersections, requiring less maintenance. For a roundabout to work properly it shall be designed for restricted
speeds. The most significant feature that will restrict the speed is adequate deflection. Entry and exit radii and the size of the central island
control vehicle deflection. Minimum standards shall be those of an urban single-lane roundabout. Particular note should be given to the
following:
a. For all intersections occurring at the corner of a local and collector street, roundabouts shall be designed for bus movement.
b. For all intersections occurring at the corner of a collector and parkway street, roundabouts shall be designed to allow WB-50
movement.
c. Driveways within the roundabout or within 50 feet of the inscribed circle shall not be allowed.
d. Roundabouts shall have a mountable curb on the inside radius.
e. Appropriate roundabout signage shall be provided.
f. Raised splitter islands shall be used to preclude left turn movements prior to the roundabout.
g. Any vegetation in the island shall be designed in compliance with the City of Austin Transportation Criteria Manual.
h. No parking shall be allowed within:
1. A roundabout;
2. 20 feet on all approach roadways; and
3. 20 feet past the end of the splitter island.
i. The design of roundabouts shall require approval of the Administrator.
10. Traffic calming measures. The use of traffic calming measures shall require the approval of the Administrator and may include, but
are not limited to, gateways, roundabouts, neckdowns, chicanes, throttles and protected on-street parking.
11. Sidewalks.
a. Each area of the district shall provide pedestrian connectivity throughout the district by providing an interconnected system of
sidewalks on both sides of all streets with the exception of the:
1. SS-36 side street;
2. PL-28 public lane; and
3. PL-30 public lane.
b. The PL-30 public lane shall include a sidewalk with a width of 10 feet on one (1) side.
c. Off-street pathways shall be required where necessary to complete connectivity gaps.
d. All streets shall provide sidewalks in accordance with figures 1–17.
e. Sidewalk assignments may be varied in order to save trees.
f. Sidewalks may be located outside the street right-of-way provided they are located in a public use easement shown on the plat.
g. Alternative surface materials, such as decomposed granite gravel, may be substituted for concrete sidewalks with the approval
of the Administrator on the condition that this sidewalk serves as a portion of a trail system for district use and is deemed more
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/526
desirable.
12. Curb ramps.
a. The preferred alignment for curb ramps is perpendicular to both traffic and the curb.
b. Curb ramps shall be located so that they:
1. Are not obstructed by parked vehicles; and
2. Shall not intrude into vehicular traffic lanes.
13. On-street parking. Vehicles that are parked parallel on streets are required to be parked adjacent to the curb no further than one (1)
foot from the face or [of] curb.
Table 11.02.034. Street Standards Summary
ROW Pavement
Width
# of
Lanes
Travel
Lane
Width
(FC-FC)
Traffic
Direction
Parking Design
Speed
Curb
Radius
Street Trees
Parkways/Boulevards
PKW-200
(Figure 1)
Parkway Varies 2 @ 20' 2 12' 2 way Parallel - one
side per
direction
30 mph 15' Typical 40'
OC
BVD-92
(Figure 2)
Boulevard 92' 2 @ 20' 2 12' 2 way Parallel - one
side per
direction
30 mph 15' Typical 40'
OC
MS-172
(Figure 6 [3])
Main Street
Boulevard
172' 2 @ 22' 1 22' 2 way Angled 25 mph 20' Typical 60'
OC
Main Streets/Collectors
MS-66
(Figure 8 [4])
2-Lane Main
Street
66' 60' 2 12' 2 way Angled 25 mph 20' Typical
40'-60' OC
US-54
(Figure 9 [5])
Urban Street
w/angled
parking
54' 48' 2 11' 2 way Angled - side
1 Parallel -
side 2
25 mph 15' Typical 40'
OC
US-48
(Figure 10 [6])
Urban Street
w/parallel
parking
48' 40' 2 12' 2 way Parallel both
sides
25 mph 15' Typical 40'
OC
RC-58
(Figure 11 [7])
Residential
Collector
58' 36' 2 10' 2 way Parallel both
sides
25 mph 15' Typical 40'
OC
Local Streets
RS-50 Residential 50' 28' 1-2 10' 2 way Parallel both 25 mph 15' Typical 40'
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/526
(Figure 12 [8]) Street sides OC
RS-46
(Figure 13 [9])
Residential
Lane
46' 28' 1-2 10' 2 way Parallel 25 mph 15' Typical 40'
OC
SS-36
(Figure 14 [10])
Side Street 36' 26' 1-2 10' 2 way Parallel 25 mph 15' Typical 40'
OC
PL-28
(Figure 15 [11])
1-Way Public
Lane
24' 16' 2 10' 1 way None 15 mph 15' Not required
PL-30
(Figure 16 [12])
2-Way Public
Way
30' 22' 2 14' 2 way Parallel one
side
15 mph 15' Typical 40'
OC
Alleys
AL-24
(Figure 17 [13])
1-Way Alley 20' 14' 2 8' 1 way None 15 mph 15' MRA Not required
D. Open space standards.
1. Intent. Open space:
a. Is a significant element of the Town Center district.
b. Shall serve as areas of community and neighborhood gathering
c. Should be distributed throughout the Town Center and be arranged in a hierarchy of small, intimate open spaces to large, multifunctional
areas.
d. Should address the recreational needs of the residents.
e. Shall be designed to:
1. Provide places and opportunities for interaction within the community;
2. Serve as landmarks and organizing elements; and
3. Provide visual, aesthetic, and environmental amenities.
2. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within open space areas:
a. Natural areas;
b. Conservation areas;
c. Outdoor recreational/athletic facilities;
d. Outdoor swimming pools;
e. Parks and related amenities;
f. Streams, lakes, impounded waterways, or their drainage ways;
g. Clubhouses, recreation centers and community centers;
h. Pedestrian and bicycle trails and pathways;
i. Plazas, greens, playgrounds; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/526
j. Transit stops and off-street parking areas.
3. Site development regulations. The following site development regulations shall apply to open spaces uses within the district:
a. Maximum lot size.
1. The minimum lot size within a public open space area shall be 3,500 square feet, except for landscaped lots in the rightof-
way, which may be smaller.
2. There is no minimum lot size within a private open space area.
b. Maximum height. Exclusive of appurtenances, no buildings within an open space shall exceed the following maximum
building heights:
1. Town Center 1 Area: 60 feet.
2. Mixed Residential Area: 35 feet.
3. Neighborhood Commercial Area: 35 feet.
c. Minimum lot width.
1. The minimum lot width within a public open space area shall be 40 feet.
2. The is no minimum lot width within a private open space area.
d. Minimum setbacks.
1. Front yard: 15 feet.
2. Side yard: 10 feet.
3. Rear yard: 10 feet
e. Open space distribution. At least 80 percent of residential lots shall be within 600 feet of an open space lot, whether privately or
publicly owned.
f. Irrigation. All irrigation systems within public open space shall be approved by the director of parks and recreation.
4. Conveyance. Open space and structures thereon shall be conveyed, owned, and maintained pursuant to one (1) of the three (3)
following options:
a. Conveyed to a public body, if said public body agrees to accept conveyance and to maintain the public open space and
buildings, structures, or improvements which have been placed on it. Not in limitation of any other rights the City may have to
impose additional requirements, land within the floodplain that is to be included in any conveyance to the City shall have a grading
plan that includes:
1. No concrete lining of water channels;
2. No fencing;
3. Slopes that are easily accessible by pedestrians and compatible with the public improvements; and
4. A channel that utilizes an irregular, natural configuration both in horizontal alignment and cross-section design, which
shall be approved by both the Administrator and the commission.
b. Conveyed to and accepted by the City but only on the condition that all responsibility for maintenance is retained by or
assumed by a property owners' association or other party reasonably acceptable to the City.
c. Conveyed to a property owners' association or some other party responsible at time of final plat for maintaining common
buildings, areas and land within the community. Private open space shall be restricted to the uses specified on the final plat and
which provide for the maintenance of private open space in a manner which assures its long-term maintenance and for its intended
purpose.
5. Parking regulations. Parking for open space uses within the district is provided from adjacent on-street parking unless, at the
developer's option, off-street parking is provided within an open space lot. On-street parking may be credited toward the required parking
spaces of the intended use.
6. Parkland dedication.
a. Goal. The goal of parkland dedication is to integrate usable open space into the fabric of the community.
b. Application. Land within the district designated as parkland shall comply with the standards set forth in this section and shall
be shown on the Regulating Plan as public open space. The land area of parkland dedication shall be indicated on the Regulating
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/526
Plan. The parkland shown on the Regulating Plan adopted concurrently herewith satisfies the dedication requirements with respect
to the district (excluding, however, Town Center Area 2). No cash payment or improvements in lieu of parkland dedication shall be
permitted. An appropriate park-phasing plan shall be approved with the preliminary plan. Town Center Area 2 must comply with
code with respect to parkland dedication and development.
c. Land treatment. No easements or other dedications shall be issued, reserved, granted or made except as agreed by the director
of parks and recreation. The director of parks and recreation may allow the developer to dump fill material and take other respective
actions specified when, at the discretion of the director of parks and recreation, such action would be beneficial to the parkland. In
all such cases, the developer shall obtain a letter of permission to the developer prior to the action in question.
d. Parkland dedication within the Mixed Residential Area. Parkland located in the Mixed Residential Area shall be a system of
connected mini-parks distributed throughout the area in order to promote use by residents and access by pedestrians and bicyclists
within the district.
1. The collection of parks shall be arranged to preserve existing trees wherever feasible, and be integrated into the
neighborhood street system. Open space within parkways, boulevards and access streets, which provide linear greenways and
pedestrian connectivity throughout the district, may also be considered land for parkland dedication.
2. The amount of land required to be dedicated for parkland shall be indicated on the Regulating Plan and indicated as
public open space. The area of the parkland shall be measured and calculated to the property line of that lot. Parkland shall
have a minimum of 50 feet of street frontage. Greens shall be considered land for parkland dedication.
3. The minimum lot size dedicated for parkland is 8,000 square feet. The location and size of utilities stubbed out to
parkland shall be determined at time of final plat by the director of public works. The developer shall have the option of
entering into license agreements with the City for parkland improvements.
4. Parkland to be dedicated as part of the subdivision plat shall adhere to the approximate size and location of the
designations indicated on the Regulating Plan. By adoption of the Town Center, the City approves the parkland shown on the
Regulating Plan and agrees that such parkland satisfies the parkland dedications requirements within the Mixed Residential
Area. No cash payment or improvements in lieu of parkland dedication shall be permitted. An appropriate park-phasing plan
shall be approved with the preliminary plan.
5. Mail kiosks serving residents living within the Mixed Residential Area may be located within parkland.
e. Parkland dedication within the Town Center Area. All parkland dedication requirements for the Town Center Area 1 and
Neighborhood Center Area are satisfied by the parkland shown on the Regulating Plan.
E. Landscape standards.
1. Intent. For the development in this district, each site plan shall be prepared so as to be consistent with and maximize the goals of the
Town Center, including but not limited to retaining existing trees.
2. Application. Landscape requirements as set forth in the Code of Ordinances shall apply except as provided in this section.
3. General requirements.
a. No parking space shall be located farther than 100 feet from a permeable landscaped island, peninsula, or median and a tree
except for parking lots that contain more than three (3) parking modules.
b. Parking spaces shall be located evenly through the parking areas, however the locations of landscaped islands, peninsulas and
medians may be adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other natural features.
c. Existing tree locations. If protected trees are encountered in tree surveys, the Administrator may approve layout modifications
of streets and walks.
d. Not required for this district. Street yard and transitional buffering (buffer yards).
4. Loading zone areas. Off-street loading zones shall be designed:
a. To be buffered from street view and from adjacent properties as much as possible; or
b. So as not to detract from the character of the streetscape by using design elements that are consistent or compatible with the
surrounding development.
5. Street trees.
a. Location. Street trees shall be installed in planting strips along streets.
b. Planting plan. The Administrator shall approve a street tree-planting plan for planting strips and traffic islands for each phase of
development of the district.
c. Size. Street trees shall be a minimum of four-inch caliper ball and burlap or its equivalent 24-inch box or 65-gallon container.
6. Planting criteria.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/526
a. Street trees shall be planted:
1. To avoid interference with streetlights, signage, and other fixtures;
2. At least 4 feet from the edge of driveways;
3. At least 4 feet from underground utilities;
4. At least 20 feet from overhead lines;
5. At least 5 feet from hydrants.
6. A minimum of 3 feet from the back of the curb.
b. Street trees shall be kept out of:
1. Intersection triangles at a minimum of 25 feet by 25 feet from the face of the curb; and
2. Alley/street intersection triangles at a minimum of 15 feet by 15 feet, as measured from the edge of the pavement.
c. Street trees within the Mixed Residential Area shall be:
1. Located in the planting strip between a public sidewalk and a curb; and
2. Planted on an average of every 40 feet, taking into consideration planting criteria and coordination with existing trees.
d. Street trees within the Town Center Area 1 shall be:
1. Located between the public sidewalk and the edge of the curb of a driving lane; and
2. Planted on an average of 40 to 60 feet, taking into consideration planting criteria and coordination with existing trees.
7. Traffic islands. Planting plans showing planted street medians (traffic islands) shall be approved by the Administrator.
8. Mix of species. The specified mix of trees shall require approval of the City urban forester.
9. Fencing and gates.
a. The maximum height of an open style fence in a street yard shall be 36 inches. Open style fences shall not exceed five (5) feet
in height. Masonry columns are permitted as part of all open style fences.
b. Fences that abut parks and greens shall be open style fences except as provided in subsection (10) below.
c. Where an alley is provided adjacent to lots in the Mixed Residential Area and such lots have fences adjacent to the alley, gates
shall be provided from the rear or side yard to the alley of such lots.
10. Fencing and landscaping along railroad track and 183A Toll Road.
a. Fencing:
1. Shall be constructed along the property line of the district that abuts the:
a. Railroad track located on the western portion of the property;
b. 183A Toll Road right-of-way located on the eastern side of the property;
2. Shall be constructed of double-sided decorative masonry, double-sided concrete masonry unit (CMU) or woodcrete;
3. Shall be at a height not exceeding six (6) feet;
4. Shall be at a minimum of five (5) feet;
5. May be either open style or solid; and
6. May be offset from the property line provided that it is situated in a maintained landscaped lot or easement.
b. Additional landscaping to aid in screening the view into residential units from railcars traveling along the railroad track shall be
planted in rear yards of lots abutting the railroad track including a minimum of:
1. One (1) shade tree; and
2. Two (2) ornamental trees per lot.
c. Fencing and landscaping along 183A Toll Road shall comply with the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/526
1. No fencing along 183A Toll Road shall be required until the 183A Toll Road street improvements are constructed;
2. In the event that the Central Texas Regional Mobility Authority elects to construct fencing adjacent to the lots located
along 183A Toll Road, the developer shall not be required to construct additional fencing;
3. Fencing shall be constructed along the property line of the district that abuts the railroad track located on the western
portion of the property and shall be constructed of double-sided decorative masonry, double-sided and tinted split-faced CMU
or woodcrete at a height not exceeding six (6) feet, but shall be a minimum of five (5) feet. This fencing may be either open
style fencing or solid fencing. Fencing may be offset from the property line provided that it is situated in a maintained,
landscaped lot or easement;
4. Fencing along the property line abutting 183A Toll Road may be omitted in locations where buildings front the 183A Toll
Road right-of-way or areas within sight triangles; and
5. Landscaping along the frontage of 183A Toll Road shall comply with the standards of the Corridor Overlay ordinance,
except that the landscape setback area may be reduced from 25 to 20 feet.
F. Lighting standards. A developer may, with City approval, incorporate alternative street lighting standards only if the standards are designed to
aesthetically enhance the district.
G. Sign standards. See Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 13, Sign Regulations.
H. Civic uses. For all civic uses the following site development regulations are required:
1. The building must be oriented to the general public in order to create focal points and landmarks;
2. All sides of a building that are visible from a public street, public gathering area or green shall be compatible with or equivalent to
the architectural features, materials, and the articulation of the front facade of the building; and
3. The front facade shall not be oriented to face directly toward a parking lot.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/526
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/526
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.04, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.035 Mixed Residential Area
A. Purposes. The Mixed Residential Area is:
1. Designed to incorporate a variety of residential land uses including:
a. Single-family detached residential;
b. Single-family attached residential; and
c. Multifamily residential.
2. Intended to promote pedestrian activity and circulation through well-designed streetscapes that provide for the safe and efficient
movement of vehicular traffic and pedestrian circulation.
3. Intended to allow for the location of limited commercial uses serving neighborhood needs. Commercial uses may be located within
certain areas of the Mixed Residential Area of the district for the convenience of nearby residents. The businesses shall be conducive to
the residential pattern of development and shall not create land use, architectural or traffic conflicts.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Mixed Residential Area:
1. Residential uses.
a. Single-family detached residential use including single-family detached lot and side yard lot;
b. Single-family attached residential use, including condominiums and townhouses;
c. Accessory buildings, which shall be located in rear yards, and accessory uses customarily incidental to the use of the residential
uses above; and
d. Residential accessory dwellings.
2. Open space.
a. Natural areas;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/526
b. Conservation areas;
c. Outdoor recreational/athletic fields;
d. Outdoor swimming pools;
e. Parks, playgrounds, and related amenities;
f. Streams, lakes, impounded waterways, and their drainage ways;
g. Clubhouses and community centers;
h. Transit stops and off-street parking areas; and
i. Pedestrian and bicycle trails.
3. Temporary commercial uses.
a. Temporary home sales office; and
b. Temporary construction site office.
4. Commercial uses. Limited Commercial Overlay areas are designated on the Regulating Plan and the following uses are permitted
within these areas:
a. Limited lodging;
b. Home office;
c. Studio office;
d. Arts and crafts workshop;
e. Boutique retail;
f. Corner grocery;
g. Limited food service; and
h. Neighborhood commercial.
5. Civic uses.
C. Residential site development regulations.
1. Alleys. Alleys are required unless there is a finding by the Administrator that an alley is not physically feasible of [to] be
constructed.
2. Lot size and setback regulations. The following table lists the site development regulations for residential development within the
Mixed Residential Area.
Table 11.02.035. Lot Size and Setback Regulations
Regulation Single-Family
Detached Lot Side Yard Lot Townhouse Condominium
Minimum lot size 2,700 sf 2,700 sf 1,400 sf 4,500 sf
Minimum lot size on a corner lot 3,150 sf 3,150 sf 1,750 sf 4,950 sf
Minimum lot width 1 30 ft 30 ft 20 ft 50 ft
Minimum lot width on a corner lot 35 ft 35 ft 25 ft 55 ft
Maximum height 35 ft 35 ft 35 ft 35 ft
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/526
Minimum front yard setback 3,4 15 ft 15 ft 10 ft 10 ft
Minimum street side yard setback 3,4 10 ft 10 ft 10 ft 10 ft
Minimum interior side yard setback 2,3 5 ft 0 ft / 10 ft None 10 ft
Minimum rear yard setback 3 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft
Table Notes:
1. On a courtyard or curved street, the minimum lot width between the front lot line and the minimum front yard
setback is 15 feet for a townhouse lot and 25 feet for other lots.
2. Side yard lots shall have a minimum interior side yard setback of zero (0) feet on one (1) side and 10 feet on the
other side. The minimum distance between two (2) structures located on side yard lots shall be 10 feet; not including roof
overhangs (provided the roof overhangs do not encroach into an easement).
3. Roof overhangs may extend two (2) feet into the front, rear and side setbacks provided that they do not encroach
into an easement.
4. Minimum front yard setbacks and street side yard setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the line of the
closest solid wall to the property line; open space areas (such as a front porch, stoop, balcony or bay) may encroach upon
such setback, even if there are structural supports. There shall be no structure within eight (8) feet of the front property
line or a street side yard property line. Steps and handrails are not considered as a part of the structure and have no
setback requirement.
2. Garage/carport regulations.
a. Garages or carports shall be:
1. Accessed from the rear of the lot;
2. Either attached or detached;
3. Accessible from a:
a. Private interior drive;
b. Alley; or
c. Private street; or
d. Public street.
b. Two (2) car garages shall be required for all single-family detached residential units constructed on lots with lot width of
greater than 35 feet.
c. The Administrator may approve a garage entry facing the street provided that the garage is at least 20 feet behind the front
property line and at least ten (10) feet behind the front wall of the principal structure.
d. Carports may be used if they:
1. Conform with the all of the requirements of this subsection;
2. Are accessible from alleys; and
3. Are screened from view of streets.
3. Residential parking regulations.
a. Single-family detached residential. Development of single-family detached residential units shall provide a minimum of two (2)
off-street parking spaces, except for lots:
1. Having a lot width that exceeds 35 feet; and
2. With a driveway that is less than 20 feet in length shall be required to provide:
a. One (1) additional off-street parking space;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/526
b. A second off-street parking space should the building contain a residential accessory dwelling unit; and
c. Shall be accessible from an alley should an alley abut the property.
b. Single-family attached residential.
1. Parking spaces shall be:
a. Conveniently located; and
b. Accessible from an alley should an alley abut the property.
2. Parking that exceeds one (1) parking space per unit may be located off-street and off-site provided that the parking space
is no further than 200 feet from the dwelling unit. Head-in parking off of an alley may meet these requirements.
3. Development of single-family attached residential units shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces with
the exception of one (1) bedroom or condominium or townhouse units, which shall provide a minimum of one and one-half
(1.5) parking spaces per dwelling unit.
c. Tandem parking. Tandem parking shall:
1. Be permitted in accordance with the provisions of the existing Code of Ordinances; and
2. Count toward the required parking spaces.
4. Residential facades [and additional regulations].
a. Prohibited materials:
1. Wood siding;
2. Vinyl siding; and
3. Metal siding.
b. Residential building exteriors may be finished in:
1. Cementitious “hardiplank” siding;
2. Brick;
3. Stone;
4. Cast stone; or
5. Stucco.
c. Residential density. All property within the Mixed Residential Area shall be platted to an average minimum gross density of
four (4) dwelling units per acre, excluding parks, churches and other nonresidential uses, but including open space, parks, streets and
other associated residential uses. Residential accessory dwelling units shall not be included for purposes of calculating this average
minimum gross density requirement.
d. Private interior drives. Private interior drives are permitted only as part of a condominium development under the following
conditions:
1. Maintenance will be maintained by a property owners' association at a reasonable level.
2. Compliance with all City fire and emergency regulations are met.
3. A means for a vehicle to turn around for every 150 feet in length is provided for.
4. A minimum street width of 20 feet.
e. Height regulations. No building within the Mixed Residential Area shall exceed 35 feet, or two (2) floors above ground level,
whichever is less, exclusive of appurtenances.
f. Residential elevations.
1. Generally. The finished first floor of a dwelling shall be a minimum of 24 inches above the elevation of the curb along the
lot frontage.
2. Exception. When the requirement in subsection C(4)f(1) above shall result in a slab elevation exceeding 48 inches above
grade on any portion of the slab due to topographic conditions, in which event the elevation may be reduced to the minimum
amount necessary as to not cause an elevation of the slab that is 48 inches above ground. Notwithstanding the above, variations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/526
may be considered for this requirement in order to protect an existing tree. The elevation shall be measured from the location
on the curb that is perpendicular to the primary entry of the principal dwelling structure.
g. Front porch regulations.
1. Single-family detached residential units, other than those constructed on a lot with a lot width that is equivalent to or less
than 35 feet shall comply with the following:
a. 20 percent of the principal dwelling structure shall not be required to comply with any minimum front porch
regulations within this section; and
b. 80 percent of the principal dwelling structure shall not [sic] be required to include a front porch with:
i. 80 square feet having a minimum depth of six (6) feet; and
ii. A minimum of 100 square feet of total front porch area.
2. Single-family detached residential units constructed on a lot with a lot width that is equivalent to or less than 35 feet, shall
comply with the following:
a. 40 percent of the principal dwelling structure shall not be required to comply with any minimum front porch
regulations within this section; and
b. 60 percent of the principal dwelling structure shall be required to include a front porch with 50 square feet and
having a minimum depth of six (6) feet.
3. Single-family attached residential. No requirements.
4. Measurements.
a. Dimensions of front porches shall be based on the extent of exposed slab.
b. Percentage of compliance as set forth above shall be measured on a plat-by-plat basis.
h. Roof regulations.
1. Pitched roofs may be clad in:
a. Painted or galvanized metal;
b. Clay or concrete tile; or
c. 25-year (minimum) composition shingles.
2. Flat roofs are permitted only if habitable as a roof terrace.
3. Principal pitched roofs shall be symmetrical gable, hip, or barrel vault with a pitch no less than 5:12.
4. Porch and stoop roofs may have a 2:12 minimum pitch.
i. Condominium spacing.
1. Each building shall be at least 10 feet from the walls of the nearest dwelling unit, not including stoops, porches, and other
non-air-conditioned spaces.
2. The roof overhang may extend up two (2) feet into the side yard setback.
j. Screening of above-ground utility facilities and mechanical equipment.
1. Electrical transformers, air conditioning compressors and other above-ground utility facilities and mechanical equipment
(other than fire hydrants) shall be screened from view from public streets.
2. Screening may consist of fencing, landscaping, or other visual screening.
3. Landscaping that will, at maturity, screen at least 60 percent of the view of the facility shall be considered adequate
screening for the purpose of this section.
k. Addressing locations. For all lots located adjacent to an alley, assigned City address numbers shall be permanently affixed to all
structures in such positions as to be plainly visible and legible from both the street and alley.
D. Side yard lots. The following regulations shall apply to side yard lots:
1. A structure may be erected adjacent to an interior side lot line; the eaves of a structure may extend across the interior side lot line not
more than two (2) feet.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/526
2. Except for a patio or patio cover, the minimum distance between structures on adjoining lots is 10 feet.
3. The minimum distance between a patio or patio cover and a structure on an adjoining lot is six (6) feet.
4. Easements.
a. An easement is required for the purpose of construction and maintenance of a structure on each lot that abuts a lot with a
structure adjacent to a common interior side lot line.
b. The easement shall:
1. Be not less than five (5) feet wide; and
2. Extend the full length of the interior side lot line.
E. Residential accessory dwellings. A lot intended for use as a single-family residential dwelling unit may contain both a principal dwelling
structure and a residential accessory dwelling unit under the following conditions (applicable to the residential accessory dwelling):
1. Unit is required to be in the rear yard of the lot.
2. No more than one (1) unit dwelling per lot.
3. Maximum height (provided that a residential accessory dwelling unit shall not be constructed to a height greater than the principal
dwelling structure) shall be the lesser of:
a. Two (2) stories; or
b. 35 feet.
4. Maximum floor area: 600 square feet.
5. Parking shall:
a. Be accessible from an alley, if any; and
b. Not be less than one (1) parking space per accessory dwelling unit.
6. All units shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations within the Code of Ordinances, including but not limited to, those
dealing with building, plumbing electrical, fire, safety, health, sanitation, and property maintenance.
7. Utilities.
a. Utilities provided to the residential accessory dwelling unit shall be submetered from the principal dwelling structure.
b. Utility assignments for residential accessory dwellings. Impact fees for both water and wastewater shall be paid and LUEs
issued for each residential accessory dwelling unit as required by City Code. Not less than one-half (1/2) of a water LUE and onehalf
(1/2) of a wastewater LUE shall be required for each residential accessory dwelling. LUEs shall be counted and credited as they
are allocated, whether in whole numbers or in fractions thereof.
F. Residential-scale commercial site development regulations. The following standards for the Limited Commercial Overlay districts are intended
to preserve the residential atmosphere and be consistent with the district.
1. Dwelling units. Dwelling units are permitted above or behind a commercial use and are secondary to that commercial use.
2. Lot size. The following site development regulations shall be applicable to commercial uses:
a. Minimum lot size: 3,500 square feet.
b. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
c. Minimum lot width: 35 feet.
d. Maximum height: 35 feet.
3. Setbacks.
a. Front yard: 10 feet.
b. Side yard: 5 feet.
c. Street side yard: 10 feet.
d. Rear: 10 feet.
4. Parking regulations.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/526
a. Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the Code of Ordinances except that designated on-street parking spaces
along the frontage of the lot shall count toward the required parking spaces.
b. Off-street parking for Limited Commercial Overlay uses shall be located in the side yard and/or rear yard.
5. Sold on site. Items produced or wares and merchandise handled shall be limited to those sold on the premises.
6. Operating and delivery hours. Operating and delivery hours for commercial uses, including private refuse pick-up, shall be limited to
the period from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
7. Limited lodging: Bed-and-breakfast establishment.
a. The property owner shall occupy the residence.
b. A maximum of four (4) guest bedrooms may be provided.
c. Paying guests shall not stay more than seven (7) consecutive days.
d. Only overnight guests may be served meals at the establishment, except that luncheons and receptions may be held for
attendees of organized social functions and tours.
e. Each bed-and-breakfast establishment shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces plus one (1) additional
space for each guest room shall be provided unless the establishment's owner can show that adequate off-street parking is available
at an adjacent commercial site under common ownership or lease.
f. Each bed-and-breakfast establishment shall comply with all licensing requirements of the county health department for storage,
preparation, and serving of food and beverages.
8. Limited office.
a. Only the first story of a principal or ancillary building allows for limited office uses.
b. No outdoor storage of materials is allowed.
c. Parking: One (1) assigned parking space for each 300 square feet of commercial usage in the building in addition to the parking
requirement for each dwelling (i.e., home office).
9. Limited commercial.
a. Only the first story of a principal or ancillary building allows for limited commercial uses.
b. The parking regulations shall be determined according to the specific activity (i.e., child care or coffee house) and the Code of
Ordinances.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.05, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.036 Town Center Area 1
A. Purpose. The Town Center Area 1 is intended to:
1. Serve as the focal point of the district;
2. Contain retail, commercial, civic, and residential uses to meet the needs of the community;
3. Create an intensive concentration of retail services, including shops, restaurants, cafes, and entertainment venues;
4. Create the potential for office and multifamily residential development, all oriented to the public framework of streets and open
spaces;
5. Create a vibrant mixed-use center with a strong pedestrian orientation;
6. Create open space as an integral component of the area; and
7. Be pedestrian oriented, including the encouragement of pedestrian movement between the Mixed Residential Area and the Town
Center Area 1.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within Town Center Area 1:
1. Residential uses.
a. Single-family attached residential, including condominiums and townhouses; and
b. Multifamily residential.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/526
2. Commercial uses. Unless otherwise prohibited, all uses permitted within the GB zoning district are permitted within the Town Center
Area 1 labeled as “Mixed-Use.”
3. Civic uses.
4. Open space.
a. Conservation areas;
b. Outdoor recreational/athletic facilities;
c. Outdoor swimming pools;
d. Parks, playgrounds and related amenities;
e. Streams, lakes, impounded waterways and their drainage ways;
f. Clubhouses and community centers;
g. Off-street parking areas; and
h. Pedestrian and bicycle trails.
5. Mixed use.
a. Mixed use is permitted as where shown on the Regulating Plan.
b. Mixed use does not require any certain combination or mix of permitted uses.
c. Buildings and structures combining any mix of permitted and conditional uses are allowed, subject to the standards and
provisions set forth in the Town Center.
C. Site development regulations.
1. Setbacks. Except as set forth in subsection (C)(2), Residential Buffer Areas, below there shall be no required setbacks in Town
Center Area 1.
2. Residential buffer areas. Residential buffer areas are intended to provide a transition from single-family detached residential
buildings and single-family attached residential buildings to permitted uses in the Town Center Area 1.
a. Building setbacks. In a residential buffer area, the minimum buildings setback from residential uses and associated alleys in the
Mixed Residential Area for Town Center uses other than townhomes and condominiums shall be 40 feet and the landscape setback
shall be 15 feet. See figure 15, Residential Buffer Area.
b. Landscape setbacks. In a residential buffer area, a 15-foot landscape buffer area in the Town Center Area is required adjacent to
residential uses. That strip of land, the landscape buffer between such residential lot and Town Center parking lots, service drives
and loading areas, shall be improved and maintained as follows:
1. A masonry wall not less than six (6) feet tall and not more than eight (8) feet tall (the “buffer wall”) in the landscape
buffer and within an area which is not less than 10 feet and not more than 15 feet from the residential use in the Mixed
Residential Area;
2. Every 40 feet of length of the buffer wall, the landscaped buffer on the Mixed Residential Area side of the buffer wall
improved and landscaped with one (1) canopy tree, two (2) ornamental trees, five (5) shrubs, and two (2) vines; and
3. An irrigation system sufficient to properly water and maintain the trees, hedges, and other plantings in the landscape
buffer. These improvements and the setbacks are shown on figure 15, Residential Buffer Area.
4. The landscape buffer on the Mixed Residential Area side of the buffer wall will be owned by the owner of the applicable
property in the Town Center Area 1 but will be maintained by the property owners' association for the Mixed Residential Area.
5. The buffer wall will be maintained by the owner of the Town Center Area tract on which the wall is located or, if a
property owners' association is created for the Town Center Area 1, then by such property owners' association. The property
owners' association for the Mixed Residential Area shall have and is hereby granted an access and landscape easement, and
such easement shall be shown on all final subdivision plats for the Town Center Area property.
3. Balconies. An unenclosed balcony with a minimum clearance of nine (9) feet above finished grade may extend five (5) feet over a
public sidewalk.
4. Awning or walkway. An awning or walkway covering with a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above grade may extend five (5)
feet over a public sidewalk.
5. Secondary residential use. Residential units are permitted above or behind a commercial use and are secondary to that commercial
use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/526
6. Automobiles. Automobiles shall be accommodated in a manner that provides for convenience but does not undermine the integrity of
the public environment or the quality of the pedestrian realm.
7. Alcoholic beverage regulations. Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted within the Town Center Area and is subject
only to applicable state statutes. The City Code with respect to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages does not apply to the
establishment, location, licensing, and/or permitting of bars and cocktail lounges.
8. Residential elevation.
a. Elevation shall be measured from the location on the curb that is perpendicular to the primary entry of the principal dwelling
structure.
b. A residential use with street-level living space shall have a finished first-floor elevation of not less than 24 inches above the
elevation of the curb along the lot frontage except when such requirement shall result in a slab elevation exceeding 48 inches above
grade on any portion of the slab due to topographic conditions, in which event the elevation may be reduced to the minimum amount
necessary as to not cause an elevation of the slab that is 48 inches above ground. Notwithstanding the above, variations may be
considered for this requirement in order to protect an existing tree.
9. Location of unsightly equipment.
a. Dumpsters, mechanical equipment, storage areas and areas for refuse collection:
1. Shall be located so as not to detract from public use areas; and
2. Are not allowed in the residential buffer area.
b. No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection, or compaction, or other such uses shall be located within 25 feet of any public
street, public sidewalk, residential use, or internal pedestrian pathway. This requirement does not apply to a statutorily required
accessible ADA route servicing the trash collection area.
10. Buildings. Multi-level mixed use buildings will be a feature of the Town Center Area 1. This area is envisioned as a vibrant mixeduse
center with a strong pedestrian orientation. All buildings and structures in the Town Center Area 1 shall comply with the following
standards:
a. Uses. Town Center uses shall include public places, public-oriented activities, amenities, and treatments on the ground floor,
including shops, cafes, offices, or other such uses that promote a positive pedestrian environment.
b. Facades.
1. Facade walls. Front facade walls and side facade walls must incorporate all of the following design elements. Rear facade
walls must incorporate at least two (2) of the following design elements. The cumulative length of these design elements must
extend for at least 75 percent of the facade wall's horizontal length.
a. A repeating pattern of wall recesses and projections, such as bays, offsets, reveals, or projecting ribs, that has a relief
of at least eight (8) inches.
b. Arcades, awnings, canopies, covered walkways, or porticos.
c. Display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows.
2. Facade wall changes. Facade walls must have one (1) or more of the following changes:
a. Changes of color, texture, or material, either diagonally, horizontally, or vertically, at intervals of not less than 20
feet and not more than 100 feet.
b. Changes in plane with a depth of at least 24 inches, either diagonally, horizontally, or vertically, at intervals of not
less than 20 feet and not more than 100 feet.
3. Facade materials and colors.
a. No more than 80 percent of the area of a facade wall, exclusive of fenestration, may have a single material color.
b. The following material may only be used as an accent material: smooth-faced concrete block that is non-tinted or
non-burnished; tilt-up concrete panels that are unadorned or untextured; and prefabricated steel panels.
4. Front facade orientation. The front facade shall not be oriented to face directly toward a parking lot.
5. Front facade openings. A minimum of 30 percent of the front facade on the ground floor of commercial buildings shall
consist of window or door openings, allowing views into and out of the interior of the building.
c. Primary entrance design elements. In order to make the primary entrance architecturally prominent and clearly visible from the
abutting street, at least three (3) of the following design elements are required at the primary entrance:
1. Architectural details such, but not limited to, arches, friezes, tilt work, murals, or moldings.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/526
2. Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaping or seating.
3. Enhanced exterior lighting fixtures such as wall sconces, light coves with concealed light sources, ground-mounted accent
lights, or decorative pedestal lights.
4. Prominent three-dimensional features such as belfries, chimneys, clock towers, domes, spires, steeples, towers, or turrets.
5. A repeating pattern of pilasters projecting from the facade wall by a minimum of eight (8) inches or architectural or
decorative columns.
d. Roofs.
1. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment, skylights, and solar panels must be screened or set back so that they are not visible
from a point five (5) feet and six (6) inches above grade at the property line.
2. Screening materials must match the materials and colors used on the main building.
3. Chain-link fence may not be used as a screening material.
e. No residential at street level for retail. For areas designated as commercial space on the Regulating Plan in the Town Center
Area 1, residential use is not permitted on the street.
f. Civic buildings. Civic buildings, including buildings owned or leased by the City, shall be designed so as to be:
1. Architecturally significant;
2. A focal point for the area; and
3. To reinforce their position as an important place in the Town Center.
11. Retail frontage street buildings. In addition to the other requirements of subsection (C)(10) above, buildings along the retail
frontage street shall:
a. Include retail, restaurant and entertainment uses that are permitted and preferred along the retail frontage street designated on
the Regulating Plan.
b. Include ground-level retail, hotel, restaurant, entertainment, and other commercial and public-oriented uses that generate
pedestrian activity;
c. Include storefronts that are predominantly transparent (minimum 30 percent) of ground-level facade in glass windows and
entries at frequent intervals (no greater than 50 feet along the building frontage);
d. Incorporate adequate provisions for shade and pedestrian shelter;
e. Provide direct access to pedestrian passage and to convenient surface and/or structured parking which shall be located away
from the predominant public view along this frontage;
f. Be designed with continuous storefronts (within the developable areas of the retail frontage street), exclusive of streets,
pedestrian access, and other public gathering places; and
g. Hotels shall be permitted along the retail frontage street provided that there are no rooms intended for lodging and no meeting
rooms located on the street frontage on retail frontage street.
12. Height. All buildings and structures in the Town Center Area 1 shall have the following height regulations:
a. Minimum height: Two (2) floors or 24 feet.
b. Maximum height:
1. General requirement. Five (5) floors or 75 feet, whichever is less.
2. Exception to general requirement. In order to promote variation and hierarchy, taller buildings may be permitted if it is
demonstrated to the Planning and Zoning Commission that buildings with such additional height (e.g., hotels):
a. Reinforce the form and structure of the Town Center, by creating visual gateways, termini, focal points, etc.;
b. Provide a harmonious scale transition to adjacent development;
c. Are sufficiently spaced from other taller buildings to remain the exception rather than the rule;
d. Do not exceed a floorplate of 25,000 gross square feet above the fifth floor; and
e. Are treated in a way that will promote a unique architectural identity that is in scale with the community (e.g.,
articulation of building base and middle with distinctive roof silhouette).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/526
13. Roof regulations.
a. Design elements.
1. Parapets.
a. Parapets with horizontal tops having height changes of at least one (1) foot occurring horizontally no less than every
100 feet.
b. Parapets that do not have horizontal tops must have pitched or rounded tops with a pattern that repeats or varies no
less than every 100 feet.
c. All parapets must have detailing such as cornices, moldings, trim, or variations in brick coursing.
2. Sloping roofs must have at least two (2) of the following design elements:
a. Slope of at least 5:12.
b. Two (2) or more slope planes.
c. Overhanging eaves extending at least three (3) feet beyond the supporting wall.
b. Materials.
1. Pitched roofs may be clad in painted or galvanized metal, clay or concrete tile.
2. Flat roofs may be made of built-up roofing or a membrane roofing system.
c. Roof penetrations and rooftop mechanical systems shall be screened or set back from view at street level.
14. Designated service areas. Designated loading and service areas shall not be permitted along the retail frontage street or within 25
feet of residential properties or associated alleys in the Mixed Residential Area.
15. Residential minimum and optimum densities. A minimum density of 20 dwelling units per acre and an optimum density of 40
dwelling units per acre should be pursued for lots developed for residential use only within the Town Center.
16. Street trees.
a. Shade trees are required to be planted in an orderly fashion along all Town Center Area 1 streets.
b. Tree types may be varied by street to create variety.
c. Tree spacing shall be generally 35 to 40 feet on center in a regular pattern that creates or reinforces the line of the street.
17. Sidewalks. Sidewalks along the retail frontage street and other primary circulation routes within the Town Center Area 1 shall have
a minimum width of 12 feet, except that the waivers may be granted by the commission for a reduction to a minimum of 8 feet when it is
determined that certain conditions would make such reduction appropriate for the design of the project.
18. Development to a human scale. Site features including, but not limited to, environmental graphics, lighting, public art and
amenities, public and private gathering areas, building facades and landscaping that are located along the retail frontage street and other
pedestrian-oriented areas shall be designed to a human scale.
19. Design integration. A site development applicant shall demonstrate to the Administrator how the design of a proposed development
can be integrated with the remainder of the area in compliance with this Town Center Code. The commission shall have the authority to
determine compliance with such standards.
E. Lighting. Town Center buildings rear yard development standards. The following standards shall apply to the rear facades and rear
yards of Town Center Buildings: Average illumination for parking and loading areas in the rear yard must be a minimum of 0.5 footcandle
and a maximum of 4.0 footcandles. Posts for parking lot lights must not exceed 18 feet in height. Only metal halide lights are permitted,
unless otherwise approved by the Administrator. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded light fixtures. All light fixtures shall
be located, aimed, and/or shielded so as to prevent stray light from trespassing across property boundaries. The use of laser source light of
any similar high-intensity light, including searchlights, is prohibited.
F. Signage. See Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 13, Sign Regulations.
G. Parking regulations.
1. Required parking. The required parking for a use may be located anywhere in the Town Center Area 1. Community parking facilities
are encouraged.
2. Shared parking and adjacent on-street parking. Any shared parking or adjacent on-street parking may apply toward the minimum
parking requirements.
3. Surface parking lots. Surface parking lots are permitted provided the lots:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/526
a. Do not front on the retail frontage street;
b. Are well landscaped with hedges and other types of low planting and screening provided along all street frontages and other
public places; and
c. Are accessible from secondary streets.
4. Parking structures. Parking structures shall:
a. Be provided in general compliance with the Regulating Plan in order to provide for the intended density and mixture of uses
shown;
b. To the greatest extent possible, be encapsulated within or below buildings in a manner that conceals it from predominant public
view;
c. Not interrupt the continuity of the pedestrian environment;
d. Not be situated along the retail frontage street;
e. Be positioned to encourage maximum shared use;
f. To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate active ground-level uses when frontage on streets other than 183A Toll Road;
g. Not be built to have sloping floor elevations occur adjacent to public streets;
h. Have entryways and stairways be well lit and visible; and
i. Whenever feasible, not front on a public street. The exception shall be along 183A Toll Road.
5. Alleys. Parking in alleys is prohibited.
6. Bicycle parking. Convenient bicycle parking shall be provided for employees and customers.
H. Electrical and communications infrastructure.
1. Fiber optic cable. Underground fiber optic cable (or the latest technology equivalent) communications equipment shall be:
a. Provided for all development in the Town Center Area 1;
b. Shown on all utility plans for this area; and
c. Installed in conjunction with subdivision construction and site development.
2. Electric service. Site areas appropriate for outdoor gatherings shall be pre-wired for underground electric service and other events.
I. Retention pond.
1. Requirement. A retention pond shall be required to be installed with approximately the same size and in the same approximate
location as shown on the Regulating Plan (parcel #2 and parcel #14).
2. Slope conditions. Slope conditions adjacent to the pond are required to be not greater than 5:1 in order to promote a pedestrian
friendly environment.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.06, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.037 Town Center Area 2
A. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within Town Center Area 2:
1. Commercial uses. Unless otherwise prohibited, all uses permitted within the general Business (GB) district are permitted within
Town Center Area 2.
2. Civic uses.
3. Open spaces.
a. Conservation areas;
b. Outdoor recreational/athletic facilities;
c. Outdoor swimming pools;
d. Parks, playgrounds, and related amenities;
e. Streams, lakes, impounded waterways, and their drainage ways;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/526
f. Clubhouses and community centers;
g. Off-street parking areas; and
h. Pedestrian and bicycle trails.
B. Site development regulations. The Code of Ordinances and all other site development standards and requirements of the City apply to and
govern Town Center Area 2.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.07, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.038 Neighborhood Commercial Area
A. Purposes. The Neighborhood Commercial Area is designed to:
1. Contain retail, commercial, civic, and limited residential uses to meet the needs of community residents;
2. Include a concentration of retail services, including shops, restaurants, cafes, and restaurant venues;
3. Attract office and multifamily residential development all oriented to the public framework of streets and open spaces;
4. Be pedestrian-oriented to encourage pedestrian movement between the Mixed Residential Area and the Neighborhood Commercial
Area; and
5. Create usable open space to be an integral component of the area.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the Neighborhood Commercial Area:
1. Residential uses.
a. Condominiums; and
b. Multifamily residential.
2. Commercial uses.
a. Unless otherwise prohibited, all uses permitted within a General Business (GB), Neighborhood Business (NB), Local Business
(LB), or Multifamily (MF) zoning district are permitted within the Neighborhood Commercial Area;
b. Indoor kennels;
c. Car washes; and
d. Drive-through commercial uses.
e. A minimum of 40 percent of the building square footage in the Neighborhood Commercial Area shall be comprised of retail,
personal services, and/or restaurant uses.
3. Civic uses.
4. Open space.
a. Conservation areas;
b. Outdoor recreational/athletic fields;
c. Outdoor swimming pools;
d. Parks, playgrounds, and related amenities;
e. Streams, lakes, impounded waterways, and their drainage ways;
f. Clubhouses and community centers;
g. Off-street parking areas; and
h. Pedestrian and bicycle trails.
C. Site development regulations.
1. Setbacks. Except as set forth in subsection (C)(2), Residential Buffer Areas, below there shall be no required minimum setbacks
within the Neighborhood Commercial Area.
2. Residential buffer areas. Notwithstanding the above, a 25-foot landscaped area and building setback line shall be required for
property in the Neighborhood Commercial Area that abuts Discovery Boulevard, New Hope Drive, and/or 183A Toll Road, and in any
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/526
residential buffer area.
3. Mixed use. Residential units are permitted above or behind a commercial use and are secondary to that commercial use.
4. Automobiles. Automobiles shall be accommodated in a manner that provides for convenience but does not undermine the integrity of
the public environment or the quality of the pedestrian realm.
5. Alcohol. Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted only within areas set forth in and subject to the provisions of this
Chapter 11, the Code of Ordinances, and applicable state statutes.
6. Residential elevations. A residential use with street-level living space shall have a finished first-floor elevation not less than 24
inches above the elevation of the curb along the lot frontage except when such requirement shall result in a slab elevation exceeding 48
inches above grade on any portion of the slab due to topographic conditions, in which event the elevation may be reduced to the minimum
amount necessary as to not cause an elevation of the slab that is 48 inches above ground. Notwithstanding the above, variations may be
considered for this requirement in order to protect an existing tree. The elevation shall be measured from the location on the curb that is
perpendicular to the primary entry of the principal dwelling structure.
7. Location of unsightly equipment. Dumpsters, mechanical equipment, storage areas and areas used for refuse collection:
a. Shall be located so as to not detract from public use areas;
b. Are not allowed in a residential buffer area.
8. Facades.
a. All sides of a building that are visible from a public street, public gathering area or green shall be compatible with or equivalent
to the architectural features, materials and the articulation of the front facade of the building.
b. A minimum of 30 percent of the front facade on the ground floor of commercial buildings shall consist of window or door
openings, allowing views into and out of the interior of the building.
9. Height.
a. The maximum height of Neighborhood Commercial Area buildings shall be the lesser of three (3) stories or 40 feet in height;
provided, however, the maximum height of any portion of a neighborhood center area building in a residential buffer area shall be
18 feet.
b. The height of Neighborhood Commercial Area buildings shall provide a harmonious scale transition to adjacent development
and shall be treated in such a way that will promote a unique architectural identity that is in scale with the community (e.g.,
articulation of building base and middle with distinctive roof silhouette).
10. Roof regulations.
a. Pitched roofs may be clad in painted or galvanized metal, clay or concrete tile.
b. Flat roofs may be made of built-up roofing or a membrane roofing system.
c. Principal pitched roofs shall be symmetrical gable, hip, or barrel vault with a pitch no less than 5:12. Porch and stoop roofs may
be 2:12 minimum pitch.
d. Roof penetrations and rooftop mechanical systems shall be screened or set back from view at street level.
11. Street trees.
a. Shade trees planted in an orderly fashion along all Neighborhood Commercial streets are required.
b. Tree types may be varied by street to create variety.
c. Tree spacing shall be a minimum of 40 feet in a regular pattern that creates or reinforces the line of the street.
12. Landscape standards. The Neighborhood Commercial Area shall comply with all landscaping ordinances pursuant to the Code of
Ordinances.
13. Tree preservation. The layout of the Neighborhood Commercial Area shall be designed in such a manner as to maximize
preservation of existing trees on the site. Additionally, the existing tree clusters shall:
a. Serve as a focal point of the site design;
b. Utilized as either public or private open space; and
c. Be designed with features and amenities that are conducive to public gathering.
14. Design integration.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/526
a. A site development applicant shall demonstrate:
1. How the design of a proposed development can be integrated with the remainder of the area in compliance with the Town
Center Code and Regulating Plan; and
2. Perform to the standards set forth in this division.
b. The commission shall have the authority to determine compliance with such standards.
E. Parking regulations. All parking requirements shall be in accordance with current Code of Ordinances, with the following exceptions:
1. Required parking. The required parking for a use may be located anywhere in the Neighborhood Commercial Area. Community
parking facilities are encouraged.
2. Shared parking and adjacent on-street parking. Any shared parking or adjacent on-street parking may apply toward the minimum
parking requirements.
3. Alleys. Parking in alleys is prohibited.
4. Bicycle parking. Convenient bicycle parking shall be provided for employees and customers in accordance with the existing
provisions required for a (GB) General Business zoning district.
F. Access to Mixed Residential Area. Public access between the Mixed Residential Area and the Neighborhood Commercial Area shall be
incorporated into the site design of the Neighborhood Commercial Area.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.08, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.039 Restrictive covenants
A. Filing required. Conditions, covenants, and restrictions for the Mixed Residential Area, the Town Center Area 1, the Town Center Area 2, and
the Neighborhood Commercial Area shall be filed in the county real property records before a:
1. Final plat may be approved;
2. Lot is sold; or
3. Building permit issued.
B. Requirements for proper filing. The conditions, covenants, and restrictions shall:
1. Create one (1) or more property owners' associations (POA) with mandatory membership for each property owner;
2. Provide for the ownership, development, management, and maintenance of private open space;
3. Be effective for a term of not less than 50 years;
4. Require that the property owners' association obtain the approval of the Administrator regarding
a. The disposition and management of private open space before it may be dissolved; and
b. Amendments to the conditions, covenants, and restrictions, which relate to provisions of this division.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.09, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.040 Development procedures
A. Generally. Preliminary plans and final plats will follow the same procedures as conventional projects, but the City will expedite review of such.
B. Regulating Plan. The Regulating Plan, which also constitutes the concept plan:
1. Includes the Mixed Residential Area, the Town Center Area 1, the Town Center Area 2, and the Neighborhood Commercial Area on
one (1) plan which also constitutes the concept plan.
2. Reflects a general projection of land uses to be representative of the mixture of land uses, their locations and their approximate
intensities.
3. Shall contain the following general information:
a. Location and sizes of the Mixed Residential Area, the Town Center Area 1, the Town Center Area 2, and the Neighborhood
Commercial Area;
b. A general description of land use categories and intensities;
c. Locations of civic uses;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/526
d. Location and size of Limited Commercial Overlay areas in the Mixed Residential Area;
e. General layout of the major transportation network, including street types in accordance with this Town Center Code;
f. Approximate locations and sizes of private open space and public open space;
g. General locations of retention ponds;
h. Location of the retail frontage street within the Town Center Area 1; and
i. General locations of traffic calming measures.
C. Site development and subdivision review.
1. Conceptual design review. The approval process for conceptual design review shall include review of the following:
a. A bubble plan for the site; and
b. Comprehensive design elements of the structures and site, including, but not limited to the following:
1. Elevations;
2. Building materials;
3. Fenestration;
4. Environmental graphics;
5. Public art;
6. Public amenities;
7. Landscaping and tree preservation;
8. Streetscape amenities (including the ratio of building height to width of the street);
9. Relationship to adjacent uses; and
10. Vertical integration of uses.
2. Site plan review. A site plan review will be required for the Town Center Area 1, the Town Center Area 2, and the Neighborhood
Commercial Area.
3. Consolidated review. Subdivision and site plan review of the Town Center Area 1 and the Neighborhood Commercial Area shall be a
consolidated review process.
a. Subdivision review and approval shall occur concurrently with site plan review and approval.
b. Additional and/or revised zoning standards may be considered by the City Council prior to site plan and subdivision approval.
c. Replatting is permitted subsequent to such approvals if in compliance with the ordinance and the approved site plan.
D. Revisions to the Town Center Code.
1. Minor revisions. The Administrator may approve minor revisions to the Town Center Code if the Administrator determines that there
are no adverse effects to:
a. Areas that are part of a final plat; or
b. The overall intent of the Town Center Code.
c. The following shall be considered as minor revisions:
1. The size or configuration of a Town Center Area, Town Center Area 2, Neighborhood Commercial Area or Mixed
Residential Area may be revised if the Administrator determines that the basic layout of the district remains the same and the
Regulating Plan functions as well as before the revision.
2. Land uses and land use intensities designated on the Regulating Plan may be revised so long as the basic layout of the
district remains the same and the Regulating Plan functions as well as before the revision.
3. The location or size of a civic use may be revised if the Administrator determines that the revised location or size is
appropriate.
4. The location of a commercial use in a Mixed Residential Area may be revised if the Administrator determines that the
revised location is appropriate.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/526
5. The location of public open space, including parkland dedication, may be revised if the Administrator determines that the
revised location is appropriate.
6. The locations of major utility facilities and easements may be revised if the Administrator determines the revised
locations are more functional or appropriate.
7. The location, classification and frontage type of streets may be modified if such modifications are deemed to be
appropriate by the Administrator.
8. Other adjustments to the Regulating Plan that the Administrator deems a minor revision.
9. Allowing front-loaded single-family attached residential and single-family detached residential (that is, not requiring an
alley) within reasonable criteria which address density, adequate on-site parking, and site engineering considerations.
10. Minor changes which do not substantially change the Town Center Code or the Regulating Plan, may be approved
administratively, if approved in writing, by the Administrator.
2. Major revisions. Any major revision or change to the Town Center Code and/or the Regulating Plan which is not categorized as
a “minor revision” above or otherwise deemed a “minor revision” by the Administrator shall be approved following the City's
procedure for a zoning change. Adding land area to the district is considered a major revision.
3. Notice. Any required notification of surrounding property owners for major revisions to the Regulating Plan and/or the Town
Center Code shall be limited to notification of property owners within 200 feet of the boundaries of the specific lot or parcel that is
subject to the revision and shall not apply to the district or area as a whole. No notification shall be required for minor revisions to
either the Town Center Code or the Regulating Plan.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.10, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.041 Definitions
For the purposes of this Town Center Code (Town Center), the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed
to them in this division 2, Town Center Code.
Apartment house and apartments. A building, or portion thereof, which is designed or occupied as the home or residence of more than two (2)
households living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building, and includes flats and other multifamily dwellings.
Area. Area may refer to the Town Center Area, Town Center Area 2, Neighborhood Commercial Area, or the Mixed Residential Area.
Arts and crafts workshop. Places associated with artistic endeavors such as but not limited to a painter's studio and sculptor's gallery. Artistic
endeavors are limited to those uses that do not emanate excessive noise; noxious fumes; or vibrations.
Boutique retail. Small-scale shops with less than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area such as an antique store or art gallery.
Civic uses. The use of a parcel of land for one (1) or more of the following purposes:
1. Administrative and business offices used by a governmental entity;
2. Park and recreation services;
3. College and university;
4. Cultural services;
5. Postal facility usage;
6. Private and public primary and secondary educational uses;
7. Public assembly use;
8. Safety and medical services; and
9. Transportation terminal uses.
Corner grocery. Grocery or specialty food store with no more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
CPTC Development Agreement. An agreement by and between the City of Cedar Park and V-S Cedar Park, Ltd., dated December 20, 2001, as
amended by the First Amendments to Development Agreement, executed by and among the City, VSCP, and Continental Homes of Texas, L.P.
(“Continental”), dated May 15, 2003, and as further amended by the Second Amendment to Development Agreement executed by and among the
City, VSCP, and Continental executed concurrently with or pursuant to the adoption of this Town Center Code.
Environmental graphics. Signage and graphics used in an exterior setting for identifying uses, providing direction and information and for decorative
purposes, including banners and flags, and whether for temporary or permanent display.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/526
Facade wall. Any separate face of a building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building that encloses usable space.
Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction, or in a direction within 45 degrees of one another, they are considered as part of a single
facade wall.
Front facade. The side of the building that provides the primary entrance into the building.
Front facade wall. The facade wall containing the primary entrance to the building. If two (2) or more facade walls have entrances of equal
significance, each facade wall will be considered a “front facade wall.”
Home office. Office with home owner as the sole business proprietor with no employees.
Limited Commercial Overlay. Areas within the Mixed Residential Area, which are designated on the Regulating Plan, that allows for development of
(or for conversion at a later time of existing residential uses), limited lodging, limited office, and/or limited commercial use, as defined in this Town
Center Code.
Limited food service. Retail use including small cafes and coffee shops with no more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
Limited lodging. Buildings for short-term human habitation including bed-and-breakfast lodging establishments or guest cottages that are also owneroccupied.
Low maintenance materials. Vinyl, painted wood, and wrought iron.
Mixed-use. Any use of a lot or tracts of land for more than one (1) permitted use.
Multifamily. Any use of lots or tracts of land on which three (3) or more dwelling units are built within one (1) building.
Neighborhood commercial. Video rental stores, pharmacy, or clothes cleaning agency with no more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
Open space. A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, which may include floodplain and wetland areas,
within a development area and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of the development area and, where designated, the community at
large.
Open style fence. A fence designed to enclose a private yard, which abuts a park, green or alley. The required features of this fence include the ability
to see through the fence (a minimum of 40 percent of the fence surface area shall be open) and construction of low maintenance materials. Low
maintenance materials include vinyl, painted wood or wrought iron.
Parkland. An open area, including improvements, which is dedicated to the City pursuant to this Town Center Code or Code of Ordinances, as
applicable to meet City parkland dedication requirements.
Parcel. A generalized land unit of the Town Center, which is graphically portrayed on the Regulating Plan and is designated with a land use and
intensity of use. A parcel may or may not be further subdivided during the subdivision process into lots and streets.
Plaza. A plaza is an open area adjacent to, or part of, a civic building or facility. Plazas function as gathering places and may incorporate a variety of
temporary activities such as vendors and display stands. Landscaping for a plaza contains durable pavement and includes formal tree plantings.
Property owners' association. An organization made up of the property owners in the area, which is responsible for maintenance of private streets,
alleys, and the open spaces not conveyed to the City, and which shall have the authority to make and collect assessments sufficient to operate and
maintain private streets, alleys and open spaces.
Rear facade wall. The facade wall containing service areas.
Regulating Plan. The general development plan for adoption of zoning and concept plan for the Cedar Park Town Center.
Residential accessory dwelling. An additional dwelling unit located:
1. Within the principal dwelling structure of the lot;
2. In a freestanding building within the same lot as the principal dwelling structure; or
3. Above a residential garage.
Residential buffer area. A portion of either the Town Center Area 1 or the Neighborhood Commercial Area which abuts or adjoins:
1. The Mixed Residential Area and which is within 40 feet of a lot upon which is built or may be built:
a. A single-family attached residential building; or
b. A single-family detached residential building; or
2. Parkland.
Retail frontage street. The public street within the Town Center Area 1 designated on the Regulating Plan on which retail, restaurant, hotel,
entertainment, and other commercial uses promoting public interaction and pedestrian activity are the intended uses.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/526
Side facade wall. Any facade wall that is not a front facade wall or a rear facade wall.
Single-family attached residential.
1. The use of a series of sites for:
a. Two (2) or more dwelling units;
b. Constructed with common or abutting walls; and
c. Each located on a separate ground parcel within the total development site.
2. Condominiums and townhouses can both be implemented as single-family attached residential.
3. Multifamily is not single-family attached residential.
Single-family detached residential. The use of a lot for one (1) dwelling unit with no common or abutting walls with another dwelling unit.
Studio office. Office where there is no more than two (2) employees.
Temporary construction site office. Temporary buildings used for uses incidental to construction work on the premises which shall be:
1. Removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; and
2. For which no temporary living quarters shall be permitted.
Temporary home sales office. Temporary office buildings used as a sales office for the development of a new subdivision or for construction purposes
established and operated within a subdivision or a construction site.
Townhouse. A single-family attached residential dwelling, located on its own separate lot, having a common wall with or abutting one (1) or more
adjoining dwelling units in a townhouse group.
Townhouse group. Two (2) or more contiguous townhouses within a contiguous development.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.02.11, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.02.042–11.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Land Uses
Sec. 11.02.061 Generally
The tables in this division describe which land uses are a permitted use, conditional use, special use, and prohibited use, as defined below. (Ordinance
CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.03.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.062 Legend
A. Using the tables. The tables in this section list the applicable land uses in rows, organized by general land use category. The zoning districts are
arranged in columns. Where rows and columns intersect, a letter indicates if the use is permitted, conditional, special, or prohibited in the district, as
stated below.
B. Symbols. All the tables in this section use the following symbols:
1. “P” means that the land use is permitted by right in the specified zoning district.
2. “C” means that the land use is a conditional use, which is permitted, subject to the applicable conditional use standards provided in
Article 11.02, division 4, Conditional and Special Uses.
3. “S” means that the use is allowed only as a special use, which may be approved only after a public hearing and consideration by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and a subsequent public hearing and determination by the City Council, and are subject to:
a. The applicable special use standards for the specified use, as stated in Article 11.02, division 4, Conditional and Special Uses;
and
b. The procedures stated in section 11.06.085, Special Use Permit.
4. “–” means that the use is a prohibited use in the specified zoning district.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.03.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.063 Residential uses by zoning district
Table 11.02.063. Residential Uses by Zoning District
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/526
Land Use Standards
Reference
Zoning Districts
Interim Residential Nonresidential
Mixed Use
Districts
Overlay
District
DR ES SR SU UR MF NB LB GB PO HC LI HI H PS OG OR MU PA EC
Legend: P = Permitted; C = Conditional; S = Special Use; – = Prohibited
Accessory
dwelling unit
11.02.092
(1)
C C C – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Apartment
11.02.092
(8)
– – – – – C – – – – – – – – – – – P P P
Bed-and-breakfast
facility
11.02.092
(12)
C – – – – – C – – – – – – – – – – C C C
Community
garden
11.02.092
(16)
C C C C C C – – – – – – – – C C C C C –
Community home
11.02.092
(17)
C C C C C C – – – – – – – – – – – C C –
Dwelling, duplex – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Dwelling, singlefamily
P P P P – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Family home
11.02.092
(25)
C C C C C – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Home occupation
11.02.092
(30)
C C C C C C – – – – – – – – – – – C C C
Industrialized
home
11.02.092
(33)
C – C C C – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Manufactured
home
11.02.092
(34)
C – C – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Mobile home – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/526
Townhome 11.02.092
(48)
– – – – C – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.03.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.064 Nonresidential uses by zoning district
Table 11.02.064. Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District
Land Use Standards
Reference
Zoning Districts
Interim Residential Nonresidential
Mixed Use
District
Overlay
District
DR ES SR SU UR MF NB LB GB PO HC LI HI H PS OG OR MU PA EC
Legend: P = Permitted; C = Conditional; S = Special Use; – = Prohibited
Adult day care 11.02.092
(2) – – – – – – C C C – – – – C C – – – – –
Agricultural support
service
P – – – – – – – – – P P P – – – – – – –
Airport – – – – – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – –
Alcoholic beverage
establishment
11.02.092
(3) – – – – – – – C C C C C C – – – – C C C
Alcoholic beverage
sales, off-site
consumption
11.02.092
(4) – – – – – – – C C – C – – – – – – C C C
Amenity center P P P P P P – – – – – – – – – – – P P –
Animal grooming
11.02.092
(5) – – – – – – C C P – P P P – – – – C C –
Animal veterinary
service, large animal
11.02.092
(6) – – – – – – – – – – – C C – – – – – – –
Animal veterinary
service, small animal
11.02.092
(7) – – – – – – – C P – P P P – – – – S – –
Apiary P – – – – – – – – – – – – – P P P – – –
Archery range – – – – – – – – – – – – P – P – P – – –
Art studio, gallery
– – – – – – P P P P P – – – – – – P P P
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/526
Assisted living,
congregate or respite
care
– – – – – S – – – – – – – P – – – S – –
Automobile, major
repair and service
– – – – – – – – – – P P P – – – – – – –
Automobile, minor
service
11.02.092
(9) – – – – – – – – C – P – – – – – – – – –
Automobile, rental
11.02.092
(10) – – – – – – – – C – P – – – – – – – – –
Automobile, sales – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – – – – – –
Bank, credit union, and
financial institution
11.02.092
(11) – – – – – – – P P P – – – – – – – C C –
Broadcasting center
11.02.092
(13) – – – – – – – – – – P P P – P – C – – –
Bus or taxi depot/
transit station
– – – – – – – – – – P – P – P – – – – –
Caretaker or guard
residence
11.02.092
(14) – – – – – – – – – – C C C – – – – – – –
Car wash
11.02.092
(15) – – – – – – – – C – C – – – – – – – – –
Cemetery/ columbarium – – – – – – – – – – – – – – P – – – – –
Civic club – – – – – – P P P P P – – – – – – P P –
College, university or
vocational school
– – – – – – – P P P P P P P P – – P P –
Commercial parking lot – – – – – – – – S – S – – – – – – S – –
Commissary – – – – – – – – P – P P – – – – – – – –
Concrete, mortar, and
asphalt batching
operations, permanent
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Construction sales and
services
11.02.092
(18) – – – – – – – – – – C C P – – – – – – –
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/526
Contractor's
shop/storage yard
– – – – – – – – – – P P P – – – – – – –
Craft brewing/
distillery/winery
production with onpremise
consumption
11.02.092
(19) – – – – – – – – C – C C – – – – – C C C
Credit access business
11.02.092
(20) – – – – – – – – – – C – – – – – – – – –
Crematory – – – – – – – – – – P P P – – – – – – –
Data center – – – – – – – – P P P P P – – – – – P –
Day-care center
11.02.092
(21) – – – – – – C C C – – – – C C – – C C –
Day-care center,
incidental
11.02.092
(22) – – – – – – C C C C C C C C C – C C C C
Drug store
11.02.092
(23) – – – – – – C C P P – – – P – – – C C –
Extraction (gas, gravel,
minerals, oil, or sand)
11.02.092
(24) – – – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – – – –
Farm/ranch P – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Flea market – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Food processing
11.02.092
(26) – – – – – – – – – – C C C – – – – – – –
Fortune teller/ psychic
11.02.092
(27) – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – – – – – –
Funeral home or
mortuary
– – – – – – – – P – P – – – – – – – – –
Gasoline service station
11.02.092
(28) – – – – – – – – C – C – – – – – – – – –
Government facility
(outdoor operations)
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – P P P – P –
Government office – – – – – – P P P P P P P P P – P P P P
Grocery 11.02.092
(29)
– – – – – – C C P – P – – – – – – C C C
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/526
Gym – – – – – – P P P P P P – P P – P P P –
Head shop – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Heavy industry – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Heliport (accessory) – – – – – – – – – – – – – P P – – – P –
Hospital services
11.02.092
(31) – – – – – – – – – – – – – C – – – – – –
Hotel
11.02.092
(32) – – – – – – – – C – – – – – – – – C C C
Indoor arena or theater – – – – – – – – P – P – – – P – P P P P
Indoor commercial
amusement
– – – – – – – P P – P – – – – – – P P P
Kennel – – – – – – – – S – P P P – – – – – – –
Landfill (disposal) – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Laundromat – – – – – – – P P – P P – – – – – P P –
Lumberyard, wholesale – – – – – – – – – – P P P – – – – – – –
Manufactured home
sales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Manufacturing and
fabrication, general
– – – – – – – – – – – S P – – – – – – –
Manufacturing and
fabrication, light
– – – – – – – – – – – P P – – – – – – –
Massage, unlicensed – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Medical clinic – – – – – – – P P P – – – P – – – – – –
Medical office – – – – – – P P P P P – – P – – – P P –
Mobile food
establishment court
– – – – – – – S S – – – – – – – – S S –
Museum
– – – – – – – P P P P – – – – – – P P P
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/526
Non-emergency
transport service
– – – – – – – P P – – – – – – – – – – –
Nursery/ greenhouse,
retail
11.02.092
(35) – – – – – – – – C – P P – – – – – – – –
Nursery/ greenhouse,
wholesale
– – – – – – – – – – P P P – – – – – – –
Nursing or convalescent
home
– – – – – S – – – – – – – P – – – S – –
Office, general – – – – – – P P P P P P P P P – – P P –
Office/ showroom/
warehouse
– – – – – – – – P – P P P – – – – – – –
Outdoor arena, stadium
or amphitheater
11.02.092
(36) – – – – – – – – S – S S – – P – P S S P
Outdoor commercial
amusement
11.02.092
(37) – – – – – – – – S – S S – – – – – S S P
Outdoor recreation
(athletic fields/
facilities)
11.02.092
(38) C C C C C C – – – – – – – – P – P C C P
Outdoor recreation
(park, playground)
P P P P P P – – – – – – – – P P P P P P
Outdoor storage/ sales
or display (primary use)
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Paintball course
11.02.092
(39) – – – – – – – – – – C C C – C – C – – –
Parking garage
(primary use)
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – P – – P P P
Pawnshop – – – – – – – – – – – – P – – – – – – –
Personal services – – – – – – P P P P P – – P – – – P P –
Place of public
assembly
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P – P P P P
Power or solid waste
energy recovery plant
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – P – – – – –
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/526
Print shop 11.02.092
(40)
– – – – – – C P P – P – – – – – – – – –
Private school (grades
K-12)
– S S S S S P P P P S S S S S – – S S –
Public school (grades
K-12)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P –
Reception/banquet hall – – – – – – – – P – – – – – – – – – – –
Recreational vehicle
park
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – S – – –
Recreational vehicle
sales and service
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Recycling processing
and collection
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Research, testing lab, or
product development
11.02.092
(41) – – – – – – – – C C C P P P – – – – C –
Restaurant, dine-in only
11.02.092
(42) – – – – – – C C C C C – – C – – – C C C
Restaurant, drive-in or
drive-through
11.02.092
(43) – – – – – – – C C – C – – – – – – S S –
Retail sales
11.02.092
(44) – – – – – – C C C – C – – – – – – C C C
Salvage facility and
yard
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Self-storage facility
11.02.092
(45) – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – – – – – –
Sexually oriented
business
11.02.092
(46) – – – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – – – –
Sport shooting range – – – – – – – – – – S S S – S – – – – –
Stone cutting – – – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – – – –
Tattoo parlor/body
piercing studio
11.02.092
(47) – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – – – – – –
Transportation terminal 11.02.092
(49)
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – –
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/526
Utility services, general P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Utility services, major
11.02.092
(50) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Vending kiosk
11.02.092
(51) – – – – – – C C C C C C C C C – – C – –
Warehouse and
distribution
11.02.092
(52) – – – – – – – – – – C P P – – – – – – –
Wireless
telecommunications
facilities, buildingmounted
11.02.092
(53) – – – – – – – – C C C C C C C – – C C C
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
11.02.092
(54) – – – – – – – – – – S S S – – – – – – –
Wrecker, impound yard – – – – – – – – – – – – S – – – – – – –
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.03.04, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.065 Temporary uses
Table 11.02.065. Temporary Uses by Zoning District
Land Use Standards
Reference
Zoning Districts
Interim/Residential Nonresidential
Mixed Use
Districts
Overlay
District
DR ES SR SU UR NB LB GB PO HC LI HI H PS OG OR MU PA EC
Legend: P = Permitted; C = Conditional; S = Special Use; – = Prohibited
Model home/onsite
real estate
office
11.02.093 C C C C C – – – – – – – – – – – C C C
Portable storage
unit
11.02.093 C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Temporary
construction
building
11.02.093 C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Temporary
construction
dumpster
11.02.093 C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/526
Temporary
construction yard
11.02.093 C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.03.05, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.066 Unlisted or functionally similar uses
A. Authorization of unlisted use.
1. The Administrator may authorize a use in a zoning district if:
a. A proposed use is not specified in section 11.02.063, Residential Uses by Zoning District, section 11.02.064, Nonresidential
Uses by Zoning District, or section 11.02.065, Temporary Uses; and
b. The Administrator has made a determination that the use is either a subcategory of or is functionally similar to a permitted,
conditional, special, or temporary use.
2. An authorized use under this section shall comply with all regulations that apply to the use of which the authorized use is a
subcategory or to which it is functionally similar.
B. If not authorized, then prohibited. If the Administrator determines that a proposed use is not a subcategory of, or functionally similar to, a
permitted, conditional, special, or temporary use, then the use is a prohibited use.
C. Decision criteria. The Administrator shall determine whether a proposed use is a subcategory of, or is functionally comparable to, a permitted,
conditional, special, or temporary use based on relevant considerations, including the following:
1. Nature of use and whether it involves dwelling units, sales, processing, storage, employment, etc.;
2. Parking demand;
3. Average daily and peak hour trip generation (cars and trucks);
4. Noise;
5. Lighting;
6. Dust;
7. Odors;
8. Solid waste generation;
9. Potentially hazardous conditions, such as projectiles leaving the site;
10. Use and storage of hazardous materials;
11. Character of buildings and structures; and
12. Hours of operation.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.03.06, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.02.067–11.02.090 Reserved
Division 4. Conditional and Special Uses
Sec. 11.02.091 General provisions
A. Applicability. A conditional use (C) or a special (S) use permit may be granted where authorized pursuant to table 11.02.063, Residential Uses
by Zoning District, table 11.02.064, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District, and table 11.02.065, Temporary Uses by Zoning District, to certain land
uses that are not a permitted use in some or all zoning districts of the City, but are nevertheless recognized as being desirable to the full function and
development of the City under appropriate circumstances and in conformity with the goals and objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan. Special
use permits shall provide a means whereby proposals for such land uses may be examined on a case-by-case basis to determine whether, and under
what conditions, these uses may be permitted.
B. Procedure.
1. Conditional uses shall be allowed if the standards and conditions stated in section 11.02.092, Conditional and Special Use Standards
and Conditions, are met.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/526
2. Special uses may only be approved following a public hearing and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and a
subsequent hearing and decision by the City Council. The special use approval process [is] stated in Article 11.06, division 3, part II,
Public Hearing Approvals, which allows for certain land uses that are not permitted by right to be granted approval in some zoning
districts subject to the standards and conditions stated in section 11.02.092, Conditional and Special Use Standards and Conditions, and
section 11.06.085, Special Use Permit. If there are special uses identified in Article 11.02, division 3, Land Uses, that are not included in
this division, all applicable standards of this Chapter and all conditions of approval that may be recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and determined by the City Council shall apply.
3. There shall be no variances considered with regard to the regulations set forth herein.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.04.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.092 Conditional and special use standards and conditions
In accordance with the land use designations noted in table 11.02.063, Residential Uses by Zoning District, table 11.02.064, Nonresidential Uses by
Zoning District and table 11.02.065, Temporary Uses by Zoning District, the following uses are permitted as conditional uses or may be considered
as special uses if the following requirements are met:
1. Accessory dwelling unit, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The accessory dwelling unit is accessory to a residential dwelling unit, and cannot be a manufactured home; and
b. All requirements of section 11.04.032, Accessory Dwelling Units, are met.
2. Adult day care, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The operator for the use meets all certification, licensing, and/or monitoring requirements as per the Texas Human Resources
Code, chapter 103, Day Activity and Health Services.
3. Alcoholic beverage establishment, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is in compliance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code; and
b. Pursuant to sections 109.33, 109.331 and 109.57 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the use is not located:
i. Within 300 feet of a church, public hospital, public school, private school, and/or day-care center or child-care center, in
accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code section 109.33; or
ii. Within 1,000 feet of a public school, private school, day-care center, or child-care facility if the City Council receives a
request from the school district or private school in accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code section 109.33, if the
establishment receives 50 percent but less than 75 percent of its gross receipts for the premises from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages; or
iii. Within 1,000 feet of a church, public hospital, public school, private school, and/or day-care center, child-care center, or
single-family residential zoning district, if the establishment derives 75 percent or more of its gross revenue from the onpremise
sale of alcoholic beverages.
4. Alcoholic beverage sales, off-site consumption, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is in compliance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code; and
b. Pursuant to section 109.33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the use is not located within:
i. 300 feet from a church, public hospital, public school, private school, and/or day-care center or child-care center, in
accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code section 109.33; or
ii. If at any time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission to
an establishment, place of business, or person and the establishment, place of business or person satisfies the requirements
regarding the distance requirements noted above, then the same is deemed to satisfy the distance requirements for all subject
renewals of the license or permit.
5. Animal grooming, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. No operations, including dog runs or recreation areas, are conducted outdoors;
b. If the use is located less than 100 feet from any residential zoning district, the building is sound attenuated such that the sound
is not audible at the residential property line; and
c. If the use is located in a multi-tenant building, ventilation systems are installed to prevent odors and allergens from circulating
to other parts of the building.
6. Animal veterinary services, large animal, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/526
a. If the use is located less than 100 feet from any residential zoning district, the building is sound attenuated such that the sound
is not audible at the residential property line;
b. Any docks and animal shoots are placed in an interior or rear yard provided that such yard does not face a public street or a
residential zoning district; and
c. If the use is located in a multi-tenant building, ventilation systems are installed to prevent odors and allergens from circulating
to other parts of the building.
7. Animal veterinary services, small animal, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. No operations, including dog runs or recreation areas, are conducted outdoors;
b. If the use is located less than 100 feet from any residential zoning district, the building is sound attenuated such that the sound
is not audible at the residential property line; and
c. If the use is located in a multi-tenant building, ventilation systems are installed to prevent odors and allergens from circulating
to other parts of the building.
8. Apartment, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use meets the standards of section 11.03.153(G), Garden-Style Apartments in Multifamily District; and
b. The use is only permitted on properties zoned Multifamily (MF) as of the effective date of this Chapter.
9. Automotive, minor service, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. All service and repairs are performed within a fully enclosed building;
b. Wrecked or inoperable vehicles are not stored within or outside of the facility;
c. Automobile bays are located perpendicular to the public right-of-way; and
d. Access is taken from a collector or higher roadway classification.
10. Automobile, rental, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. All permanent storage of material, merchandise, and equipment, including wrecked vehicles and excluding the display of
vehicles for rent, are stored in areas screened from view;
b. Access is taken from a collector or higher roadway classification; and
c. The office space is no larger than 3,000 square feet.
11. Bank, credit union, and financial institution, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Drive-through facilities are prohibited in the Mixed Use (MU) district; and
b. Drive-through facilities are not adjacent to or within 100 feet of a residential zoning district.
12. Bed-and-breakfast facility, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The facility owner or innkeeper occupies the residence;
b. The rental of rooms is on a daily or weekly basis to tourists or vacationers, for which the rental period does not exceed 14
consecutive days in any 30-day period for any such tourist or vacationer;
c. No meals are served to the general public;
d. There are no more than five (5) guest rooms;
e. Each guest room has access to a hall or exterior door;
f. The use has been permitted by the Williamson or Travis County Health Department;
g. No other bed-and-breakfast is located within a one-mile radius of the property;
h. Access is taken from a collector or higher roadway classification; and
i. The minimum lot size is 15,000 square feet.
13. Broadcasting center, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is an accessory use within educational campuses, governmental facilities and professional sports venues; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/526
b. Building- and/or roof-mounted antennas or towers project no higher than 20 percent of the allowable building height in the
district in which it is located.
14. Caretaker or guard residence, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is an accessory use to the principal use of the property; and
b. The residence has the same architecture as the principal use.
15. Car wash, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. It is automatic or full-service;
b. There are no more than three (3) car washing bays;
c. All mechanical equipment, excluding vacuum units is enclosed within a building;
d. All facilities are designed and configured such that any outdoor spraying preparation or drying activities are directed away from
any abutting residential district;
e. Bay access is oriented to prevent headlights from shining onto any street or abutting a residential district;
f. If self-service vacuums are provided, a minimum of one (1) parking space per vacuum is required, which will not interfere with
site circulation, driveways, or fire lanes;
g. Access is taken from a collector or higher classification roadway; and
h. All new full-service vehicle wash facilities, are equipped with, operate, and maintain in operation, a water recycling system that
will recycle not less than 50 percent of the water being used by the facility, and for existing automobile wash facilities, such system
is required as a condition of any permit to:
i. Expand the floor area of the vehicle wash facility building by more than 50 percent of the area of the vehicle wash facility
building as it existed on the effective date of this Chapter;
ii. Demolish, destroy or remove and then replace more than 50 percent of the floor area of the vehicle wash facility building
as it existed on the effective date of this Chapter, except for the purpose of replacing or repairing water recycling equipment; or
iii. Enlarge the water tap, meter, or service line.
16. Community garden, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Compost materials are stored at least 20 feet from all adjacent property lines;
b. All seed, fertilizer, and animal feed is stored in sealed, rodent-proof containers and housed in an enclosed structure; and
c. The land is served by a water supply sufficient to support the cultivation practices on-site.
17. Community home, is permitted subject to the proposed home complying with all regulations of Texas Human Resources Code,
chapter 123, Community Homes for Persons with Disabilities.
18. Construction sales and services, are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Liquids, gels, and pastes (e.g., paints, sealers, etc.) are stored only in enclosed buildings;
b. There is no storage of explosives;
c. There is storage of no more than 50 gallons of motor fuel; and
d. There is no disposal of inoperable machines or wastes on-site.
19. Craft brewing/distillery/winery production with on-premise consumption, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use complies with the standards for alcoholic beverage establishments, stated above, if applicable; and
b. The area devoted to on-site consumption must utilize at least 25 percent of the gross floor area.
20. Credit access business is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is the sole occupant located in a stand-alone building; and
b. It is located at least 1,000 feet from another credit access business, measured in a straight line between the nearest points of one
(1) lot to the other.
21. Day-care center, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/526
a. The use does not involve overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling, or rehabilitative services; and
b. The use is in compliance with all certification, licensing, and/or monitoring requirements as per Texas Human Resources Code,
chapter 42, Regulation of Certain Facilities, Homes, and Agencies that Provide Child-Care Services.
22. Day-care center, incidental, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is completely contained within the primary use;
b. The use shall not constitute more than 15 percent of the gross floor area of the primary use;
c. The operating hours are the same as the primary use and shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling, or
rehabilitative services;
d. The use is in compliance with all certification, licensing, and/or monitoring requirements as per Texas Human Resources Code,
chapter 42, Regulation of Certain Facilities, Homes, and Agencies that Provide Child-Care Services.
23. Drug store, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The gross floor area of the building is no larger than 24,000 square feet; and
b. The use does not include a drive-through facility in the Mixed Use (MU) district.
24. Extraction (gas, gravel, minerals, oil, or sand), may be considered subject to the following conditions:
a. The hours of operation are restricted to 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., weekdays;
b. The extraction use is not located closer than 0.25 miles to any residential or educational occupancy; and
c. The site is not within the cone of influence around a wellhead.
25. Family home is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. No person other than a family member who resides in the dwelling unit is employed on-site;
b. The use does not include overnight lodging;
c. The residential character of the lot and the dwelling unit is maintained, and neither the interior nor the exterior of the dwelling
are structurally altered so as to require compliance with nonresidential construction codes to accommodate the home occupation;
d. No additional buildings are added on the property to accommodate the home occupation;
e. There is adequate space for temporary parking, drop-off, and pick-up during peak times; and
f. The use is in compliance with all listing or certification requirements of the Texas Department of Family and Protective
Services, as per Texas Human Resources Code, chapter 42, Regulation of Certain Facilities, Homes, and Agencies that Provide
Child-Care Services.
26. Food processing, is permitted subject to all operations and processes associated with the use being conducted completely indoors.
27. Fortune teller/psychic, may be considered subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is not operated as an accessory use; and
b. The use is not conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any such services by display, signage, show window, or
other opening from a public area.
28. Gasoline service station, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. With the exception of gasoline service stations that exist, including both principal and accessory uses or buildings, on the
effective date of this Chapter, the property on which the station is located is situated no less than 300 feet from the boundary or a
property line of an Estate Residential (ES), Suburban Residential (SR), or Semi-Urban Residential (SU) district.
b. No above-grade equipment for the service of gasoline, oil, air, or water (except irrigation systems) is closer than 10 feet to any
public right-of-way, or 20 feet to the property line of a residential district;
c. Canopies shall be connected to or integrated into the architectural design of the building in terms of color, cladding, roofing and
roof pitch, if provided;
d. No overnight storage of material, merchandise, or equipment unless it is stored within the principal building;
e. Refuse and trash is stored in closed containers and in an area screened from view at all points on any public or private property
or street;
f. In the event the use is abandoned, all underground storage tanks and pumps are removed; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/526
g. Car washes, if accessory to the service station, shall direct vehicular circulation for the car wash facility away from the
circulation for the rest of the site and a stacking lane for the car wash includes a 12-foot wide “escape lane” to bypass the car wash.
29. Grocery, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The gross floor area of the building is no larger than 24,000 square feet in the Local Business (LB) district; and
b. Gasoline pumps and services are not included as an accessory use.
30. Home occupation, is permitted as an accessory to the principal residential use subject to the following conditions:
a. The home occupation is conducted entirely within a dwelling unit that is the legal residence of the practitioners, or entirely
within only one (1) accessory garage building (not to include a carport or pole barn);
b. No person other than a family member who resides in the dwelling unit is employed in the home occupation on the premises;
c. The residential character of the lot and the dwelling unit is maintained, and neither the interior nor the exterior of the dwelling
are structurally altered so as to require compliance with nonresidential construction codes to accommodate the home occupation;
d. No additional buildings are added on the property solely to accommodate the home occupation;
e. The home occupation does not generate customer-related vehicular traffic in excess of three (3) vehicle trips per 24-hour day in
the residential neighborhood;
f. No direct selling of merchandise occurs on the premises, provided however, that direct marketing is permitted;
g. No storage of equipment or materials is visible from the public right-of-way;
h. No highly explosive or combustible equipment or vehicles with more than two (2) axles are present on the property; and
i. The use is compatible with nearby uses and specifically does not include:
i. Animal training, grooming, breeding, and/or boarding;
ii. Animal hospitals;
iii. Clinics;
iv. Contractors' yards;
v. Dance schools;
vi. Hospitals;
vii. Junkyards;
viii. Lodging house uses;
ix. Massage therapy;
x. Tattoo and/or body piercing businesses;
xi. Restaurants;
xii. Rental outlets; or
xiii. Vehicle repair shops.
31. Hospital services, is permitted subject to the site area being a minimum of 10 acres.
32. Hotel, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. External balconies are set back a minimum or [of] 200 feet from any single-family residential district measured along a straight
line from the ground below the balcony to the closest single-family residential district boundary line;
b. All rooms are accessed through an internal hallway, lobby, or courtyard; and
c. Hotel staff is on-site 24 hours a day.
33. Industrialized home, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The home is affixed to a permanent concrete slab or grade beam foundation;
b. If any space is exposed between the structure and the slab or ground, the home is skirted with matching weatherized material;
and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/526
c. The home has either an attached or detached carport that can accommodate one (1) passenger vehicle or a fully enclosed onecar
garage.
34. Manufactured home, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The home unit is transported, installed, occupied, and used in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws;
b. The home unit is installed on a permanent foundation consisting of masonry or concrete, with running gear, tongue, towing
hitch, axles, and transporting lights removed, and has an anchoring system that is totally concealed under the structure in compliance
with Texas Occupations Code, chapter 1202, Industrialized Housing and Buildings;
c. The home unit is oriented such that the longer side is parallel to the centerline of the most adjacent public roadway where the
lot is addressed, or in instances where this standard cannot be met, the unit is rotated 90 degrees so that the side wall faces parallel to
the same aforementioned street frontage;
d. The home unit is not placed on a vacant lot or a lot previously established with a site-built dwelling;
e. The home is less than 10 years old at the time of building permit application and will replace an existing manufactured home;
f. The home is built to the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code, 42 USC ch. 5401–5426); and
g. The home displays a certification label on the exterior of each transportable section.
35. Nursery/greenhouse, retail, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Access is taken from a collector or higher classification roadway;
b. The area containing the plants and other accessory materials or products, e.g. soil. mulch, sod, pots and containers, etc., is
enclosed within a fenced area;
c. Stacked materials do not exceed the height of a screening fence; and
d. Greenhouses are placed to the rear of the property.
36. Outdoor arena, stadium, or amphitheater, is permitted subject to the use being spaced a minimum of 600 feet from any singlefamily
residential district, measured along a straight line between the closest district boundary lines.
37. Outdoor commercial amusement, may be considered subject to the use being spaced a minimum of 600 feet from any single-family
residential district, measured along a straight line between the closest district boundary lines.
38. Outdoor recreation (athletic field/facility), is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Accessory uses or activities are subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use and are those which are customarily
established in conjunction with the operation of permitted open space type recreation facilities, including accessory sales of
alcoholic beverages, accessory food services, and accessory sales and rental of equipment;
b. Access to any service and parking areas for over 50 vehicles is taken from a collector or higher classification roadway; and
c. After-hours lighting is limited to that necessary only for security purposes.
39. Paintball course, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The minimum area of the parcel proposed for development is 30 acres;
b. The course is a minimum of 500 feet from residential zoning districts, schools, places of public assembly, day cares, and parks
used for active recreation, which shall be measured along a straight line between the closest property lines;
c. The course is not combined with a skeet course, shooting range, or archery range; and
d. The use is designed to prevent projectiles from leaving the site.
40. Print shop, is permitted if the occupied/leased space is no larger than 3,000 square feet.
41. Research, testing lab, or product development, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. All testing conducted on-site is within a fully enclosed building; and
b. All materials and equipment are stored in areas screened from public view.
42. Restaurant, dine-in only, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. All sales of alcoholic beverages are in compliance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
b. The use receives less than 50 percent of its gross revenue on a quarterly basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages
for on-premise consumption.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/526
43. Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The speakers associated with the drive-through are a minimum 200 feet from a residential district, measured along a straight
line between the closest district boundary lines;
b. Any alcoholic beverage sales for on-premise consumption are in compliance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
c. The use receives less than 50 percent of its gross revenue on a quarterly basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for
on-premise consumption.
44. Retail sales, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. There is no and will be no drive-through or drive-up drop-off of materials or goods by personal vehicle, excluding commercial
deliveries via trucks or tractor-trailer; and
b. If located in the Local Business (LB) district, a single retail tenant does not exceed 40,000 square feet of gross floor area
45. Self-storage facility, may be considered subject to the following conditions:
a. The site is a minimum of four (4) acres, which includes an office, enclosed individual self-storage lease space, and may include
a caretaker residence and outdoor parking lease spaces for boats, RVs, trucks, and trailers, excluding storage of wrecked or
inoperable vehicles, comprising no more than 20 percent of the gross site area;
b. Any buildings with exterior access to the storage facilities do not exceed 12 feet in height, which may be increased to 16 feet
for buildings built solely for boats and recreational vehicles;
c. Any buildings with interior access to the storage facilities have a maximum height of 30 feet;
d. A six (6) foot privacy fence constructed of masonry construction encloses the entire area that includes the self-storage use, with
exception of the office and its customer and employee parking. Wrought iron or black tubular steel fencing may be substituted for
masonry only at the gates. The outer wall of the building, when constructed of brick, stone, or tilt wall, may serve also as that
portion of the fence; however, the required building setback remains. Cinderblock is not allowed for the fence; however, split-faced
concrete blocks may be used;
e. Any outdoor storage/parking of boats, RVs, trailers, etc. is located a minimum of 20 feet from any property line;
f. If a caretaker residence is part of the use, it is in connection with the office at the entry to the development and is:
i. A minimum of 800 square feet;
ii. Has a pitched roof; and
iii. Has a maximum height of 30 feet;
g. The exterior of all buildings, including exterior walls, roofs, trim and doors is finished in neutral earthen colors; and
h. Is located a minimum of 500 feet from any primary collector or arterial roadway.
46. Sexually oriented business, may be considered subject to the provisions of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Business
Regulations.
47. Tattoo parlor/body piercing studio, may be considered subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is not operated as an accessory use; and
b. The use is not conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any such services by display, signage, show window, or
other opening from a public area.
48. Townhome is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each residence has an attached or detached garage, which may include a tandem, two (2) car garage, for which the garage
counts toward one (1) required parking space under the parking regulations stated in Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14,
Site Development;
b. Any townhouse groupings do not exceed a length of more than 150 feet for any one (1) group; and
c. Primary entrance(s) into the building are oriented to face the street, provided that they may have a shared entrance with access
provided for no more than three (3) individual units.
49. Transportation terminal, may be considered subject to the following conditions:
a. It is not located within 1,000 feet from the lot line of a residential district measured along a straight line between the closest
residential district boundary line and the terminal property line;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/526
b. Canopies are connected to or integrated into the architectural design of the building in terms of color, cladding, roofing, and
roof pitch, if provided;
c. The truck circulation for a truck wash facility is directed away from the circulation for the rest of the terminal site; and
d. If a truck wash is included, a stacking lane for the truck wash includes a 12-foot wide “escape lane” to bypass the truck wash, if
provided.
50. Utility services, major, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. All above-ground structures and equipment are screened from public view by a masonry wall with a minimum height of 12 feet
or the height of the structure or equipment, whichever is less; and
b. The use is set back a minimum of 25 feet from the right-of-way of all streets bounding the property on which the use is located.
51. Vending kiosk, is permitted subject to meeting the standards noted in section 11.04.063.
52. Warehouse and distribution, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. It is not located within 600 feet from the lot line of a residential district measured along a straight line between the closest
district boundary lines;
b. Truck bays and loading docks are located perpendicular to the public right-of-way and on an interior side or rear elevation of
the building, provided they do not abut a street or highway or a residential district; and
c. Access is taken from a collector or higher classification roadway.
53. Wireless telecommunication facilities, building-mounted, are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Any building-mounted telecommunication facilities within any nonresidential districts are designed to not be visible at six (6)
feet above grade at the property line;
b. Any antenna and all related equipment are located to the rear of the property;
c. Any building-mounted telecommunication support equipment is constructed of non-reflective material (visible surfaces only)
and is located underground or hidden by an earthen berm, vegetation, and/or painted to match or complement the architecture of the
building or structure to which it is attached;
d. Any building-mounted telecommunication antenna or equipment is not lighted unless required by the Federal Communication
Commission (FCC) or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA);
e. Any building- and/or roof-mounted antennas or towers project no higher than 20 percent of the allowable building height in the
district it is located;
f. The use is in compliance with title 47, U.S. Code section 332(c)(7); and
g. The use is in compliance with Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Site Development.
54. Wireless telecommunication facility, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The use is in compliance with title 47, U.S. Code, section 332(c)(7); and
b. The use is in compliance with Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Site Development.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.04.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.02.093 Temporary uses
The standards of this section apply to model homes, temporary construction, storage, and refuse collection uses that are specified in table 11.02.065,
Temporary Uses by Zoning District, as conditional (C).
A. Location and operations. The location, hours of use, operational limitations, and duration of use are stated in table 11.02.093,
Temporary Uses.
Table 11.02.093. Temporary Uses
Temporary Use Location of Use Hours of Use Operational Limitations Duration of Use Restroom
Model home/on-site real
estate office
On lot or parcel
proposed for
development, with the
7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.
Not limited. Shall be removed prior
to certificate of
occupancy for the last
building.
Yes
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/526
same setbacks as any
other housing unit.
Temporary construction
building
On lot or parcel
proposed for
development, set back at
least 20 feet from all
property lines.
Not limited. May be used by construction
superintendent, construction
workers, contractors, and
other personnel on a
construction team or as a
security office. The building
may not be used as a
dwelling unit.
Shall be removed prior
to certificate of
occupancy for the last
building.
Yes, except when
used exclusively
for storage
Temporary construction
yard
On an active
construction site or
within one-half mile of
the construction to
which the construction
yard relates.
7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. if within
600 feet of
residential
property
The facility shall be used
only for a construction site
or an infrastructure project
that is wholly or partially
located in the City.
Shall be vacated prior to
certificate of occupancy
for the last building.
Yes
Portable storage unit On parcel or lot served
by portable storage unit.
No encroachment into
setbacks or over
sidewalks is permitted.
On nonresidential
parcels, must be located
behind the principal
building.
Not limited. Not limited. Two (2) weeks if
located in a residential
driveway; three (3)
months if located
behind a principal
nonresidential building
and screened from view
from public rights-ofway
and residential
districts.
No
Temporary construction
dumpster
On parcel or lot using
dumpster, set back at
least 10 ft. from the
property line. In
nonresidential and
mixed-use districts,
dumpsters shall be
located behind buildings
(where possible) and
shall not obstruct
required parking areas.
Not limited. Refuse shall be contained
within the dumpster, and
shall be secured to prevent it
from being removed from
the dumpster by wind or
animals.
Shall be removed prior
to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy
for the last building.
No
B. Extension of approvals. Approvals may be extended upon demonstration of good cause, appropriate maintenance, extension of any surety, and
diligent pursuit of the purposes for which the temporary construction or storage uses were established. All applications for renewal of a temporary
use approval pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the Administrator at least 10 working days before the expiration of the approval or permit.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.02.04.03, adopted 11/9/17)
ARTICLE 11.03 DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
Division 1. Purpose and Applicability
Sec. 11.03.001 Purpose
A. This Article provides the dimensional standards for established and new neighborhoods, nonresidential, and mixed use development; outlines
where exceptions to the standards are allowed; and articulates the site and building design standards for the City.
B. The regulations of this Article are adopted in accordance with Texas Local Government Code (TLGC), chapter 211, Municipal Zoning
Authority.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.01.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.002 Applicability
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/526
This Article establishes regulations for parcels proposed for development or redevelopment, applicable to established and new neighborhoods, as
well as nonresidential and mixed use development.
A. Established and new neighborhoods. The density, lot and building standards for each residential district and development type are
stated in division 2 of this Article, Standards for Established Neighborhoods, and division 3 of this Article, Standards for New
Neighborhoods.
B. Nonresidential and mixed use development. The lot and building standards for each district are stated in division 4 of this Article,
Standards for Nonresidential and Mixed Use Development.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.01.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.03.003–11.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Standards for Established Neighborhoods
Sec. 11.03.031 Purpose and applicability
A. Purpose. This division establishes standards for the development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement of buildings in the established
neighborhoods that exist as of the effective date of this Chapter.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this division apply to all platted subdivisions wholly or partially within the Development Reserve (DR), Estate
Residential (ES), Suburban Residential (SR), Semi-Urban Residential (SU), and Urban Residential (UR) districts. More specifically, the provisions
of this apply to the following:
1. Development of vacant platted lots; and
2. Redevelopment or substantial improvement of existing buildings on platted lots.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.02.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.032 Conformity
A. Conforming buildings. All principal buildings that lawfully existed and were lawfully constructed, or are the subject of a permit for which an
application was filed prior to the effective date of this Chapter, are deemed “conforming” principal buildings with respect to the building height,
building coverage, square footage of living area, and building setbacks. However, this division does not make the following buildings conforming
that were:
1. Constructed without required permits;
2. Constructed in violation of permit requirements;
3. Razed and are proposed for reconstruction that exceeds the building coverage and square footage of living area of the dwelling that
existed prior to its razing;
4. Permitted and originally constructed as a single-family detached dwelling and later converted to multifamily units; or
5. Accessory buildings that were constructed with or without permits that violate the standards of this division, or any other standards
of this Chapter.
B. Conforming lots. All lawfully platted lots that existed on the effective date of this Chapter are deemed “conforming” with respect to the preexisting
lot area and width standards. However, this division does not make any originally platted conforming lot, later split by a metes and bounds
description, into a conforming lot.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.02.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.033 Established neighborhood standards
A. Generally. Lots of record and principal buildings that exist as of the effective date of this Chapter may remain as conforming lots of record and
buildings, subject to the exceptions set out in section 11.03.032, Conformity.
B. Applicable standards.
1. New construction and redevelopment or expansion of an existing home.
a. The principal building:
1. May be constructed in accordance with the setbacks on the recorded subdivision plat, even if they are different than the
setbacks of the zoning district within which it is located;
2. May be constructed, redeveloped or expanded to the same dimensions of building height, building coverage, and square
footage of living area; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/526
3. Shall be clad or constructed with a minimum 50 percent primary materials. For reconstruction or expansion, if the original
principal structure was clad or constructed with more than 50 percent primary materials, the reconstructed or expanded area of
the structure shall be clad or constructed with that same percentage of primary materials.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.02.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.03.034–11.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Standards for New Neighborhoods
Sec. 11.03.061 Residential lot and building standards
A. Generally. The lot and building standards for each residential zoning district and development type are provided in table 11.03.061A, Single-
Family Residential Lot and Building Standards and table 11.03.061B, Townhome and Garden-Style Apartment Lot and Building Standards.
B. Applicability. These standards apply to:
1. Detached single-family developments on a lot that is platted after the effective date of this Chapter;
2. Resubdivisions of property that are replatted after the effective date of this Chapter to create two (2) or more buildable lots; or
3. Townhome (in the UR district) or apartment (in the MF district) developments with three (3) or more dwelling units on a single
parcel located on a lot that is platted after the effective date of this Chapter.
C. Single-family dwellings. Single-family detached dwellings are permitted in the Development Reserve (DR), Estate Residential (ES), Suburban
Residential (SR), and Semi-Urban Residential (SU) districts. The maximum gross density, lot area and width; front, interior and street side, and rear
setbacks; building height; and minimum living area are stated in table 11.03.061A, Single-Family Lot and Building Standards.
D. Townhome dwellings. Townhome dwellings are permitted in the Urban Residential (UR) district. The maximum gross density, lot area and
width; front yard; interior side yard; street side yard; and rear yard setbacks; maximum building height and minimum living area are established for
townhome dwellings are stated in table 11.03.061B, Townhome and Garden-Style Apartment Lot and Building Standards.
E. Garden-style apartments. This multifamily housing type is typically in the form of apartments of two (2) or more stories in the MF district.
Table 11.03.061A. Single-Family Residential Lot and Building Standards
District and
Development
Type
Maximum
Gross Density
(units/acre)
Minimum Lot Minimum Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum
Living Area
Area Standard/
Corner Width
Front 2 Interior
Side 2
Street
Side 2 Rear 2,3
Development Reserve (DR)
Acreage 0. 25 35 ac. 750' 75' 75' 75' 150' 40' 2,000 sf
Estate Residential (ES) 1
Standard 1.85 15,000 sf 100' 30' 15' 20' 25' 40' 4,000 sf
Suburban Residential (SR)
Standard 1.85 15,000 sf 100' 30' 12' 20' 25' 40' 2,000 sf
Semi-Urban Residential (SU)
Standard 3.65 8,250 sf 75' / 90' 25' 10' 15' 20' 35' 1,500 sf
Table Notes:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/526
1. See section 11.03.153(C), Residential Development, for additional development standards.
2. The front, side and rear setbacks may be reduced up to five (5) feet from that required when needed to shift the building to
preserve existing protected or heritage trees. Approval from the administrator is required. Such approval is discretionary and
approval shall consider the preservation of existing tree(s), impact on the neighborhood character and continuity, availability of
parking, and that the tree is of a variety listed in the preferred plant list.
3. Rear setbacks on a double frontage lot shall be the same as that required for the front setback.
Table 11.03.061B. Townhome and Garden-Style Apartment Lot and Building Standards
District and Housing
Type
Maximum
Gross
Density
(units/ acre)
Minimum Lot Minimum Setbacks Maximum
Building
Height 6
Minimum
Living Area
Area 1 Standard/
Corner
Width
Front 2 Interior
Side
Street Side 4,
5
Rear
Urban Residential (UR)
Townhome 3 Front
entry
8 3,000 sf 30' 25' 0'/15' 9 15'/20'/25' 20' 35' 1,100 sf
Rear entry 2,500 sf 25' 10'
Multifamily (MF)
Garden-style
apartment 7, 8
20 2,178 sf 150'/165' 25' 10' 25' 25' 48' 450 sf
efficiency
650 sf one
bedroom
730 sf two
bedroom
80 sf each
additional
bedroom
Table Notes:
1. For townhome and apartment dwellings, the lot area is measured on a per dwelling unit basis.
2. If the front setback along the entire length of the property (street side) is common open space, the minimum front setback may be reduced to
zero feet.
3. When two (2) principal structures are arranged face-to-face or back-to-back, the minimum distance between them shall be 40 feet. The points
of measurement shall be the exterior walls of the buildings, which do not include balconies, railings, or other architectural features.
4. The street side yard for garden-style apartment dwellings is also the minimum separation between buildings on the same parcel.
5. The minimum street side setback shall be 15' on local streets, 20' on collector streets, and 25' on arterial streets.
6. Principal structures shall not exceed one (1) story within 100 feet of the property line when abutting a single-family residential district.
Additionally, building height shall be measured by existing grade if the structure is abutting or within 100 feet of a single-family residential
district. Building height shall be measure by finished grade if the structure is located more than 100 feet from a single-family residential district.
7. The front and interior and street-side setbacks must accommodate a sidewalk.
8. The minimum site area is 10 acres.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/526
9. The second number represents the minimum separation between townhome buildings consisting of three (3) or more contiguous dwelling
units.
F. Alternative standards.
1. Applicability. These alternative standards are permitted in the Development Reserve (DR), Estate Residential (ES), Suburban
Residential (SR), and Semi-Urban Residential (SU) districts.
2. Front setbacks. The following standards may be applied to front setbacks as an alternative to the general standards in table
11.03.061A, Single-Family Residential Lot and Building Standards:
a. Enclosure of front porch. Front setbacks may be reduced by up to two (2) feet from their existing location in order to enclose an
existing front porch.
b. Addition of front porch. Front setbacks may be reduced by up to five (5) feet from the general standards in order to allow for
the construction of a front porch, provided that:
1. The added front porch would not be located closer than 15 feet to the front property line; and
2. The porch may be enclosed with a screened enclosure, but shall not be fully enclosed with walls and windows.
G. Requirements for phased developments. The maximum residential development capacity of the entire parcel proposed for development shall be
used for calculating compliance with the maximum gross density set out in table 11.03.061A, Single-Family Residential Lot and Building Standards.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.03.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.03.062–11.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. Standards for Nonresidential and Mixed Use Development
Sec. 11.03.091 Nonresidential development standards
A. Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide the dimensional standards for all nonresidential and mixed use developments.
B. Applicability. The standards and requirements provided in table 11.03.091, Nonresidential and Mixed Use Standards, apply to the new
development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement of properties within the nonresidential (NB, LB, GB, PO, HC, LI, HI, H, PS, OG and OR)
and mixed use (MU and PA) districts.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.04.01, adopted 11/9/17)
C. [Standards.]
Table 11.03.091. Nonresidential and Mixed Use Standards
Standard
Zoning Districts
Nonresidential Mixed Use
NB LB GB PO HC LI HI H PS OG OR 5 MU 7 PA
Minimum lot area 8,000 sf 15,000 sf 20,000 sf 15,000 sf
43,560
sf
43,560 sf 150,000 sf 60,000 sf 8,000 sf NA NA 20,000 sf
See Note
#6
Minimum lot width 80' 100' 100' 100' 200' 200' 500' 200' 65' NA NA 100'
Minimum lot depth 100' 150' 200' 150' 200' 200' 300' 300' 100' NA NA 200'
Maximum building
height 1, 3 30' 45' 100' 100' 60' 60' 60' 100' 100' NA NA 100'
Building setbacks 4
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/526
- Front 2 25' 25' 25' 25' 50' 50' 100' 50' 25' 25' 25' 0'
See Note
#6
- Interior side 12' 12' 12' 12' 20' 20' 100' 20' 12' 10' 12' 0'
- Street side 25' 25' 25' 25' 50' 50' 100' 50' 25' 10' 20' 0'
- Rear to property line 5' 5' 5' 5' 25' 25' 100' 20' 15' 10' 10' 0'
- Rear to street rightof-
way
25' 25' 25' 25' 50' 50' 100' 50' 20' 10' 20' 0'
- ES, SR or SU
residential district
boundary
30' 30' 30' 30' 100' 100' 200' 30' 30' 10' 20' 30'
Outdoor uses
- Maximum display
area 8 0% 10% 10% 0% 15% 15% 0% 0% 10% 0% 0% 10%
See Note
#6
- Maximum storage
area 9, 10
0% 0% 10% 0% 20% 30% 65% 0% 50% 0% 0% 0%
Table Notes:
NA - Not Applicable
1. In the LB, GB, PO, HC, LI, HI, H, and PS districts, no portion of a building within 100 feet of the property line of a single-family residential
district shall exceed 35 feet. In the MU district, no portion of a building within 150 feet of the property line of a single-family residential district shall
exceed 35 feet.
2. All front setbacks adjacent to the major corridors shall comply with the provisions stated in section 11.03.151, Major Corridors.
3. Building height is measured from finished grade if the structure is located more than 100 feet from an ES, SR, or SU residential district. If the
structure is abutting or within 100 feet of an ES, SR or SU residential district, building height is measured by the existing grade.
4. If the district or use requires a bufferyard that is wider than the setback that is required by this section, then the width of the setback shall be at
least the width of the required bufferyard, as stated in Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Site Development.
5. All trails shall be located no less than 10 feet from any single-family detached residential property line. Swimming pools, spectator stands for
ball fields, or similar facilities shall be located no less than 100 feet from any single-family detached residential property line. Ball fields, courts or
similar uses shall be located no less than 50 feet from any single-family detached residential property line.
6. The dimensional standards for the PA district shall be established with the review and approval of a master development plan.
7. Refer to section 11.03.155, Mixed Use Development, for additional development standards.
8. Measured as a maximum percentage of the ground floor area of the building. Excludes automobile sales, florist, garden shop, or landscape
nursery uses where live vegetation and landscape materials may be kept outdoors.
9. Measured as a percentage of the gross site area, in square feet. Outdoor storage is not allowed in required parking spaces or in landscaped areas.
10. Outdoor storage is prohibited along major corridors, as stated in section 11.03.151, Major Corridors. Also, outdoor storage shall be limited to
25 feet in height when located within 200 feet of any single-family residential zoning district or any park or greenbelt.
(Ordinance CO32-18-06-28-E1, exh. A, adopted 6/28/18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/526
Secs. 11.03.092–11.03.120 Reserved
Division 5. Height and Area Exceptions
Sec. 11.03.121 General exceptions
A. Applicability. This section applies to both section 11.03.122, Residential Districts, and section 11.03.123, Nonresidential Districts.
B. General height exceptions.
1. The maximum height of the following accessory building elements and appurtenances may exceed the allowable height of the
applicable district by no more than 20 feet:
a. Church spire or belfry;
b. Monuments;
c. Stage towers;
d. Cooling towers;
e. Chimneys;
f. Elevator bulkheads;
g. Television and radio towers;
h. Necessary private utilities;
i. Necessary mechanical appurtenances.
2. The following facilities are exempt from height limitations of the applicable district:
a. Public water and fire towers;
b. Necessary public utilities.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.05.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.122 Residential districts
A. Setback encroachments.
1. Eaves and cornices may extend no more than two (2) feet into a required setback, except that eaves may encroach up to three (3) feet
into a required setback when such yard is 10 feet or more in width or depth.
2. Chimneys, when not more than four (4) feet wide, may extend one (1) foot into any required interior side setback or street side
setback. Such chimneys may extend two (2) feet into any setback when such setback is 10 feet or more in width or depth. Chimneys of
more than four (4) feet in width must conform to the setback requirements.
3. Open, uncovered porches or terraces.
a. Porches and terraces that are no higher than the floor level of the first floor above grade on the side of the building to which
they are attached, may extend:
1. Three (3) feet into any required side setback, provided it is not closer than five (5) feet to a side lot line;
2. 10 feet into any required front setback, provided it is not closer than 15 feet to the front property line; or
3. Not closer than 10 feet of the rear lot line.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.05.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.123 Nonresidential districts
A. Setback encroachments.
1. Canopies and overhangs on any side of a building may extend no more than four (4) feet into a required setback.
2. Open, uncovered patios or terraces.
a. Patios and terraces that are no higher than the floor level of the first floor above grade on the side of the building to which they
are attached may extend:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/526
1. Two (2) feet into any required side setback, provided it is not closer than 10 feet to a side lot line;
2. 10 feet into any required front setback, provided it is not closer than 15 feet to the front property line; or
3. Not closer than 10 feet of the rear lot line.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.05.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.03.124–11.03.150 Reserved
Division 6. Design Standards
Sec. 11.03.151 Major corridors
A. Purpose. The standards of this section establish requirements of site design that supplement the standards of the applicable zoning district. The
intent of these standards is to heighten the design and aesthetic appearance for highly visible properties that are directly adjacent to the City's most
highly traveled thoroughfares. These roadways serve as major entrances to the community, where higher development standards enhance the visual
appearance, economic viability, and hence, quality of life for the citizens of Cedar Park.
B. Applicability. This section establishes standards for development along major corridors which is defined to mean land within 500 feet on either
side of the street right-of-way of the following roadways:
1. Anderson Mill Road.
2. Arterial A: Arrow Point Drive south of East Whitestone Boulevard.
3. Bagdad Road from West Whitestone Boulevard to the City limits.
4. Brushy Creek Road.
5. C-Bar Ranch Trail, north of East Whitestone Boulevard.
6. Colonial Parkway.
7. Cottonwood Creek Trail (CR 185).
8. Cypress Creek Road and East Cypress Creek Road.
9. Lakeline Boulevard.
10. Little Elm Trail from Wood Ridge Lane to U.S. 183.
11. Medical Parkway.
12. East New Hope Road.
13. West New Hope Road from U.S. 183 to West Whitestone Boulevard.
14. East Park Street from Greater Scaup Lane to Vista Ridge Boulevard.
15. West Park Street from Lakeline Boulevard to Anderson Mill Road.
16. Parmer Lane.
17. Ronald W. Reagan Boulevard.
18. Vista Ridge Boulevard.
19. RM 620 (SH 45).
20. RM 1431 (Whitestone Boulevard).
21. Sam Bass Road (CR 175) north of East Whitestone Boulevard.
22. U.S. 183 (Bell Boulevard).
23. 183A Toll Road.
C. Prohibited land uses. The following uses are prohibited along major corridors:
1. Commercial, off-site parking lots (excluding parking structures);
2. Drive-in theaters;
3. Outdoor storage;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/526
4. Self-storage facilities;
5. Sexually oriented businesses; and
6. Wireless telecommunication facilities.
D. Relationship to other ordinances. Within the major corridors, all other ordinances, standards, and requirements of the City apply. Specifically,
the standards of Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Subdivision, and Chapter 14, Site Development, apply as they relate to sidewalks,
parking within 25 feet of street right-of-way, driveway spacing, restrictions on above-ground utilities, minimum 25-foot landscape area
corresponding with the 25-foot building setback, landscaping, buffering of loading and service zones, fencing, dumpster locations, and all other
applicable provisions.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.06.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.152 General standards for all districts
A. Applicability. This section establishes allowable building materials and roof types within all zoning districts.
B. Permitted exterior building materials.
1. Primary. The primary building materials used for building exterior finishes include:
a. Fired brick, including thin brick or brick veneer;
b. Stone, including cast stone, limestone, granite, marble, or other native or naturally occurring or manufactured stone and stone
veneers;
c. Architectural (textured) concrete masonry units (CMU), including split face, weathered face, sandblasted face, and ground face
blocks;
d. Portland cement stucco (traditional);
e. Cementitious or acrylic stucco;
f. Glass; and
g. Architecturally textured or patterned tilt panel walls.
2. Secondary.
a. Exterior insulation finish system (EIFS), provided:
1. Use of a wall drainage system (barrier wall systems are prohibited); and
2. Use of a 20 oz. high-impact mesh below eight (8) feet above ground level;
b. Metal siding (26+ gauge), including:
1. Embossed or pre-finished architectural metal panel (26+ gauge);
2. Prefabricated metal wall panels;
3. Corrugated or ribbed metal panel;
c. Smooth-faced, unfinished concrete block;
d. Cementitious concrete siding (Hardiplank or like material); and
e. Pressure-treated or naturally decay-resistant wood.
3. Prohibited.
a. Plastic or vinyl siding;
b. Plywood;
c. Wood fiber (oriented strand board);
d. Under-fired or unfired clay, sand, or shale rock;
e. Painted brick;
f. Mirrored glass; and
g. Cement board stucco.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/526
4. Others. Other building materials may be used by approval of the Administrator if it is demonstrated that they meet or exceed the
durability, impact resistance, and aesthetic qualities of the materials permitted above.
C. Roofing systems.
1. Roofing materials used on pitched roof systems shall be:
a. Architectural shingles;
b. Concrete tile;
c. Barrel tile;
d. Slate;
e. Architectural standing seam metal;
f. Building integrated solar arrays (solar panels that double as roofing material); and/or
g. Green roof systems.
2. Corrugated or ribbed metal and other roofing materials that are not listed above are prohibited.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.06.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.153 Residential development
A. Purpose and applicability.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide building and site standards to achieve quality design and development outcomes
that reflect positively on the community and its character and values.
2. Applicability. This section is applicable to the Development Reserve (DR), Estate Residential (ES), Suburban Residential (SR),
Semi-Urban Residential (SU), and Urban Residential (UR) districts.
B. Single-family detached dwellings.
1. Applicability.
a. The standards of this subsection apply to all dwellings constructed or reconstructed on lots platted after the effective date of this
Chapter.
b. Dwellings that existed on lawfully platted lots as of the effective date of this Chapter that are constructed or reconstructed after
the effective date are subject to the standards of Article 11.03, division 2, Standards for Established Neighborhoods.
2. Building entrances. All single-family residences shall be designed and oriented so the primary entrance to the residence faces the
public street. In the instance of a corner lot, the primary entrance shall face the shortest lot line.
3. Building materials and form. (See also section 11.03.152, General Standards for All Districts.)
a. Primary materials. Stated below are the minimum primary material cladding requirements (percentage) for the building
elevation for lots that face one (1) or two (2) or more streets. The percentages are based on the exterior wall surface of the entire
structure, excluding doors, windows, and the foundation.
1. Applicable to the Development Reserve (DR) and Suburban Residential SR) districts: 50 percent primary materials, or 75
percent primary materials when facing two (2) or more streets.
2. Applicable to the Semi-Urban Residential (SU) district: 75 percent primary materials, with the remaining 25 percent as
cementitious concrete siding (Hardiplank or like material). Use of stucco as a primary material may not exceed 25 percent of
the total primary materials used.
b. Roofs. When used, pitched roofs shall have a minimum slope ratio of 4:12 and eaves shall be a minimum of 18 inches.
c. Garages. The principal dwelling shall have at least a fully enclosed two (2) car garage. The garage may be detached or attached
as part of the principal building. In the SU district, garage conversions are permitted provided parking requirements are met. The
exterior doors of the garage shall remain intact and in working order so as to retain the appearance of a garage from the street.
C. Estate Residential standards.
1. Site standards.
a. Communities shall be gated, utilizing private streets to be owned and maintained by the homeowners' association (HOA);
b. All required detention shall be provided for in a wet retention pond (constant water level) with a fountain; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/526
c. The required landscape and pedestrian easement along major corridors shall be 40 feet, which shall include enhanced
landscaping, berms, and a six (6) to eight (8) foot tall masonry wall constructed of natural stone.
2. Building standards.
a. Facades. The exterior facades of a principal building or structure, excluding glass windows and doors, shall be constructed of
100 percent primary materials. Cementitious fiber board may be used for architectural features, not to exceed 10 percent of the
entire structure, including window box-outs, bay windows, roof dormers, garage door headers, columns, chimneys that are not part
of an exterior wall or other architectural features approved by the Building Official.
b. Roofs.
1. The roof pitches of a principal building or structure, including garages, shall meet the following roof pitch standards:
a. A minimum of 65 percent of the surface area of composition roofs (architectural shingles) shall maintain a minimum
roof pitch of 8:12.; and
b. A minimum of 75 percent of the surface area of clay tile, cement tile, slate or slate products, or metal roofs shall
maintain a minimum roof pitch of 3:12.
2. Wood roof shingles are prohibited.
c. Garages.
1. All homes shall have a three (3) car garage/enclosed parking spaces, which shall include cedar-clad garage or carriage
style doors;
2. No more than two (2) garage doors shall face the street (note that one (1) double - approximately 20' wide - door counts
as two (2) garage doors);
3. All homes shall incorporate swing-in driveways and/or side-facing garages;
4. All front entry garage doors shall incorporate three (3) of the following details:
a. Set back 20 feet behind the front elevation of the principal building;
b. Recessed a minimum of three (3) feet from the garage face;
c. Single garage doors separated by column (in place of one (1) double garage door); or
d. Cast stone surrounds.
5. Carports shall be prohibited.
d. Driveways. Enhanced paving treatments are required for all driveways and shall consist of one (1) of the following:
1. Stamp and stain/patterned concrete (must use dust-on color application to wet concrete);
2. Acid-etched colored concrete for the field with scored smooth colored borders (must use dust-on color application to wet
concrete);
3. Colored concrete with scored smooth border (must use dust-on color application to wet concrete);
4. Brick or interlocking pavers or pave stone;
5. Stone or slate;
6. Other similar treatment as approved by the Administrator.
e. Elevations. Plan elevations shall alternate at a minimum of every eight (8) homes on both sides of a street.
f. Fences. Privacy fences on single-family residential lots shall be located 10 feet behind the front elevation of the principal
building and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height above grade.
g. Lighting. All homes shall provide an exterior lighting package to illuminate front entrances, garages, landscaping, and trees
located in the front yard.
D. Nonresidential uses in residential districts.
1. Purpose. As indicated in section 11.02.064, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District, certain nonresidential uses are allowed within
the residential districts. To protect the value and compatibility of both residential and nonresidential uses, the standards of this subsection
were established.
2. Applicability. These standards are applicable to all nonresidential uses, buildings, and structures in the residential districts indicated
on table 11.02.064, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/526
3. Building standards.
a. Size.
1. Buildings for agricultural support services or a farm/ranch shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line.
2. With the exception of utility structures, nonresidential principal buildings shall be a minimum size of 2,000 s.f. in the RA,
ES, and SR districts, 1,500 s.f. in the SU district, and 1,100 s.f. in the UR district.
b. Facade. The exterior facade of a principal building or structure shall provide a minimum of 90 percent primary materials. A
maximum of 10 percent secondary materials may be provided; however, an additional 10 percent (for a maximum of 20 percent)
may be considered for architectural features.
c. Roofs. Pitched roofs shall be required on all buildings, which shall have a minimum slope ratio of 4:12 and eaves shall be a
minimum of 18 inches.
d. Fenestration. Glazed window and door openings shall account for no less than 25 percent of the overall wall surface of each
face or building level on walls facing a public street. Mirrored glass is prohibited.
4. Location. Nonresidential uses shall be located on a collector or higher classification roadway.
E. Townhomes.
1. Applicability. The standards of this subsection on single-family attached dwellings apply to all dwellings constructed or
reconstructed after the effective date of this Chapter.
2. Garages and parking.
a. Front garages and driveways. Townhome dwelling units with front garages and parking require a minimum width of 30 feet.
Driveways may be a maximum width of 20 feet. The facade of the garage shall be set back no less than 20 feet from the street
rights-of-way (public) or street easement (private). Alleys and rear parking courts may also be for temporary or overflow parking.
b. Rear alley-access garages and parking courts. Rear garages and parking is required for dwelling units with a width of 25 feet or
less. If there are individual driveways, they shall have a maximum width of 20 feet. The facade of the garage shall be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from the alley or drive access to a rear parking court. Front yard parking is prohibited for dwelling units with
alley-access garages or parking.
c. Tandem garages are permitted. The two (2) car garage shall count toward one (1) required parking space.
3. Streets and alleys. All dwellings must front on and take access to a public street or private street built to public street standards, or
may take access to an alley in which case the dwellings may front on streets or common open space.
4. Courtyards. All dwelling units with parking in the front yard shall have a pervious front courtyard adjacent to the driveway, which
shall be a minimum width of 10 feet and a minimum depth that is the same as the front building setback.
5. Building materials and form.
a. Articulation. Townhome groupings shall be designed with a variation in the horizontal and vertical elevations of at least three
(3) feet for every two (2) attached townhomes to prevent the appearance of straight, unbroken lines in their horizontal and vertical
planes.
b. Primary materials. The exterior wall surface of the entire structure, excluding doors, windows, and the foundation, shall be
constructed of at least 75 percent primary materials. Use of stucco as a primary material may not exceed 25 percent of the total
primary materials used. For lots that face two (2) or more streets, the exterior wall surface of the entire structure, excluding doors,
windows, and the foundation, shall be constructed of 100 percent primary materials.
6. Alternative ownership arrangements.
a. The standards of section 11.03.061, Residential Lot and Building Standards, with respect to lot area and width and building
setbacks relate to the development of residential dwellings on legally platted lots that are intended to be owned in fee-simple by the
landlord or residents of the dwellings. However, the standards are not intended to preclude other ownership types, such as single
ownership of all units (rentals); condominiums (in which the land is owned in common by the owners of the condominium units); or
common maintenance communities (in which fee-simple ownership is limited to the land under the building, and, in some cases, a
small area around it). The alternative standards of this section are intended to allow such alternative ownership arrangements,
provided that the development complies with this Chapter.
b. The proposed pattern of development will be allowed if it is demonstrated that it will comply with the maximum gross density
and applicable front, interior and street side, and rear setbacks as if it were platted with lots that meet the minimum requirements of
the Urban Residential (UR) district as noted in table 11.03.061B, Townhome and Garden-Style Apartment Lot and Building
Standards.
c. Any development having attached units and/or common areas shall have a common maintenance or ownership agreement and
shall be required to file all covenants and declarations governing those agreements at the time of platting. When property owner
associations are established, membership shall be mandatory. The final plat shall include the official public record document number
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/526
of such covenants and declarations filing at the respective county. The mandatory homeowners' association shall maintain the
common landscape areas, fences, all structures and other improvements on the site owned in common, including the driveways,
amenities, and any common parking areas and garages, and exterior maintenance of the principal structures.
F. Manufactured and industrialized homes.
1. Skirting. The vacant space between the finished grade of the property on which each manufactured or industrialized home is located
and the exterior edges of the finished floor of each unit is skirted as follows:
a. Installation. Skirting shall be installed on a concrete footing so there is no visible gap between the finished floor and the
ground.
b. Materials. The material used for skirting shall be rock, brick or concrete masonry construction. All skirting materials are
compatible in appearance with the home and allow for adequate ventilation and drainage.
c. Design. The skirting shall be a continuous, complete, opaque, and rigid surface that lends permanency to the appearance of the
unit and totally screens the crawl space under the unit.
2. Per the Texas Occupations Code, section 1202.253, Municipal Regulation of Single-Family and Duplex Industrialized Housing,
single-family industrialized homes shall:
a. Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot
on which the industrialized home is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll of the
county in which the property is located; and
b. Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings
located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized home is proposed to be located.
G. Garden-style apartments in Multifamily (MF) district.
1. Applicability. The standards of this subsection apply to development in the Multifamily (MF) district.
2. Architecture.
a. The architectural style of the front facade of the building(s) shall be expressed on all sides of the building(s) fronting on, most
directly facing, or within 150 feet of street right-of-way or a private street easement.
b. The rear facade of a building shall not face street right-of-way unless a rear facade must face street right-of-way by way of
parcel size or orientation. When a rear facade of a building faces the street right-of-way and is located in the corridor overlay,
landscaping shall be provided between the building(s) and street right-of-way as stated in Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter
14, Site Development.
c. Residential buildings located within the interior of a multifamily development that are not fronting on, most directly facing, or
within 150 feet of street right-of-way are exempt from these architectural standards.
3. Building facade. Each exterior wall surface, excluding doors, windows, and the foundation shall be constructed of 100 percent
primary materials.
4. Building design.
a. Form. A multifamily building containing more than eight (8) dwelling units shall be designed to break up a rectangular
footprint and avoid a box-like or monolithic appearance. Any of the following techniques, or any technique that would produce a
comparable effect, may be used to avoid the appearance of a box-like or monolithic building:
1. Varying roof lines;
2. Changes in wall planes of at least five (5) feet at intervals of not more than 60 feet;
3. The use of dormers, bay windows, or other windows that create dimensions that break up the facade;
4. Balconies that are used irregularly, some projecting, some recessed;
5. Primary entrance treatments that are recessed or project from the main facade; or
6. Changes in floor plans that create rooms with corner windows.
b. Stairwells. Stairs that provide primary access to units on upper floors shall be covered and integral to the building and roof
design.
c. Design features. Elements such as eaves, rakes, cornice lines, or frieze boards shall be used to contribute to the visual interest of
the building.
d. Building scale.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/526
1. Any portion of a building that is closer than 50 feet from a common property line that abuts a single-family residential
district shall be no higher than 12 feet above the highest point of the closest residential structures. This does not apply if the
residential structure is located across a street from the development.
2. The apparent exterior floor-to-floor height of each story of a building shall be limited to 12 feet. Individual floors shall be
delineated on the building facade through the use of window placement and horizontal details. Interior floor-to-floor heights
may exceed 12 feet.
e. Garages. When visible from street rights-of-way, garages shall be located on the side or behind the rear facades of the
multifamily buildings. Alternatively, landscaping shall be provided between the garage building(s) and street right-of-way, as stated
in Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Site Development. The materials, building design, and roof type of garages shall be
compatible with the building form and materials of the multifamily buildings.
f. Pedestrian facilities and amenities.
1. Walkways with a minimum width of five (5) feet shall directly connect each front door or front entrance with surrounding
sidewalks, walkways, or paths.
2. All buildings shall provide a minimum 10-foot pedestrian zone between the building and parking area. The pedestrian
zone shall contain walkways and landscape planting areas, plazas, and/or gardens. These areas shall also be protected from
vehicular traffic by curbs, fencing, walls, wood posts, concrete bollards, or other barriers.
3. In conjunction with each pedestrian zone and for each 10 dwelling units, or portion thereof, there shall be one (1) bench
or picnic table and one (1) trash receptacle accessible by a sidewalk, walkway, or path that is located no more than 25 feet
from a building entrance. Benches, tables, and trash receptacles shall be anchored to the ground. Each shall be constructed of a
non-corrosive, weather-resistant material, excluding wood.
4. All crossings of internal streets, access drives, and driveways shall have well-defined pavement markings and pedestrian
crossing signs.
5. Covered sidewalks or walkways that are part of or adjacent to a building may be used for outdoor seating and dining or as
terraces and arcades, provided [there is] a minimum passable width of four (4) feet.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.06.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.154 Nonresidential development
A. Generally.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure a higher degree of building construction, quality, and durability for structures built
to promote public health, safety, and welfare within the City. Additionally, the standards of this section are to promote a high aesthetic
appeal, promote compatible and uniform design, and reflect the characteristics of building materials and styles commonly found in
Central Texas.
2. Applicability. This section is applicable to the Neighborhood Business (NB), Local Business (LB), General Business (GB),
Professional Office (PO), Hospital (H), Heavy Commercial (HC), Light Industrial (LI), Heavy Industrial (HI), Planning Area (PA), Mixed
Use (MU), Open Space Greenbelt (OG), Open Space Recreation (OR) and Public Services (PS) districts.
3. Minimum requirements. The required combination of primary and secondary materials stated in section 11.03.152, General
Standards for All Districts, is as follows:
a. Primary. Minimum 90 percent.
b. Secondary. Maximum 10 percent; provided, however, that an additional 10 percent (for a maximum of 20 percent) may be
considered for architectural features.
c. Exemption. Portable buildings on school-owned property are exempt from the primary material requirement.
B. Nonresidential developments.
1. Design standards. The building and site design standards shall be as stated below.
a. Exterior building facades. The design of buildings in the applicable districts shall comply with the standards stated in this
section, and all other applicable standards and requirements of this Chapter.
b. Building facades.
1. Facades that are greater than 100 linear feet shall be articulated with recesses or projections, which total no less than 25
percent of the facade length. Recesses or projections shall be a minimum depth of two (2) percent of the length of the facade.
No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 75 linear feet. (See figure 11.03.154A, Building Wall Articulation.)
2. Any public, ground floor entrance facade(s) shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other such
design features along no less than 60 percent of the entrance facade. (See figure 11.03.154B, Animating Features.)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/526
c. Mechanical equipment and meters. Mechanical equipment associated with building operations (e.g., HVAC systems, electric
meter banks, etc.) shall be screened as stated in this subsection.
1. Roof-mounted equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from ground-level views from all adjacent
property and rights-of-way by:
a. Parapet walls, which shall include cornice treatments that are of adequate height to fully screen the equipment such
that the equipment cannot be seen by pedestrian-level at the property line; or
b. Screening walls of adequate height to fully screen the equipment, which use materials and colors that match or are
consistent with the design of the principal building; or
c. Sloped roof systems or other architectural elements of adequate height to fully screen the equipment from all
adjacent property and rights-of-way.
2. Building-mounted equipment. Mechanical equipment that is mounted on a building wall that is within public view shall
be enclosed, screened by opaque fencing, landscaping, or painted to match the building facade.
d. Canopies. Gasoline canopies, car washes, and other accessory uses with canopies shall be constructed of the same materials as
the principal structure. The design of the canopy shall complement the design of the principal structure.
e. Service entrances. All service entrances and other non-public building sides or areas shall be screened from public rights-ofway
using vegetation or masonry fencing of the same materials as the principal structure.
f. Outdoor displays. In addition to the requirements stated in table 11.03.091, Nonresidential and Mixed Use Standards,
permanent and seasonal outdoor sales areas shall be incorporated into the design of the building and site. Only designated and
approved permanent or seasonal outdoor sales areas shall be permitted. Unenclosed areas for the sale and storage of seasonal
inventories shall be permanently designated and separated with walls or fences, while keeping with the common design of the
principal structure.
g. Outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading areas. In addition to the requirements stated in table 11.03.091, Nonresidential
and Mixed Use Standards, as well as Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Site Development, these areas shall be screened,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/526
recessed, or enclosed as follows:
1. No area for outdoor storage, trash collection, compaction, loading, or other such uses shall be located within 20 feet of
any public street, public sidewalk, or internal pedestrian walkway.
2. Outdoor shopping-cart storage areas shall be provided in the parking lot, and adjacent to the buildings if they are not
available at the entrance.
3. Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash dumpsters, trash compaction, and
other such service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the structure and landscaped so that they are
visually screened from public view.
h. Parking and vehicular and pedestrian circulation. The parking lot design and pedestrian circulation routes shall provide safe,
convenient, and efficient access for vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists. Pedestrian circulation via internal public sidewalks shall be
required. The placement of structures shall enhance and promote pedestrian circulation on the site.
1. At a minimum, one (1) internal continuous sidewalk with at least five (5) feet of clearance shall be provided from the
public street to the building entrance(s). Additionally, at least four-foot-wide walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian
activity, such as transit stops, street crossings or store entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas to provide a
separated and pedestrian-friendly access route.
2. All internal pedestrian walkways shall be physically separated from the drive lanes. Additionally, all sidewalks and
crosswalks shall be visually distinct from the driving surface by use of striping, pavers, bricks, or scored concrete.
3. Sidewalks, at least six (6) feet in width, shall be provided along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any
facade abutting public parking areas. At all times, such sidewalks shall maintain a clear pedestrian passage that extends the
entire width of the sidewalk. Additionally, such sidewalks shall connect all customer entrances to other internal sidewalks, and
shall be located an average of at least three (3) feet from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for living
foundation landscaping, except where architectural features, such as covered walkways, arcades, or entryways, are part of the
facade.
i. Roofs. In addition to the regulations stated in section 11.03.152, General Standards for All Districts, all roof designs must use at
least one (1) of the following design features:
1. Three (3) or more roof slope planes;
2. Overhanging eaves or canopy projections, which extend no fewer than two (2) feet past the supporting walls; or
3. Flat roof with an architecturally articulated parapet or cornice.
j. Facade treatments. All building facades shall use no less than four (4) of the following design features, for which the
Administrator may allow minor deviations to the full requirement of each chosen feature if the petitioner adequately demonstrates
that the overall intent and spirit of this subsection adheres to the overall development design:
1. Colors, materials or textures. Facades shall have two (2) or more exterior contrasting colors and have more than three (3)
exterior materials or texture changes.
2. Building wall offsets. Building facades facing the front lot line shall have minimum 12-inch offsets, such as pilasters,
columns, and/or reveals, or other decorative elements.
3. Covered walkways. Across the entire front facade of the structure, a covered pedestrian walkway with a minimum depth
of eight (8) feet is provided.
4. Display windows. Clear glass window displays cover no less than 20 percent of one (1) facade or 30 percent of two (2)
facades.
5. Integral planters or walls. Planters or landscape walls constructed adjacent to the face of the building and incorporate
living landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. Such areas shall be a minimum of two (2) feet wide and 19 inches high for
sitting, and five (5) feet wide for a planter and cover at least 50 percent of the facade.
6. Open space pedestrian plaza. A plaza may be incorporated for gathering and sitting adjacent to the main entrance or on
the front facade, which must be equivalent to two (2) percent of the gross square footage of the subject building. Such area
shall include seating with benches and/or tables and chairs at a minimum rate of one (1) seat per 15,000 square feet of gross
floor area, and may include any of the following features:
a. Kiosk(s);
b. Outdoor playground area;
c. Water feature;
d. Gazebo;
e. Clock tower; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/526
f. Other such focal feature and amenity that enhances the public space.
7. Atrium skylight(s), with a minimum depth of 20 feet that visually enhances the exterior architectural style and design of
the front entrance, facade, and roof area.
8. Exterior lighting. Enhanced exterior lighting such as wall sconces along the front facade.
9. Prominent landmark. The front facade of the building contains a prominent three-dimensional landmark feature such as a
tower, turret, arches, etc.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.06.04, adopted 11/9/17)
C. Neighborhood business (NB).
1. Applicability. The requirements of this subsection apply to all buildings within the neighborhood business (NB) zoning district.
2. Building scale. Buildings fronting on the following street classifications shall be limited to the following scale standards:
a. Arterial street or highway: Maximum 6,000 square feet in gross floor area.
b. Collector street: Maximum 4,500 square feet in gross floor area.
c. Local street: Maximum 3,000 square feet in gross floor area.
3. Building Height. Building height shall be limited to one (1) story.
4. Building Design.
a. Articulation. No street-facing facade may have a continuous length of 50 feet or more without a minimum offset of four (4) feet
in the building elevation. Maximum building length of any facade shall not exceed 100 feet.
b. Detailing. For each elevation fronting on or most directly facing street right-of-way, a private street easement, or parking lot,
the facade shall contain a minimum of three (3) architectural details that promote good design from the list below.
1. Entry portico;
2. Chimneys or cupolas;
3. Transom windows;
4. Dormers;
5. Window canopies;
6. Eaves in excess of 18 inches;
7. Covered porches (extending along 50 percent of the building facade and projecting a minimum of four (4) feet from the
face of the building);
8. Decorative window shutters; or
9. Other similar design feature approved by the Administrator.
5. Roofs. Roofs shall be gable, hip or shed style roofs with a slope at a minimum ratio of 4:12. Permitted roof materials include asphalt
shingles, slate or simulated slate shingles, or standing seam metal. Eaves shall extend a minimum of 12 inches from the building facade.
The use of flat, gambrel and mansard roofs is prohibited.
6. Restrictions.
a. All allowed uses must be operated entirely indoors, with the exception of an outdoor restaurant or café seating area. However,
the outdoor seating area may not face directly upon or be within 50 feet of a single-family residential district;
b. Delivery hours shall be limited to a period from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
c. Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; and
d. Drive-through uses are prohibited.
(Ordinance CO32-18-06-28-E1, exh. A, adopted 6/28/18)
D. Redevelopment.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to facilitate redevelopment on lots or tracts that do not, or cannot, meet the minimum
standards of this section and other provisions of this Chapter. These provisions are intended to provide a means by which administrative
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/526
relief may be granted from unforeseen applications of this Chapter that create unique challenges or practical difficulty in redevelopment
of a site.
2. Applicability. The standards of this subsection apply to the following nonresidential districts: NB, LB, GB, PO, HC, LI, HI, H, OG,
OR and PS district.
3. Applicable standards. In no case shall these standards be interpreted to lessen the requirements for reasons other than those causing
unique challenge or practical difficulty in redeveloping a site. Pursuant to this subsection, the Administrator may review applications for
and authorize the following modifications from the requirements of this Chapter:
a. Site area and lot area, width, and depth. The standards stated in table 11.03.091, Nonresidential and Mixed Use Standards, are
waived when a site that is subject to redevelopment is less than the required minimum area, width or depth. The minimum site and
lot dimensions must be such that they accommodate a building, together with adequate parking, site access and circulation, and the
building setbacks pursuant to this subsection. Such reductions may be approved upon a finding that the following conditions exist:
1. The reduced lot area and/or lot dimensions are in keeping with the historic pattern of development in the area; and
2. The reduced lot area and/or lot dimensions will not inhibit the reasonable use of the lot.
b. Building setbacks. The required minimum building setbacks stated in table 11.03.091, Nonresidential and Mixed Use
Standards, may be reduced by up to 20 percent for interior side setbacks and 40 percent for front and street side building setbacks,
provided that the setback reduction is the minimum necessary to accommodate the land use and meet the other applicable standards
on the site. A setback reduction may be approved upon a determination that one (1) or more of the following conditions exists:
1. There are site or structural conditions that preclude strict adherence to the setback requirements, such as:
a. The lot does not meet the dimensional standards established for the zoning district in which it is located;
b. The lot has topographic limitations that require placement of the structure into the required setback area; or
c. The design features of the principal building are compatible with other pre-existing, legally established principal
buildings of adjacent properties on the same side of the street.
2. The part of the proposed structure that would encroach into the minimum setback area is less than 50 percent of the width
of the encroaching building facade, provided the part of the structure that would encroach into a front setback shall either be
open (such as a porch or screen room) or not subject to occupancy.
3. The part of the proposed structure that encroaches into the minimum setback area is necessitated by a life safety code,
flood hazard reduction, Americans with Disabilities Act standard, or other public safety code requirements.
4. The encroachment of the proposed structure is necessary due to significant existing vegetation.
c. Major corridors. The standards stated in Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Subdivision, and Chapter 14, Site
Development, shall apply, except the minimum 25-foot building setback and landscape area may be reduced to no less than 15 feet
provided:
1. Conformance with the sidewalk requirements;
2. No parking is allowed within the landscape area;
3. No new above-ground utility support structures (poles) are installed; and
4. All existing four-inch caliper or larger hardwood trees within the landscape area are preserved and credited toward the
landscape requirements.
4. Conditional approval. The Administrator may place conditions on an approval to assure that the circumstances which warranted the
application of the flexible development standards are maintained.
5. Written decisions. Decisions by the Administrator shall be in writing and may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
6. Variances. No variances shall be allowed with regard to deviations from the development standards that are approved pursuant to this
subsection nor shall any deviations from these development standards make void or otherwise modify any variance decision by the board
of adjustment.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.06.04, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.03.155 Mixed use development
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Mixed Use (MU) district is to create a vibrant pedestrian-oriented environment by providing for vertically and
horizontally mixed-use buildings. This district is specifically intended to establish an urban form along internal streets through specific design and
building form standards, as well as to integrate enhanced connections to the adjacent streets, neighborhoods, and districts. The intent of these
standards is to:
1. Implement the Bell Boulevard Master Plan;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/526
2. Facilitate compact, mixed use development elsewhere within the City on vacant tracts or for infill and redevelopment purposes; and
3. Create a development form that combines modern urban design with the essence of a traditional, walkable downtown.
B. Applicability. These standards are applicable to all properties zoned Mixed Use (MU), and properties zoned Planning Area (PA) that are
designated for mixed use development within a master development plan. If the standards of this section conflict with the standards established in
section 11.03.154, Nonresidential Development, the standards of this section shall apply.
C. Mixed use requirements.
1. Building area and density. Depending on whether a development includes horizontal or vertical mixed use, the residential and
nonresidential building areas and residential densities vary.
a. In horizontal mixed use developments, the maximum percentage of gross building area allowed for residential uses is 60
percent and the minimum percentage of gross building area allowed for nonresidential uses is 40 percent. The minimum residential
density shall be 60 dwelling units per acre, based upon the net acreage of the residential development.
b. In vertical mixed use buildings, the maximum percentage of gross building area allowed for residential uses is 85 percent and
the minimum percentage of gross building area allowed for nonresidential uses is 15 percent. The minimum residential density shall
be 40 dwelling units per acre, based upon the net acreage of the site.
2. Building types.
a. Vertically mixed use buildings require the ground floor to be devoted to retail, services, office or institutional uses, with
residential uses on the upper floors.
b. Single-use multifamily buildings are allowed provided they are of an urban character, using on-street or structured parking in
lieu of surface parking.
c. Single-use retail, office, services, and institutional buildings are allowed provided they are a minimum of two (2) stories.
D. Design standards.
1. Layout.
a. Nonresidential and/or mixed use buildings. Nonresidential and/or mixed use buildings are to be:
1. Located near the center of the development; adjacent to transportation corridors; or close to the central open space.
2. Grouped together along streets to create short walking distances between buildings.
3. Located and oriented to minimize the walking distances to residential areas and public open spaces.
b. Streets. All streets and drive aisles shall be interconnected with one another and connected to adjacent neighborhoods in a grid
or modified grid pattern. Cul-de-sacs are restricted and only to be used as approved by the Administrator to alleviate specific design
issues.
c. Blocks. Blocks shall be not less than 300 feet and no more than 600 feet in length, with public access easements to provide
mid-block pedestrian connections to common parking and public spaces, as displayed by figure 11.03.155A, Pedestrian
Connections.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/526
2. Frontage.
a. Walls longer than 30 feet without fenestration, building wall articulation, or material changes are not permitted on any street or
private drive frontage, except alleys.
b. One (1) fully functional and visibly identifiable public entrance shall be provided along the frontage of each building adjacent
to an arterial or collector street.
c. Buildings shall front on the street or private drive and be designed to encourage pedestrian activity within and along the site. As
applicable, portions of site frontages devoted to off-street parking or site access shall include design features such as landscaping,
seat walls, and other pedestrian amenities to maintain visual continuity of the street or private drive and sidewalk to the fullest extent
practicable.
3. Pedestrian improvements.
a. Sidewalks shall be installed to connect public walkways to all building entrances, parking structures or areas, open spaces, and
any other destinations warranting pedestrian access.
b. Sidewalks shall connect to existing sidewalks on abutting and adjacent lots or tracts.
c. Sidewalk widths adjacent to streets and private drives (see figure 11.03.155B, Sidewalk Widths).
1. Sidewalks abutting residential buildings shall include a minimum 12-inch dismount area from back of curb, a minimum
eight (8) foot pedestrian zone, and a minimum six (6) foot tree zone.
2. Sidewalks abutting nonresidential or mixed use buildings shall include a minimum 12-inch dismount area from back of
curb, a minimum 18-foot pedestrian zone with a minimum eight (8) foot clear zone and a minimum six (6) foot tree zone.
3. The tree zone shall include a minimum four (4) inch caliper shade tree every 30 linear feet of frontage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/526
4. Residential buildings.
a. Dwellings must have a primary entrance on the front facade.
b. Buildings shall be a minimum of four (4) stories.
c. Dwelling units shall be a minimum of 450 square feet.
d. The front maximum build-to line for all buildings adjacent to streets or private drives shall be no more than 20 feet. Building
step-backs are permitted above the second floor of any building.
e. Uncovered stairs may extend to the front property line.
f. The front yard may contain ornamental metal fencing and retaining walls not more than four (4) feet in height above the
sidewalk.
5. Nonresidential and/or mixed use buildings.
a. Residential dwelling units within mixed use buildings shall be a minimum of 450 square feet.
b. The gross floor area of a single commercial establishment shall not exceed 25,000 square feet per floor.
c. Nonresidential buildings shall be a minimum of two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height. Mixed use buildings shall be a
minimum of four (4) stories in height.
d. Front facades of buildings shall be oriented toward commercial streets within the mixed use tract, and must include a public
entrance on this facade.
e. Walls without fenestration or building wall articulation shall not be permitted along any exterior wall facing a public or private
street, parking area, or pedestrian area. Comparable materials and design elements must be used on all exposed sides of a building.
f. Transparency:
1. A minimum of 75 percent of the street-facing building facade between two (2) feet and eight (8) feet in height must be
comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas.
2. Opaque, dark-tinted, or reflective glass is prohibited.
g. Building facades along streets, private drives, pedestrian areas, or common open spaces must be articulated with projections or
recesses that cumulatively equal 10 percent of the average building wall height, with a minimum depth of two (2) feet. Such
variations shall contribute to the building architecture, which may be expressed in any manner provided the cumulative relief is
achieved, as shown in figure 11.03.155C, Building Wall Articulation. Such relief may be met through the use of oriel or bay
windows, porches, porticos, vestibules, building articulation, towers, and other architectural treatments.
h. The front maximum build-to line for all buildings adjacent to streets or private drives is 30 feet. Building step-backs are
permitted above the second floor of any building.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/526
i. Building materials, windows, doors, and architectural detailing shall be compatible with adjoining residential buildings within
the development.
6. Massing and scale of unified street frontages.
a. Facades. Building facades shall be architecturally differentiated in an obvious manner and shall include at least two (2) of the
following:
1. Different colors;
2. Cladding materials;
3. Varying, height, provided that the change is at least 10 percent of the building height of the tallest module;
4. Varying roof forms;
5. Window arrangement; and/or
6. Other facade articulation details (e.g., arcade, balcony, gallery, oriel or bay windows, pavilion, pergola, porches, porticos,
terrace, tower, or vestibules, etc.).
7. Floor-to-floor heights. All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed use building shall have a
minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 12 feet.
E. Open space. Open space is an important organizing element within a mixed use development, and must be integrated into the overall design of
the project. Open space, both public and private, shall be distributed throughout the development and should provide not only aesthetic quality, but
serve recreational and civic functions as well. A variety of types of open spaces shall be conveniently accessible to all residents and provide physical
linkages throughout the development.
1. Amount required. The minimum total required on-site, or alternatively approved by the Administrator, off-site open space is seven
(7) percent of the gross land area of the mixed use development, which includes the central open space and drainage areas.
2. Types of open space. Various types of open space shall be provided, but shall include a central open space such as a park, square,
piazza, green, or plaza, or if alternatively approved, must be within one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) of an off-site open space that serves the
same or an equivalent function (see figure 11.03.155D, Types of Open Space).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/526
3. Active and passive. Additional open spaces may include active recreation facilities as well as passive open spaces such as
greenways, creeks, detention or retention ponds, drainage areas, or other similar types of open space.
4. Central open space requirements.
a. On- or off-site detention basins and other stormwater impounding areas, except for permanent wet ponds, may not be counted
toward satisfying the central open space area requirement.
b. The central open space shall be located near the middle of the development or if alternatively approved, shall be easily and
conveniently accessible by sidewalk or paved trail from all dwelling units and nonresidential buildings in the development. 90
percent of the buildings within the development shall be located within one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) of the central open space.
c. In order to facilitate public interaction, the central open space shall be improved with a focal point such as a gazebo, public art
or sculpture, pavilion, or paved patio area with a fountain or other iconic feature to help identify the park as a primary gathering
place for the development. The area of this focal point shall be a minimum of 300 square feet in size.
d. The central open space in the development shall be accessible by pedestrians, bicycles, and vehicles. Sidewalks shall be
provided adjacent to all roadways and shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide and not be adjacent to a street curb.
e. The central open space is a key component of a mixed use development. It shall be owned and maintained by a mandatory
property owners' association (POA), management district, or another City-approved legal instrument.
F. Parking.
1. On-street. Street cross-sections shall be designed to include parallel or angled parking on both sides of all streets that are internal to
the mixed use development, which shall be used to create a desirable, pedestrian-oriented streetscape environment.
2. Off-street. Off-street surface parking shall only be permitted for nonresidential uses and shall not front on any arterials or collector
streets. Off-street surface parking is prohibited in front of any structure within a designated front yard, with the exception of
nonresidential buildings only. The Administrator may approve two (2) rows of parking between nonresidential buildings and the arterial
or collector roadway. Refer to figure 11.03.155E, Off-Street Surface Parking. Off-street surface parking shall generally be located to the
side or rear of main buildings. All off-street surface parking lots shall be landscaped with hedges or other types of low planting materials
and screening walls along 100 percent of all street frontages and other public places. Off-street surface parking shall only be accessed
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/526
from minor streets or alleys and shall be angled or parallel. Each off-street surface parking lot shall not exceed a total of 50 parking
spaces, unless otherwise approved by the Administrator, to allow for adequate circulation.
3. Structured parking. Parking structures shall be provided to achieve the intended urban form, scale and intensity, density, and mixture
of uses of a mixed use development. To fulfill these requirements, upon initial construction, structured parking is required for the
residential use component of a mixed use development. In addition, structured parking must account for no less than 75 percent of the
total required parking for a vertical mixed use building or 90 percent of a horizontal mixed use development. Parking shall be
encapsulated within or below buildings in a manner that conceals it from predominant public view and that does not interrupt the
continuity of the pedestrian environment, as displayed by figure 11.03.155F, Structured Parking. All above-grade parking structures must
be designed to be consistent with and complementary to the architectural style of the main building(s). Freestanding parking structures are
permitted provided they are either not situated along arterial or collector streets or they incorporate active ground-level, street-facing uses
within the structure. Parking structures shall be positioned within the development to accommodate maximum shared use.
[4. Reserved.]
5. Shared parking. Uses within a mixed use development may have different hours of operation and peak parking demand hours.
Shared parking offers the potential to reduce the amount of impervious area and to enhance the efficiency of site design. Where a mixture
of land uses creates synergy with respect to the use of parking spaces due to differences in when the spaces are most likely to be used, the
City may allow a reduction in the required number of spaces. To do so, an applicant may submit a shared parking study to demonstrate
that the parking required for mixed uses is less than the cumulative total of the parking requirements for each individual use. The shared
parking study is required to be undertaken by a qualified, certified traffic engineer.
G. Phasing. For horizontal mixed use developments, a certificate of completion for a minimum of one (1) nonresidential building shall be issued
prior to issuance of any certificates of occupancy for residential buildings.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/526
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.03.06.05, adopted 11/9/17)
ARTICLE 11.04 ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, AND STRUCTURE STANDARDS
Division 1. Purpose, Applicability, and General Provisions
Sec. 11.04.001 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to establish standards for accessory buildings, structures, dwelling units, and uses. (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh.
A, sec. 11.04.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.04.002 General provisions
The following provisions apply to both Article 11.04, division 2, Residential Uses, and Article 11.04, division 3, Nonresidential and Mixed Uses.
A. General regulations.
1. A manufactured or mobile home is not permitted as an accessory building or structure.
2. An accessory building or structure may not be rented, sublet, or sold separately from the sale of the entire property.
3. An accessory building or structure is not allowed without the presence of a principal building or principal use.
4. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be located in front of the principal building or use.
5. A use that is prohibited in a zoning district shall not be permitted as an accessory use in the district, with the exception of
outdoor storage.
B. Accessory building coverage.
1. The sum of all accessory uses (including home occupations) in a principal building shall not exceed 25 percent of the total
gross floor area of the principal building.
2. The total of accessory buildings cannot exceed 20 percent coverage of the back yard of a single-family residence, not to exceed
2,000 square feet and not to exceed the size of the principal building.
3. For any lot of five (5) acres or greater, the total square footage of accessory buildings shall not exceed 4,000 square feet, with
the exception of a private airplane hangar as provided in this Article.
4. For property of any size located within 1,000 feet of an airport landing strip, a private airplane hangar for the sole purpose of
airplane storage is permitted; however, the airplane hangar shall only for the owner or lessee of the principal building.
C. Attached accessory structures. Accessory buildings or structures that are structurally attached to a principal building shall conform to
all standards that are applicable to the principal building; however, the attached accessory structure may encroach into the rear setback as
long as a minimum rear setback of 10 feet is maintained.
D. Residential occupancy. No accessory building shall be used as a dwelling unit unless it is specifically permitted for such purpose.
E. Location, height and setbacks. Square footage, setback and height requirements for accessory structures and buildings are noted in
table 11.04.002, Accessory Building and Structure Standards.
Table 11.04.002. Accessory Building and Structure Standards
Standard Accessory Building Accessory Structure
Size < 80 sf 1 81-180 sf 2 > 180 sf 2 < 80 sf 1 81-180 sf 2 > 180 sf 2
Height (ft) 12' 15'
Equal to principal
building
12' 15'
Equal to principal
building
Setback from principal
building (ft)
IBC or IRC IBC or IRC IBC or IRC IBC or IRC IBC or IRC IBC or IRC
Interior side setback (ft) 5' 5'
Equal to principal
building
5' 5' 5'
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/526
Street side setback (ft) 5' 10' Equal to principal
building
5' 5' 5'
Rear setback (ft) 5' 5'
Equal to principal
building
5' 5' 5'
Street side rear setback (ft) 10' 10'
Equal to principal
building
5' 5' 5'
Abbreviations:
IBC = International Building Code
IRC = International Residential Code
Table Notes:
1. Allowed in a public utility easement at the sole risk of the owner, which may be required at any time to be moved or removed by the
owner to provide full, uninhibited access to the utility easement.
2. Shall not be located in a public utility easement
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.04.01.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.04.003–11.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Residential Uses
Sec. 11.04.031 Residential accessory buildings and structures
A. No building permit required. The following accessory structures do not require a building permit:
1. One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and/or similar uses, provided the gross floor area
is equal to or less than 80 square feet;
2. Ponds, fountains, and landscape features;
3. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons, and are installed entirely above ground;
and
4. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to single-family dwellings.
B. Building permit required. The following accessory buildings and structures require a building permit:
1. Swimming pools, decks (except those decks exempt from a permit per section R105 of the latest version of the International
Residential Code as adopted by the City), and other similar structures as determined by the Administrator.
2. Accessory buildings or structures that are accessory to single-family residential uses and that exceed 80 square feet.
C. Multifamily (MF), Urban Residential (UR), and Mixed Use (MU) districts. Accessory buildings located in the Multifamily (MF), Urban
Residential (UR) and Mixed Use (MU) districts shall be a maximum of one (1) story, not to exceed 16 feet in height. The building height of
accessory buildings in these districts shall be measured from finished grade if the building is located more than 100 feet from a single-family
residential use or district. The building height of accessory buildings in these districts shall be measured from natural grade if the building is located
100 feet or less from a single-family residential use or district.
D. Facade requirements. The facade of any accessory building greater than 180 square feet that is not located behind a privacy fence or is visible
from the public street shall contain a minimum of 50 percent primary materials as defined in Article 11.03, Development and Design Standards.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.04.02.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.04.032 Accessory dwelling units
Accessory dwelling units may be allowed as an incidental residential use of a structure on the same lot as the principal dwelling unit and used by the
same person or persons of the immediate family, or any authorized employees on the premises, on the condition that the following standards are met:
A. Ownership, leasing, and addressing. An accessory dwelling unit:
1. Shall be owned by the same person(s) who own(s) the principal dwelling unit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/526
2. May not be rented, sublet, or sold separately from sale of the entire property, including the principal dwelling unit.
3. Shall have the same address and share the mailbox with the principal dwelling. Multiple mailboxes are prohibited.
4. Shall be specifically permitted for such purpose.
B. Design.
1. An accessory dwelling unit shall be designed and constructed so that it is in keeping with the general architecture and building
material of the principal structure.
2. No more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit (attached or detached) is permitted on the same lot with a principal dwelling unit.
3. No accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on the same lot with an attached single-family or multifamily dwelling or family
care home.
4. Neither water nor wastewater services or electrical utilities shall be separately provided to the accessory dwelling unit.
5. A minimum of one (1) additional parking space shall be provided for an accessory dwelling unit located on the premises. This
addition of parking shall be located in only the side or rear yard.
C. Integrated or attached accessory dwelling units.
1. The addition of an accessory dwelling unit shall not result in the principal building being altered in any way so as to appear
from a public or private street to be a single-family attached or multifamily dwelling.
a. Prohibited alterations include, but are not limited to, multiple entranceways or mailboxes on the front or side facades.
b. Access to the accessory dwelling unit shall be by means of an existing front, side, or rear door, except where a new
entrance is required by building code.
c. No new doorways or stairways to upper floors are permitted if they are attached to the side of a building facing a public or
private street, excluding alleys.
2. An accessory dwelling unit shall occupy no less than 200 square feet and no more than 25 percent of the cooled floor area, or
400 square feet, of the principal dwelling, whichever is less.
D. Detached accessory dwelling units.
1. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be located in a detached garage conversion.
2. The accessory dwelling unit shall only be located in the rear yard of the principal dwelling, provided:
a. The lot is not altered in any way so as to appear from a public or private street to be a single-family attached or
multifamily dwelling.
b. No access to the detached accessory dwelling unit is directly visible at any street.
3. Metal, prefabricated, or manufactured buildings are not permitted as accessory dwellings.
4. The accessory dwelling unit shall be housed in a building with a livable floor area of not less than 400 square feet and not more
than 600 square feet of first-floor area, not to exceed 650 gross square feet.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.04.02.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.04.033 Carports and porte-cocheres
A. Generally. Carports and porte-cocheres are allowed:
1. Within the areas available for construction of principal and accessory buildings on all properties that are developed with detached or
attached dwelling units, except multifamily dwelling units.
2. Within parking areas (and in the case of porte-cocheres, passenger loading areas) of multifamily, nonresidential, and mixed use
development.
3. Provided they are accessible from a public or private street, alley, or private interior drive.
4. Provided they are in addition to and not in lieu of an enclosed two (2) car garage constructed outside of the front or street side
setback for all single-family detached units constructed on lots greater than 35 feet in width.
5. If the entry of the carport or porte-cochere is at least 20 feet from the property line parallel to the street from which they take access.
B. Prohibited. Temporary, pre-assembled, or assembled on-site carports are prohibited in all districts.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/526
C. Survey required. A copy of a plat of survey showing all existing buildings on the lot or parcel of land where the carport, car cover, or portecochere
is proposed to be located shall be submitted with the required building permit application.
D. Height. Carports and porte-cocheres shall not exceed one (1) story or 20 feet in height, whichever is less.
E. Design and appearance. All carports and porte-cocheres shall be permanent structures that are built on-site. Except for approved trellises,
arbors, or similar open-roofed structures, carports and porte-cocheres that can be viewed from a public street shall be constructed so that supporting
posts, fascia, soffits, and roof and roof slope are of the same materials and color and resemble the principal structure.
F. Applicable building standards. Carports and porte-cocheres are subject to all applicable building codes of the City.
G. Building permit required. As permanent structures, no carports or porte-cocheres shall be constructed without first receiving a building permit.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.04.02.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.04.034–11.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Nonresidential and Mixed Uses
Sec. 11.04.061 Nonresidential accessory buildings and structures
A. Building permit required. All accessory buildings within a nonresidential district shall not be constructed without first receiving a building
permit.
B. Permitted exterior building materials.
1. 25 percent or greater primary materials. For nonresidential accessory buildings when the principal building(s) contain at least 25
percent primary materials, exclusive of doors and windows, 50 percent of the accessory structure facade shall include primary materials.
2. Less than 25 percent primary materials. For existing principal buildings constructed of cementitious fiberboard (e.g. Hardiplank or
similar), wood, vinyl siding, or other non-masonry material and having less than 25 percent primary materials, accessory buildings may
be constructed of the same material.
3. Open Space Recreation (OSR) district. For accessory buildings located in the Open Space Recreation (OSR) district, when the
principal structure(s) contains at least 25 percent primary materials, exclusive of doors and windows, 25 percent of the accessory structure
facade must be constructed of primary materials.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.04.03.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.04.062 Donation bins
A. Generally. Donation bins and similar temporary storage containers are permitted by registered nonprofit, charitable organizations for placing
materials including, but not limited to, used clothing, toys, leather goods, and small electronics, and similar items or materials.
B. Permit required. Donation bins are considered an accessory structure and shall first receive a permit prior to installation. Donation bins may be
placed only on developed nonresidential properties, subject to the requirements of this section.
C. Number, location, and requirements. Registered nonprofit, charitable organizations are permitted to place donation bins in accordance with the
following standards:
1. There shall be no more than one (1) donation bin on any property or portion of a property, or within 800 feet or another donation bin.
2. The bin shall not exceed a capacity of 512 cubic feet (8' x 8' x 8' maximum dimensions).
3. The bin shall be designed and installed in a manner that prevents the bin from tipping over.
4. The organization placing the bin shall:
a. Disclose to the City by way of a written letter the intended recipient(s) of collected items and the percentage of funds or goods
collected that will be paid or given to the nonprofit, charitable organization;
b. Submit to the City a written letter from the property owner consenting to the placement and maintenance of the donation bin;
c. Keep the bin in good repair, maintain the area around the bin free of litter, and remove any graffiti from the bin within 48 hours
of discovery or notice;
d. Clear the bin of its contents no less than every two (2) weeks, or as needed, more often to prevent the placement of items
outside of or around the bin; and
e. Clearly mark in an area no greater than one (1) square foot in size the name and telephone number of the registered nonprofit,
charitable organization on the bin.
5. Bins shall be located:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/526
a. Only in an interior side or rear yard and shall be screened from public view; and
b. On a concrete surface that is not also a parking space and that does not, in any way, reduce the minimum required parking for
the site on which it is located.
c. The location of bins shall not interfere with any of the requirements found in Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Site
Development.
6. The bins(s) shall be enclosed by use of a receiving door and locked so that the contents of the bin may not be accessed by anyone
other than those responsible for retrieval of the contents.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.04.03.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.04.063 Vending kiosks
Vending kiosks, are permitted only as an accessory use and shall comply with the following requirements.
A. Drive-through vending kiosks and automated teller machines (ATM) shall circulate independently from parking areas and provide at
least three (3) stacking spaces, including the position at the kiosk or ATM;
B. Walk-up vending kiosks and ATMs shall be connected to the internal and external pedestrian circulation systems, and shall not
interfere with vehicular circulation;
C. All mechanical equipment associated with the kiosk facility shall be completely contained within a building;
D. The kiosk shall:
1. Be elevated above the parking lot and drive aisle surfaces and protected by a six (6) inch curb, with a minimum radius around
the base of the kiosk of five (5) feet;
2. Be set back from property lines one (1) foot for each foot in height of the kiosk or ATM;
3. Not exceed a maximum height of 10 feet; and
4. Be incidental to and customarily associated with a permitted principal use that is located on the same lot or parcel.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.04.03.03, adopted 11/9/17)
ARTICLE 11.05 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BODIES
Division 1. Purpose and Application
Sec. 11.05.001 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to:
A. Describe the role of City staff in the administration of this Chapter and the approvals issued in accordance with it;
B. Establish and describe the various boards and commissions responsible for making recommendations and/or decisions in the review,
consideration, and approval or disapproval of development applications; and
C. Describe the scope of authorities retained by the Planning and Zoning Commission, board of adjustment, and City Council with
respect to the implementation, administration, and amendment of this Chapter.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, div. 11.05.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.05.002–11.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Bodies Established and Authorized
Sec. 11.05.031 Administrator
A. Generally. The Administrator shall be the Director of Development Services, as designated by the City Manager, and all references herein shall
include the Administrator's designees.
B. Authority and responsibilities.
1. Standards of operation and procedures. The Administrator is authorized to establish standards of operation and procedures for the
Development Services Department, or the department or division authorized by the City Manager, which are consistent with the purpose
of this Chapter, which may include, but are not limited to:
a. Internal review and referral procedures; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/526
b. The form and content of standardized application forms and checklists for the administration of this Chapter.
2. Maintenance of this Chapter. The Administrator is authorized to maintain, administer, and enforce this Chapter, as stated herein.
3. Recommendations. The Administrator shall make reports with regard to all applications for development approval, except those
which are decided by the Administrator or other members of the City staff, as stated in Article 11.06, Approvals and Procedures.
4. Decisions. As stated in section 11.06.061, Administrative Approvals, the Administrator shall decide all administrative matters
prescribed in this Chapter.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.05.02.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.05.032 Planning and zoning commission
A. Generally. The Planning and Zoning Commission, established by Cedar Park Home Rule Charter, Article VIII [VII], Planning and Zoning,
shall have the following powers and duties pursuant to Local Government Code chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority.
1. Zoning text amendment. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval or disapproval of
proposed changes to this Chapter and the appropriate zoning regulations for each zoning district pursuant to section 11.06.086, Zoning
Text Amendment.
2. Original zonings and rezonings. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend boundaries for the original zoning districts
and rezonings pursuant to section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request.
3. Other matters. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear, decide, and/or make recommendations as authorized by this
Chapter, the Cedar Park Home Rule Charter, and Texas Local Government Code chapter 211, including recommendations related to
master development plans, as stated in section 11.06.083, planned developments, as stated in section 11.06.084, and special use permits as
stated in section 11.06.085.
B. Composition and rules. The Planning Commission shall also serve as a zoning commission and which shall be known as the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of no fewer than five (5) or more than seven (7) residents of the City who
own real property within the City. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the Council for a term of two (2) years, or until their
successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Council. The commission shall
elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a Secretary from among its appointed members. Four (4) commission members shall constitute a quorum
and a minimum of four (4) affirmative votes shall be required to take official action for the transaction of business. Each commission member shall
be at least 18 years of age, a registered voter of the City and have resided within the City for 12 consecutive months before being appointed.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.05.02.02, adopted 11/9/17)
State law reference–Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.007.
Sec. 11.05.033 City Council
A. Generally. The City Council, established by Cedar Park Home Rule Charter, Article III, City Council, shall have the following powers and
duties pursuant to Local Government Code chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority.
1. Zoning text amendment. The City Council shall hear and decide on proposed changes to this Chapter and the appropriate zoning
regulations for each zoning district pursuant to section 11.06.086, Zoning Text Amendment.
2. Original zonings and rezonings. The City Council shall hear and decide boundaries for the original zoning districts and rezonings
pursuant to section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request.
3. Other matters. The City Council shall hear and decide other matters, as authorized by this Chapter, the Cedar Park Home Rule
Charter, and Texas Local Government Code chapter 211, including decisions related to master development plans, as stated in section
11.06.083, planned developments, as stated in section 11.06.084, and special use permits as stated in section 11.06.085.
B. Voting standards. Approvals shall require an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the City Council; provided, however, a proposed change
must receive, in order to take effect, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council if:
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended against a proposed amendment, supplement, change, or modification; or
2. A proposed change to a regulation or boundary is protested in accordance with Texas Local Government Code, section 211.006,
Procedures Governing Adoption of Zoning Regulations and District Boundaries, as follows:
a. A protest of a zoning decision shall be filed no later than the 30th day after the date that public notice is given, as stated in
section 11.06.032, Public Notice;
b. The protest must be written and signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of either:
1. The area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change; or
2. The area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending 200 feet from
that area.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/526
c. In computing the percentage of land area in this subsection, the area of streets and alleys shall be included.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.05.02.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.05.034 Zoning board of adjustment
A. Generally. The zoning board of adjustment, established by Cedar Park Home Rule Charter, Article VIII [VII] Planning and Zoning, shall have
the following powers and duties pursuant to Local Government Code chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority.
1. Administrative appeals. The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Chapter.
2. Special exceptions. The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Chapter.
3. Variances. The zoning board of adjustment shall authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of this Chapter if the variance
is not contrary to the public interest, and due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this Chapter would result in unnecessary
hardship, and so that the spirit of this Chapter is observed and substantial justice is done.
4. Other matters. The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide other matters, as authorized by this Chapter, the Cedar Park
Home Rule Charter, and Texas Local Government Code Chapter 211.
B. Composition and rules. The zoning board of adjustment shall consist of seven (7) members and not more than four (4) alternates. All shall be
residents of the City and shall own real property within the City. The members and alternates of the board shall be appointed by the Council for two
(2) years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Council. The
board shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary from among its appointed members and adopt its own rules of procedure consistent
with due process of law and in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. Seventy-five percent of the members of the board shall constitute a
quorum. Each member shall be at least 18 years of age, a registered voter of the City and have resided within the City for 12 consecutive months
before being appointed. Where required by law, a concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the board shall be necessary for action.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.05.02.04, adopted 11/9/17)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et seq.
ARTICLE 11.06 APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
Division 1. Purpose and Applicability
Sec. 11.06.001 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to state the development procedures to be undertaken in sequence until an application is considered and decided by the
decision-making body identified in this Article. (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.06.002 Applicability
The divisions of this Article apply as follows:
A. Division 2, Application Process, establishes the procedures that are generally applicable to all development applications.
B. Division 3, Approvals and Procedures, establishes the procedural requirements for development applications that allow
Administrator review and final approval and sets out the procedural requirements for development applications that require a public
hearing and recommendations by the Planning and Zoning Commission, prior to consideration and approval or disapproval by the City
Council.
C. Division 4, Appeals and Variances, sets out the procedural requirements for development applications that require review and
recommendations by the Administrator, and consideration and approval or disapproval by the zoning board of adjustment and Planning
and Zoning Commission, respectively.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.01.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.06.003–11.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Application Process
Sec. 11.06.031 Pre-application conference for certain development types
A. Required. A pre-application conference is required for applications for planned development, a mixed use development, and a master
development plan for a Planning Area (PA).
B. Purpose. At the pre-application conference, the Administrator, or a designee, and other members of the development review committee, will
meet with the applicant to review preliminary materials, identify issues, and advise the applicant regarding which applications and approvals will be
required from the City and what information will have to be provided.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.02.01, adopted 11/9/17)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/526
Sec. 11.06.032 Public notice
A. Generally.
1. Public notice shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section and the applicable requirements of the Texas
Local Government Code (TLGC).
2. If the requirements of this Chapter conflict with the requirements of the TLGC, the stricter requirement shall prevail.
B. Rezoning and special use permit general notice requirements. The following notice requirements shall apply to all rezoning applications,
including special use permits, planned developments, and Planning Area (PA) master development plans:
1. Publication. Notice of the time, date, and place of a public hearing of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council is
required by one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notice shall:
a. State the nature of the proposed zoning change, the address and location of the subject property being considered, and the
hearing date; and
b. Be published before the 15th day before the City Council public hearing date.
2. Mailed notice. Written notice of the time, date, and place of the public hearing is to be sent to all owners of real property located
within 300 feet of the property for which the zoning change is requested,
a. The notice shall be sent prior to the 10th day before the Planning and Zoning public hearing date by depositing in the mail such
notice properly addressed and postage paid;
b. The notice shall be sent to each owner as the ownership appears on the last approved City tax roll; and
c. The Administrator shall record the names and addresses of all persons, firms, and corporations to whom notices were mailed,
including the date of mailing.
3. Posting signs. The applicant shall post signs noticing the public hearing as stated below:
a. For property located on roadways with a speed limit less than 45 miles per hour, 18" x 24" signs shall be placed at intervals of
200 feet along the roadway frontage of the property.
b. For property located on a roadway with a speed limit of 45 mph and greater, 24" x 36" signs shall be placed at intervals of 200
feet along the roadway frontage of the property.
c. No more than three (3) signs shall be required per roadway frontage.
d. If a tract has less than 200 feet of frontage per roadway, then only one (1) sign is required per road frontage.
e. Signs shall be erected at least 10 days prior to the Planning and Zoning public hearing.
4. Neighborhood communication summary. If the exterior boundary of any property that is proposed for zoning or a rezoning is located
within 500 feet of any property zoned or used for single-family residential development, the applicant is required to submit a
neighborhood communication summary.
a. Purposes. The purposes of the neighborhood communication summary are to:
1. Educate the applicant and area residents about each others' interests;
2. Open channels of dialog between the applicant, existing landowners, and residents;
3. Attempt to resolve issues in a manner that is respectful of all interests; and
4. Identify unresolved issues.
b. Neighborhood meeting optional. A general neighborhood meeting may be conducted to achieve the purposes of this process but
is not required. Any method, or combination of methods of communication, may be utilized.
c. Submittal. By the close of business on the 14th day prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing, the applicant
shall provide the Administrator with a neighborhood communication summary that includes the following information:
1. Efforts implemented to notify neighborhoods about the proposal, including who was notified, how they were notified, and
when they were notified;
2. Information about the project that was shared with owners and residents via mailings, workshops, meetings, open houses,
flyers, and/or door-to-door meetings;
3. A list of who was involved in the discussions;
4. The suggestions and concerns raised by the neighborhoods; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/526
5. The specific actions that were taken, or that are proposed to be taken, in response to feedback from the residents.
d. Present at public hearing. The applicant must present the summary report to the authorized decision-making body at the public
hearing.
5. HOA/Neighborhood Representative Notification. If the exterior boundary of any property that is proposed for zoning or rezoning is
located within 500 feet of the external boundaries of the jurisdiction of a Home Owners Association (HOA) and/or a neighborhood a
courtesy notification shall be mailed to the HOA and/or neighborhood representative within the same timeframe as referenced in Section
11.06.032(B)(2)(a) above. Failure to issue a courtesy notification shall not render any zoning action void or voidable.
C. Zoning text amendment. Amendments to the text of this Chapter shall follow the publication notice requirements stated in subsection B.1,
above.
(Ordinance CO09-19-01-24-E4 adopted 1/24/19)
Sec. 11.06.033 Withdrawals
A. Generally. Applications may be withdrawn as provided in this section.
B. Withdrawal.
1. Any application may be withdrawn, either in writing or on the record, during the proceedings before the Planning and Zoning
Commission recommendation or decision is made.
2. Any application, or amended application for zoning or rezoning, may also be withdrawn within 10 calendar days after the Planning
and Zoning Commission's recommendation of denial or prior to the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, whichever is sooner.
Such withdrawal may occur no more than twice in any 12-month period. After an application for the same property has been withdrawn
twice in a 12-month period, no further applications for a zoning or rezoning to the same or less restrictive zoning district will be accepted
for a period of 12 months from the date of second withdrawal.
3. If an application is withdrawn after the 10 calendar days as stated above, no new application shall be accepted for zoning or rezoning
to the same or less restrictive zoning district within 12 months from the date of withdrawal.
4. All application fees will apply with each submittal or resubmittal.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.02.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.06.034 Successive applications
A. Generally. It is the policy of the City not to hear successive applications for substantively similar requests after an initial application is denied.
B. Time required between substantially similar applications.
1. Whenever any application listed in Article 11.06, division 4, Appeals and Variances, has been denied on its merits, no subsequent
application seeking substantively similar relief, whether or not in the same form or on the same theory, shall be accepted unless, in the
opinion of the Administrator substantial new evidence is available or a mistake of law or fact significantly affected the prior denial.
2. Whenever any application listed in Article 11.06, division 3, part II, Public Hearing Approvals, has been denied on its merits:
a. A second application seeking substantively similar consideration in the same form, may not be accepted by the City for a period
of 12 months after an original application is denied; and
b. Any subsequent application filed more than 12 months after the final denial of a prior application shall be presumed to be based
on new grounds and shall be heard on the merits as though no prior application has been filed.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.02.04, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.06.035 Fees
A. Generally. An applicant shall pay fees as set forth in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances for the processing and review of the various
applications. Such fees shall include:
1. Application submittal fees; and
2. Required reimbursement for extraordinary costs to the City necessitated by an application, such as fees for expert technical review or
advice from consultants, such as, but not limited to, the review of a special report or legal instrument.
3. Additional development applications or approvals may not be processed by the City until any outstanding application or review fees
or expenses incurred by the City have been paid in full.
B. Relationship to application. Fees must be paid at time of application submittal.
C. No refunds. The application fee, and any additional fees incurred by the City in the review of an application shall be paid in full by the applicant
and are nonrefundable.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/526
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.02.05, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.06.036–11.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Approvals and Procedures
Part I. In General
Sec. 11.06.061 Administrative approvals
A. Generally. Administrative approvals are those that are issued administratively by the Administrator, Building Official, or other City staff person
under this Chapter.
B. Appeals of administrative approvals. Administrative decisions may be appealed in accordance with section 11.06.121.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.03.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.06.062–11.06.080 Reserved
Part II. Public Hearing Approvals
Sec. 11.06.081 Public hearing approvals
A. Generally. Public meeting dates are established by the City after the applicant has satisfied all submittal requirements of this Chapter.
Applications that require a public hearing are provided in this division. Additional development approvals may be required by federal, state and local
law.
1. A public hearing approval is issued by the City Council during a public meeting, or if it is for an application for a variance pursuant
to Article 11.06, division 4, Appeals and Variances, the zoning board of adjustment during a public meeting.
2. At a public hearing:
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission may make a recommendation of approval, conditional approval, or denial of the
application to the City Council, may continue the application, or may approve certain applications where it has the authority.
b. The zoning board of adjustment may approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application where it has the authority.
c. The City Council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application at the conclusion of the public hearing process
and upon a second reading of the ordinance, or may continue action on the request.
B. Development approval process. In general, the approval procedures provided in this division are intended to be undertaken in sequence until the
application is considered and decided by the decision-making body.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.03.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.06.082 Rezoning request
A. Generally. The boundaries of any zoning district in the City may be changed, or the district classification of any parcel of land may be changed,
as provided in this section.
B. Authority to request rezoning. The City, or the owner(s) of any property within the corporate limits of the City may request to rezone such
property.
C. Submittal requirements. When requesting a rezoning, the applicant shall submit a completed application, which shall include the following
information:
1. A completed application requesting the rezoning;
2. The street address, location, and legal description of the subject property;
3. A certified boundary survey of the land area subject to the request, along with an indication of the existing zoning, predominant
existing uses, and existing zoning designations within 300 feet in all directions of the boundary of the land area subject to the request;
4. A list of surrounding property owners and their legal mailing addresses within 300 feet of the exterior boundary of the parcel
proposed to be zoned or rezoned;
5. A tax certificate from the county treasurer showing the status of all current taxes due on such parcel;
6. A statement by the applicant explaining the rationale for the rezoning request;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/526
7. A neighborhood communication summary in accordance with section 11.06.032(B)(4).
8. The required application fee in accordance with section 11.06.035; and
9. Any additional information that may be deemed to be appropriate and necessary to demonstrate that the rezoning, if granted, would
be compatible with surrounding development.
D. Procedures.
1. Staff review process. Upon submittal, the Administrator shall ensure the submittal is complete and will initiate the review process of
the request.
2. Review by Planning and Zoning Commission.
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall formulate a recommendation for City Council consideration.
c. The recommendation shall be transmitted to the City Council and applicant.
3. Review by the City Council.
a. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing;
b. The Council shall either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request.
c. The City Council may establish similar conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction to those of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, as stated in subsection E., below, if such conditions are deemed to be in the public interest or to assure
compliance with other aspects of this Chapter and surrounding development.
d. In making its decision, the City Council shall consider the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, staff
reports, and the written and oral testimony presented.
E. Establishment of Conditional Overlay (CO) district. The property owner, Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may
establish a Conditional Overlay (CO) district to establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction if such conditions are
deemed to be in the public interest or to assure compliance with other aspects of this Chapter and surrounding development. The conditions imposed
by a Conditional Overlay may:
1. Prohibit permitted, conditional, special, or accessory uses otherwise authorized in the base district;
2. Decrease the number or average density of dwelling units that may be constructed on the property;
3. Increase the minimum lot size or lot width requirements;
4. Increase the minimum buffer yard and setback requirements;
5. Restrict access to abutting and nearby roadways; or
6. Restrict any other specific site development regulation required or authorized by this Chapter.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.03.02.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.06.083 Master development plan
A. Generally. A master development plan provides a general site layout for property within a Planning Area (PA) district as a first step toward
development. It is intended to provide the applicant an opportunity to submit a master plan showing the nature and character of land proposed for
development. The master development plan is the basis for approval of individual site plans and preliminary and final plats, and is also the basis on
which a public hearing is held, thereby allowing consideration of the proposal at a preliminary stage. Approval of the master development plan
establishes the following:
1. General locations and types of residential, nonresidential, and public or institutional uses;
2. Minimum and maximum gross densities and heights of residential uses;
3. General locations and the extent of public parkland and private open spaces and amenities;
4. General phases of development;
5. A general identification of the lands to be dedicated for public purpose; and
6. Any special flood hazard area which may exist in the development.
B. Applicability.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/526
1. Prerequisite. Submittal, review, and approval of a master development plan is a prerequisite for submission of any other plan or
permit approval within a Planning Area (PA) district.
2. Minimum property size. A master development plan proposal shall contain at least 10 acres of contiguous property. A written request
may be made for master development of a smaller tract, which requires approval by the Administrator.
C. Procedure. The review and approval procedures are as follows:
1. Application. The applicant shall submit a completed application to the Administrator. The application shall contain the following
information:
a. The items of information outlined in section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request, plus:
b. A map depicting the existing zoning and land uses of the subject property and all land within 500 feet;
c. A map depicting the approximate locations and sizes of existing streets, water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, gas lines, or
other underground installations;
d. A written statement describing the proposed development and its conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and its policy
statements;
e. Schematic land plan drawn at a range of scale from 10 feet to an inch to 100 feet to an inch of the proposed development plan
showing, at a minimum:
1. Public parkland and private open spaces;
2. The general placement and heights of residential, nonresidential, institutional, mixed use, and other buildings and land
uses;
3. An approximate layout of street rights-of-way, their proposed roadway designations, and alignment with existing streets;
4. General plans for transitioning uses and development types, particularly for the existing, adjoining developments, as
applicable; and
5. Site features to be preserved or integrated into the development.
f. Tabulation of the following information which may be expressed in ranges, if applicable:
1. Total number of dwelling units proposed;
2. The general categories of land use categorized to include, but not be limited to:
a. Residential uses by type of structure;
b. Commercial uses;
c. Industrial uses;
d. Public (common) and private open space; and
e. Streets.
3. The general categories of land uses and their percentages of the total site area;
g. If the development is proposed for construction in phases, an expected schedule for the development of each phase; and
h. Other information as the Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council deem necessary to perform a full
and complete review of the application.
2. Waiver of specific submissions. At the conclusion of, or any time following a pre-application conference, as stated in section
11.06.031, Pre-Application Conference for Certain Development Types, any information or documentation required to be submitted may
be waived by the Administrator on the basis that the item is not necessary to a full and complete review of the proposed development.
Such waiver shall be in writing with a copy attached to the application.
3. Actions by the Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council. The procedures for the review and approval of a
master development plan shall be as set out in section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.03.02.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.06.084 Planned development
A. Generally. A Planned Development (PD) district is a district that accommodates planned associations of uses developed as integral land use
units. A planned development concept plan is a required submittal with the application for approval of a planned development. The concept plan is
intended to illustrate a development in sufficient detail to provide a full and proper consideration and disposition of the application.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/526
B. Purpose.
1. Generally. A Planned Development district accommodates a master planned association of land uses which are within an integrated
developed [development]. This district may be used to facilitate a larger-scale, multi-phase, or mixed use development. The district is
intended to allow new or innovative concepts in land development that may not be permitted in other zoning districts. Generally, greater
flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions which may not otherwise allow the development.
2. Threshold. No planned development shall be created unless the applicant demonstrates that the planned development materially
advances the purposes stated in this section.
C. Applicability. A planned development proposal shall contain at least 10 acres of contiguous property. A written request may be made for
planned development of a smaller tract, which requires approval by the Administrator.
D. Procedures. The procedures are the same as that for a rezoning request, as stated in section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request, and include the
additional requirements set forth below:
1. Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Administrator. The application shall contain the information set
forth below.
2. Submittal requirements.
a. The items of information outlined in section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request;
b. Identification of the base zoning district(s) to which the PD is most similar;
c. A statement of intent and purpose of the PD;
d. Development regulations for the PD; and
e. A concept plan that illustrates graphically the standards contained within the PD.
3. Applicable regulations. Development regulations shall be included as part of the Planned Development, and may include, but are not
be limited to:
a. Land uses;
b. Densities;
c. Lot areas and widths;
d. Lot depths;
e. Building coverage and heights;
f. Building elevations;
g. Parking and access;
h. Screening and landscaping;
i. Mandatory property owner's association; a mandatory property owners' association shall be required for a development
proposed for more than one (1) lot and/or owner for providing, operating, and maintaining the facilities, grounds, parking and drive
areas, open spaces, detention, and amenity areas. If an owner's association is required, the Articles for incorporation of an owner's
association shall be reviewed by the City to assure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter; and
j. Other regulations as the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council may deem appropriate to perform a full and
complete review of the application.
4. Actions by the Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council. The procedures for the review and approval of a
planned development shall be as stated in section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request.
5. Modifications to the PD.
a. Owners of property within a PD may request rezoning for only a portion of the PD district they own. Notice of such rezoning
will be based on the boundary of the portion of the PD district being rezoned rather than the entire PD district. In considering the
request, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall evaluate the effect of the rezoning on the remaining property
within the PD district. If the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council determines that the rezoning necessitates
adjustments to the terms and conditions of the original PD district, the zoning case to rezone the portion of the PD district will be
tabled so that the City can initiate a zoning case for the reminder [remainder] of the PD district and first consider amendments to the
terms and conditions of the original PD district.
Sec. 11.06.085 Special use permit
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/526
A. Generally. A special use is a use that is allowed within a district, but which is subject to specific standards and a public hearing process in order
to reduce the potential for incompatibility with other uses within or adjacent to the district. The designation of a special use means that it is only
allowed in a proposed location if all of the conditions applicable to the use are met. A special use may or may not be appropriate in a particular
location depending on the value of the public need and benefit versus the impacts of the use.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section are applicable to all uses that are designated as “special” in section 11.02.063, Residential Uses by
Zoning District, and section 11.02.064, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District.
C. Submittal requirements. When requesting a special use permit, the applicant shall submit a completed application including the following:
1. The items of information outlined in section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request;
2. A statement by the applicant explaining the rationale for the SUP request;
3. A concept plan including:
a. Number and location of access points to the property, proposed structures and uses with particular reference to automotive,
bicycle, transit and pedestrian safety and convenience; traffic flow and control; emergency access; and location of off-street parking,
loading spaces, and service areas;
b. General compatibility and appropriateness of the permitted use in relationship to other nearby properties and uses, including
consideration of lighting, signage, and hours of operation, screening/buffering, landscaping, noise/odors, and other factors;
c. Compliance with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; and
4. Any additional information that may be deemed to be appropriate and necessary to demonstrate that the SUP, if granted, would be
compatible with surrounding development.
D. Approval criteria. In review of a special use, the Planning and Zoning Commission, City Council, and staff shall utilize the following in their
review, recommendations, and decision:
1. The proposed special use permit conforms to adopted plans and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter;
2. Adequate public facilities and services are available without the reduction of services for any existing uses;
3. All proposed accessory uses demonstrate that they are necessary and desirable;
4. The proposed special use has incorporated features sufficient to protect adjacent uses including but not limited to: service areas,
pedestrian and vehicular circulation, safety provisions, access ways to and from the site, buffering, fencing and site building placement;
5. The proposed special use is compatible with adjacent existing uses and other allowed uses in the zoning districts, for which such
compatibility is expressed in terms of appearance, architectural scale and features, site design, landscaping, as well as the control of
adverse impacts; and
6. The maximum density is no greater than that permitted in the applicable zoning district.
E. Procedures. An application is processed as stated in section 11.06.082, Rezoning Request.
F. Decision. In granting a special use, the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may:
1. Impose standards, conditions, and requirements in addition to or which supersede those of this Chapter, as deemed necessary to
advance the purposes and intent of this Chapter, provided that such requirements are directly related to the impacts of the proposed use;
and
2. Require that a performance guarantee, acceptable in form, content, and amount to the City, be posted by the applicant to ensure
continued compliance with all applicable conditions and requirements.
G. Findings of fact/basis for denial. After considering the public comment relating the criteria listed above in relation to the requested special use
permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall find:
1. If the application is granted, that the application sufficiently addresses each of the criteria listed above; and
2. If the application is denied, that the application failed to sufficiently address one (1) or more of the stated criteria.
H. Perpetually binding. A special use shall be perpetually binding upon and shall run with the property.
I. Abandonment or failure to commence special use.
1. If a special use has not progressed in accordance with Texas Local Government Code, chapter 245, Issuance of Local Permits, the
special use shall be deemed expired.
2. If any special use is discontinued for a period exceeding one (1) year or replaced by another use, the special use permit shall be
deemed abandoned.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/526
J. Enlargements, modifications, or alterations.
1. A building, premises, or land used under a special use permit may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise changed
provided the changes do not:
a. Increase the height of structures, including, without limitation, antenna support structures;
b. Increase the gross floor area of the building;
c. Reduce the distance between a building or noise-generating activity on the property and an adjacent, off-site residential use; or
d. Reduce the amount of open space.
2. All other enlargements, modifications, structural alterations, or changes other than those outlined in subsection J.1., above, shall
require the approval of a new special use permit.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.03.02.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.06.086 Zoning text amendment
A. Generally. The City Council may amend the text of this Chapter in accordance with the procedures stated in this section and Article 11.06,
division 2, Application Process, to implement the Comprehensive Plan, conform to state or federal legal requirements, address changing or changed
conditions, or otherwise advance the public health, safety, and welfare of the City.
B. Applicability. The City Council and any other body that is described in Article 11.05, Development Review Bodies, may initiate an amendment
by motion.
C. Procedures. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall each hold a public hearing. The procedure shall incorporate the
following additional requirements:
1. Staff review. The Administrator shall review each proposed amendment in light of the criteria in subsection C.4., below, and refer the
application to other departments or entities as deemed necessary. Based on the results of those reviews, the Administrator shall provide a
report and recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Planning and zoning commission recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed text amendment. Following the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City
Council.
3. City Council action and decision. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council
shall, after a public hearing, vote to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed amendment, based on the approval criteria
below. The City Council may also refer the proposed amendment back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration,
continue a public hearing, or postpone action on an application.
4. Approval criteria. Recommendations and decisions regarding petitions for amendments to text of this Chapter are legislative in
nature, but shall be based on consideration of all the criteria that the proposed amendment:
a. Will help to implement the Comprehensive Plan;
b. Is consistent with the stated purposes of this Chapter;
c. Will maintain or advance the public health, safety, or general welfare;
d. Will help to mitigate adverse impacts of the use and development of land on the natural or built environments, including, but
not limited to mobility, air quality, water quality, noise levels, stormwater management, and vegetation; or will be neutral with
respect to these issues; and
e. Will advance the strategic goals of the City Council.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.03.02.05, adopted 11/9/17)
Secs. 11.06.087–11.06.120 Reserved
Division 4. Appeals and Variances
Sec. 11.06.121 Appeals
A. Generally. An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of adjustment by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or board of the
City affected by a decision of the Administrator under this Chapter.
B. Applicability. The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals that allege error in an order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of Texas Local Government Code, chapter 211, subchapter A, Municipal
Regulatory Authority, or this Chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/526
C. Procedures. The procedure for an appeal under this section shall be in accordance with Texas Local Government Code, section 211.010, Appeal
to Board, this subsection, and any applicable adopted rules of procedure.
1. Decision.
a. The zoning board of adjustment shall decide the merits of the appeal based on their findings of fact and deliberations.
b. In any case where the notice of appeal is accompanied by an application for variance, the zoning board of adjustment shall have
the authority to grant, as part of the relief, a variance but only in strict compliance with each provision stated in section 11.06.122,
Variance.
2. Effect of appeal. In any case where this Chapter imposes conditions and limitations upon any right, any such right granted by the
zoning board of adjustment on appeal shall be subject to such conditions and limitations in the same manner and to the same extent as if
secured without the necessity of an appeal.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.04.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.06.122 Variance
A. Generally. The variance procedure is intended to provide a means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen applications of this Chapter
which create unnecessary hardships or practical difficulties. The variance procedure provided in this section is only appropriate when remedy of such
hardships is not allowed pursuant to other provisions of this Chapter.
B. Applicability. The zoning board of adjustment may authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of this Chapter if the variance is not
contrary to the public interest, and due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this Chapter would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of this Chapter is observed and substantial justice is done. Variances may be authorized only in accordance with the conditions enumerated
in subsection D, Hardship Criteria, below, and then only in compliance with the procedures of this section.
C. Use variances prohibited. Variances that authorize a use other than those permitted in the district for which the variance is sought are not
permitted.
D. Hardship criteria.
1. An applicant for a variance has the responsibility to demonstrate how or why the strict application of applicable requirements of this
Chapter would result in an unnecessary hardship due to circumstances unique to the property on which a variance is sought.
2. The zoning board of adjustment may only grant a variance from any requirement of this Chapter if it makes written findings that
affirm each of the following criteria are satisfied:
a. There are special conditions unique to the property, such as lot size, shape, orientation, topography or other physical features,
that are not generally characteristic of other properties in the area;
b. Due to these special conditions, strict application of this Chapter would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of the property
and would result in an undue hardship;
c. The undue hardship is not self-induced or created by the applicant, nor is it strictly pecuniary/financial;
d. Development under the variance would not alter the character of the area adjacent to the property, impair the use of adjacent
property developed in compliance with this Chapter, or impair the purpose of the regulations of the zoning district in which the
property is located;
e. Granting the variance request would not be contrary to the public interest or detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare;
f. Granting the variance request would be within the spirit of this Chapter and result in substantial justice; and
g. Any other criteria that should be considered pursuant to state law.
E. Variance process.
1. All requested variances from this Chapter shall be made in writing at least 30 calendar days prior to the date on which consideration
of the variance would be given by the zoning board of adjustment.
2. The applicant requesting a variance shall submit documentation describing how the proposed variance(s) satisfy each of the criteria
stated in subsection D, above.
3. Should a variance be granted, the zoning board of adjustment may impose such additional conditions as necessary and desirable in
the public interest.
4. The board shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing prior to taking action on a variance request.
5. Public notice shall be provided in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, section 211.010, Appeal to Board. Written
notice of all public hearings on proposed variances shall be sent to all owners of property, or to the person rendering the same for City
taxes, located within the area of application and within 200 feet of any property affected thereby, within not less than 10 days before such
hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the latest approved tax roll and depositing the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/526
notice, postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice of all public hearings shall also appear in the local newspaper of general circulation
within not less than 10 days before such hearing is held.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.06.04.02, adopted 11/9/17)
ARTICLE 11.07 NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 11.07.001 Definitions
A. Nonconforming structure means a structure that does not conform to the regulations of this Chapter, but that was lawfully constructed under the
regulations in force at the time of construction and use of the structure has not ceased, as defined herein, since that time.
B. Nonconforming use means a use that does not conform to the use regulations of this Chapter, but that was lawfully established under the
regulations in force at the beginning of operation and has not ceased, as defined herein, since that time.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.07.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.07.002 General regulations
A. Lawful status. Nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures are permitted except as provided in this Article 11.07.
B. Unlawful status. Nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures do not include those uses or structures which in whole or in part are not in
conformance with current zoning standards and were not in conformance with applicable standards at the time of their inception.
C. Annexation. Nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures include those uses and structures that were in existence prior to annexation
pursuant to Texas Local Government Code section 43.002, Continuation of Land Use.
D. Change in district boundaries. Nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures include those uses and structures that were in existence and
lawful at the time of the change in a zoning district boundary pursuant to this Chapter and have since been in regular continuous use.
E. Burden of demonstration. The burden of establishing that a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure is still a lawful nonconformity shall
be borne by the owner or the proponent of such nonconformity.
F. Determination of nonconforming status. A determination of a nonconforming status shall be made by the Administrator, subject to appeal to the
board of adjustment.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.07.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.07.003 Nonconforming use regulations
A. Expansion prohibited. A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or increased in any manner. An expansion of a nonconforming use includes
(1) additional off-street loading or off-street parking to accommodate the nonconforming use; and (2) additional patio cover, porch, and/or canopy to
accommodate the nonconforming use.
B. Loss of nonconforming use status. The right to operate a nonconforming use ceases if: (1) such use is lost pursuant to section 11.07.005,
Amortization of Nonconforming Uses and Nonconforming Structures; (2) the use is changed; or (3) the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is
apparent, as determined by the Administrator. Factors to consider by the Administrator when determining apparent intent include:
1. Discontinuance of the use for a period of 180 days or more; and
2. Removal of the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have
not been replaced by similar equipment within 180 days or more.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.07.03, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.07.004 Nonconforming structure regulations
A. Destruction or damage.
1. If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed or declared unsafe by the Building Official to an extent that repairs would
equal or exceed 60 percent of its total appraised value as determined by the appraisal district, the structure may not be rebuilt except to
conform to the provisions of this Chapter.
2. If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed or declared unsafe by the Building Official to an extent that repairs would
equal less than 60 percent of its total appraised value as determined by the appraisal district, the structure may be rebuilt in conformance
with the regulations in place at the time of the original construction of the nonconforming structure, provided: construction begins within
six (6) months of the destruction and is diligently pursued to completion; and the existing square footage or function of the
nonconforming structure is not expanded.
B. Expansion of nonconforming structure.
1. Major expansion. A nonconforming structure expanded by more than 10 percent or 2,000 square feet of its gross floor area,
whichever is less, shall fully comply with this Chapter. This requirement shall apply to the original, pre-expanded, portion of the structure
as well.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/526
2. Minor expansion. A nonconforming structure expanded by 10 percent or less of its gross floor area, or 2,000 square feet, whichever
is less, may be constructed in conformance with the regulations in place at the time of the original construction of the nonconforming
structure. The gross floor area of a nonconforming structure may only be increased once.
C. Repairs. Routine repairs of nonconforming structures are permitted. Routine maintenance includes: repairs required by applicable law, painting,
and incidental alterations such as the relocation of walls, partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing which do not enlarge or intensify the nonconforming
structure, or materially extend their life.
D. Moving. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to another location in the City unless every portion of the structure
is made to conform to this Chapter in the zoning district in which it is to be located.
E. Loss of nonconforming structure status. The right to occupy a nonconforming structure ceases if: (1) such structure is required to comply with
this Chapter pursuant to section 11.07.005, Amortization of Nonconforming Uses and Nonconforming Structures; (2) the structure is changed
pursuant to this section; or (3) the intent of the owner to vacate the structure is apparent, as determined by the Administrator. Factors to consider by
the Administrator when determining apparent intent include:
1. Vacation of the structure for a period of 180 days or more;
2. Removal of the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming structure from the premises and have not been
replaced by similar equipment within 180 days or more.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.07.04, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.07.005 Amortization of nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures
A. Qualifications for amortization consideration.
1. Public necessity. Any person, who resides or owns real property in the City may request that the City Council establish a compliance
(amortization) date for a nonconforming use or a nonconforming structure. Upon receipt of such request, the City Council shall determine
whether this is a public necessity for expedited compliance (amortization) with this Chapter, based upon consideration of the following
factors:
a. Nonconforming use:
i. The character of the surrounding neighborhood;
ii. The degree of incompatibility of the use to the zoning district in which it is located;
iii. The effect of the nonconforming use on the surrounding area and the effect of its cessation on that area;
iv. The manner in which the use is being conducted;
v. The hours of operation of the use;
vi. The extent to which continued operation of the use may threaten public health or safety.
vii. The environmental impacts of the use's operation, including but not limited to the impacts of noise, glare, dust, and odor;
viii. The extent to which public disturbances may be created or perpetuated by continued operation of the use;
ix. The extent to which traffic or parking problems may be created or perpetuated by continued operation of the use; and
x. Any other factors relevant to the issue of whether continued operation of the use will adversely affect nearby properties.
b. Nonconforming structure:
i. The character of the surrounding neighborhood;
ii. The degree of incompatibility of the structure to the zoning district in which it is located;
iii. The effect of the nonconforming structure on the surrounding area and the effect of its cessation on that area;
iv. The extent to which continued operation of the structure may threaten public health or safety; and
v. Any other factors relevant to the issue of whether continued operation of the structure will adversely affect nearby
properties.
2. Lack of public necessity. If the City Council finds there is not a public necessity for expedited compliance with this Chapter, the City
Council shall request that the Planning and Zoning Commission initiate a public hearing in accordance with this Chapter to determine the
proper zoning of the property on which the use is located.
B. Amortization period.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/526
1. If the City Council finds that there is a public necessity for expedited compliance with the zoning regulations, the City Council shall,
in accordance with the law, provide a compliance date for the nonconforming use or nonconforming structure under a plan whereby the
owner's actual investment in the nonconforming use or nonconforming structure, fixed equipment and other assets (excluding inventory
and other assets that may be feasibly transferred to another site) on the property before the time that the use became nonconforming can
be amortized within a definite time period.
2. The following factors must be considered by the City Council in determining a reasonable amortization period:
a. The owner's capital investment in structures, fixed equipment and other assets (excluding inventory and other assets that may
be feasibly transferred to another site) on the property before the time the use and/or structure became nonconforming;
b. Any costs that are directly attributable to the owner and the establishment of compliance date, including demolition expenses,
relocation expenses, termination of leases, and discharge of mortgages;
c. Any return on capital investment since inception of the use and/or use of the structure, including net income and depreciation;
and
d. The anticipated actual recovery of capital investment, including net income and depreciation.
3. If the City Council finds that the owner did not have an investment in the nonconforming use or nonconforming structure before it
became a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure, the owner is not entitled to an amortization period to recover any of the costs
set forth in this subsection B. The City Council in its sole discretion, however, may give the owner a reasonable time to wind-down its
operation.
4. For purposes of setting a compliance date/amortization period, the term “owner” shall mean the owner of the nonconforming use or
nonconforming structure at the time the City Council determination of a compliance date/amortization period is made.
C. Compliance requirement. If the City Council establishes a compliance date for a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure, the use must
cease operations or the structure must be removed on or before that date.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.07.05, adopted 11/9/17)
ARTICLE 11.08 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
Division 1. Enforcement Procedures
Sec. 11.08.001 Purpose
This Article establishes the procedures that the City may use to assure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and to correct violations. This
Article also provides the penalties and remedies that the City may seek to correct violations. The provisions of this Article are intended to encourage
the voluntary correction of violations. (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.08.01, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.08.002 Right of entry
The Administrator and Building Official shall be permitted to enter any real property at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter, or any applicable federal, state or local laws, by consent of the owner or occupant or pursuant to a lawfully issued
administrative warrant. (Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.08.01.02, adopted 11/9/17)
Sec. 11.08.003 Penalties and remedies
A. Criminal enforcement. A property owner or occupant who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a class C
misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000) in accordance with the general penalty
provision in the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, section 1.01.009, General Penalty for Violations of Code.
B. Other remedies. In addition, and without prejudice to the penalties and remedies stated herein, the City may also enforce these provisions and
pursue any and all available legal remedies, including but not limited to injunctive relief and recovery of civil penalties under chapter 54 of the Texas
Local Government Code, Enforcement of Municipal Ordinances.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, sec. 11.08.01.03, adopted 11/9/17)
ARTICLE 11.09 DEFINITIONS
Sec. 11.09.001 Definitions
Accessory building. An enclosed accessory structure with a roof, used or intended for supporting or sheltering a use or, when permitted as an
accessory dwelling unit, for occupancy.
Accessory dwelling unit. An accessory building permitted as a habitable space to serve those individuals residing in the principal structure. An
accessory dwelling unit can be attached or detached inasmuch as it fully complies with the regulations that pertain to its design and use.
Accessory structure. A subordinate structure located on the lot, the use of which is clearly incidental to and associated with the principal structure.
Accessory use. A subordinate use that is located on the same lot as the principal use and is incidental to and associated with the principal use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/526
Administrator. The Director of Development Services, or his or her designee, designated by the City Manager to administer the regulations and
provisions of this Chapter.
Adult day care. A facility that provides services under an adult day care program on a daily or regular basis, but not overnight, to four (4) or more
elderly or handicapped persons who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner of the facility. Adult day care centers must be
licensed by the Texas Department of Human Services.
Agricultural support services. Any use of land or water designed to facilitate and provide support for agricultural uses.
Airport. Any area of land designed and set aside for the landing and take-off of an airplane and utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes.
Alcoholic beverage establishment. A business whose revenue (51 percent or above of gross sales) comes from the sale of beer, wine, or other
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and which requires a license under Texas state regulations.
Alcoholic beverage sales, off-site consumption. The use of a site for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for which the use receives more than 50
percent of its gross revenue on a quarterly basis from the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption.
Alley. An alley is a passageway that provides access to the rear or side of property. Alleys are intended for use at very low vehicular speeds and
provide alternative locations for garbage collection and dry utilities.
Ambulatory surgical center. See Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 135, subchapter A, rule 135.2, Definitions. See also “Medical
clinic.”
Amenity center. A recreational facility, including, but not limited to, clubhouse, swimming pool, and play area, operated for the exclusive use of
private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests, and not the general public.
Animal grooming. An establishment where domestic animals are bathed, clipped, or combed for the purpose of enhancing their appearance or health,
and for which a fee is charged, but not including overnight boarding of animals.
Animal veterinary services, large animal. A use in which large animals such as horses, goats, and livestock are admitted for examination and medical
treatment. This use does not include medical care for small animals such as dogs, cats, and birds.
Animal veterinary services, small animal. A use in which household pets, such as dogs, cats, and birds are admitted for examination and medical
treatment. The use does not include medical care for large animals or livestock.
Apartment. A building, or portion thereof, which is designed to contain three (3) or more independent dwelling units, for individuals and/or families
living independently of each other.
Apiary. A place in which a colony or colonies of bees are kept; for example, in a stand or shed for beehives, or a bee house containing a number of
beehives.
Appurtenances. Spires, belfries, cupolas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level
and not intended for human occupancy.
Arcade. An area contiguous to a street or plaza that is open and unobstructed and accessible to the public at all times. Arcades may include building
columns, landscaping, statuary and fountains. Arcades do not include off-street loading/unloading areas, driveways or parking areas.
Archery range. A specially designed outdoor space for the safe discharge of archery. This use does not include the discharge of rifles, shotguns,
pistols and other firearms.
Architectural shingles. Laminated or dimensional shingles composed of a heavy fiberglass mat base and ceramic-coated mineral granules that are
tightly embedded in carefully refined, water-resistant asphalt.
Art studio, gallery. The use of a site for the display, production and/or sale of artwork.
Assisted living, congregate, or respite care. An institution which provides food and shelter to four (4) or more elderly persons or adults who are
unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment, as well as personal care services or administration of medication. These may also provide assistance
with or supervision of the administration of medication or skilled nursing services. These facilities must be licensed by the Texas Department of
Aging and Disability Services and further defined in Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 247, Assisted Living Facilities.
Automobile, major repairs and service. A building or place arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for the purpose of providing general
repair and servicing of all types of motor vehicles. Such repair or servicing may include reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and
transmissions; wrecker service; collision services, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; painting, undercoating and rust-proofing;
replacement or repair of brakes, shock absorbers, tires, batteries, mufflers, or upholstery; and other similar services.
Automobile, minor service. Any repair that does not require the removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission, or differential, incidental
body work, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, framework, welding, and major painting service. Examples of minor services include, but are not
limited to, the changing of fluids, tires, batteries, shock absorbers, mufflers, brakes, lights, wipers and tinting.
Automobile, rental. Includes the rental of new or used vehicles licensed under the Texas Motor Vehicle Registration Act.
Automobile, sales. Includes the sale of new or used vehicles licensed under the Texas Motor Vehicle Registration Act. New or used automotive sales
requires the registration of the business with the Texas Department of Motor Vehicles.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/526
Awning. A roof-like structure of canvas or sheetmetal extending over a doorway, from the top of a window, over a deck, etc., in order to provide
protection. Vinyl or plastic awnings are prohibited.
Bank, credit union, and financial institution. The use of a site for the provision of financial and banking services.
Bed-and-breakfast facility. An owner-occupied residence, classified as a nonresidential use for the purpose of site development, with up to five (5)
bedrooms available for overnight guests. A bed-and-breakfast shall not include restaurants, banquet facilities, or similar services.
Birthing center. See Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 137, subchapter A, rule 137.2, Definitions. See also “Hospital services.”
Block. A parcel of land within a subdivision that is bounded by streets, open spaces, boundaries of water and/or the exterior boundary of the
subdivision.
Boulevard. A street with separated travel lanes including a landscaped area between each street section. Boulevards are differentiated from parkways
in that they typically have a narrower separated section.
Broadcasting center. An establishment containing one (1) or more broadcast studios for over-the-air cable, or satellite delivery of radio or television
programs.
Build-to line. The line at which construction of a building facade is to occur on a lot, running parallel to the front property line without setback, and
thus ensuring a uniform building facade line on the street.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building area. The total area enclosed by a line formed by the outside surface of all walls at the foundation line.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, art. 11.09, adopted 11/9/17)
Building height. The vertical distance from the highest point on a structure to the average ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural
elements intersect the ground. (Ordinance CO32-18-06-28-E1, exh. A, adopted 6/28/18)
Building lot. A tract of land which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is intended by its owner or developer to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. It shall front upon a dedicated street.
Building Official. The Building Official for the City or his or her designee.
Building setback line or setback. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street line.
Bus or taxi depot/transit station. Any central location or premises for the transient housing or parking of motor-driven buses or automobiles for the
purposes of loading, unloading, and transporting passengers.
Canopy. A porch or walkway with a roof supported by columns, often leading to the entrance of the building.
Caretaker or guard residence. An on-site dwelling within a permitted principal use where the person, or family, resides as a live-in property manager,
security guard, or caretaker for the principal use.
Carport. A roofed structure that is constructed specifically for the storage of one (1) or more vehicles which is not enclosed or walled on any side.
Car wash. A facility where a customer can have a motorcycle, automobile, or light load vehicle washed in exchange for financial consideration.
Cemetery/columbarium. Land used or dedicated for the burial of the dead.
Chicane. A staggered roadway around tree groupings, at the end of a parking lane, or other feature, intended to slow traffic speed.
Child day-care, incidental. A place designed solely for the care of children belonging to employees of the primary use.
City. The City of Cedar Park, Texas, a home rule charter City.
City Council. The City Council of the City of Cedar Park, Texas.
Civic club. An organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members.
Code of Ordinances. The codes and ordinances, which may be amended from time to time, of the City of Cedar Park.
Collector street. A collector street provides mobility between areas of a district and is designed to insure a calm, safe street that enhances the
livability and preserves the character of neighborhoods. Collector streets have a more residential character than main streets.
College, university, or vocational school. A community college, college, university, vocational, technical or trade schools, language school, business
school, training center, beauty school, culinary school, and comparable advanced or continuing education facilities. The phrase does not include
fitness centers, sports instruction, swimming instruction, or martial arts instruction.
Commercial parking lot. A parking lot used for the temporary parking of automobiles for a fee.
Commissary. A commercial facility providing services consisting of the on-site preparation and storage of food and food utensils to be delivered and
served to and consumed by customers off the premises. This use can include retail sales as an accessory use. This term does not include the storage,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/526
rental, or supplying of party, banquet or event equipment, furnishings, or fixtures.
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Cedar Park.
Community garden. Privately or publicly owned land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by multiple users.
Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one (1) or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of
the group and may include common areas maintained or used by group members.
Community home. An entity protected by the Texas Community Homes for Disabled Persons Act (Texas Human Resources Code, chapter 123,
Community Homes for Persons with Disabilities); including:
A. A community-based residential home operated by:
1. The Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation;
2. A community center organized under Texas Human Resources Code [Health and Safety Code], chapter 534, subchapter A,
Community Services, that provides services to persons with disabilities;
3. An entity subject to the Texas Non-Profit Corporation Act (Article 1396-1.01 et seq., Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes [Business
Organizations Code, chapter 22]); or
4. An entity certified by the Texas Department of Human Services as a provider under the medical assistance program serving
persons in intermediate care facilities for persons with mental retardation; or
B. An assisted living facility licensed under Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 247, Assisted Living Facilities, provided that the
exterior structure retains compatibility with the surrounding residential dwellings.
Concrete. A hard, strong building material made by mixing a cementing material ([such] as portland cement) and a mineral aggregate (such as sand
and gravel) with sufficient water to cause the cement to set and bind the entire mass.
Concrete masonry unit (CMU). A hollow concrete masonry unit made from portland cement and suitable aggregates such as sand, gravely crushed
stone, bituminous or anthracite cinders, burned clay or shale, pumice, volcanic scoria, air-cooled or expanded blast furnace slags, with or without the
inclusion of other materials.
Concrete, mortar, and asphalt batching. A use where cement, mortar, or asphalt is manufactured.
Condominium. A form of real property ownership with portions of the real property designated for separate ownership or occupancy, and the
remainder of the real property designated for common ownership or occupancy solely by the owners of those portions. Real property is a
condominium only if one (1) or more of the common elements are directly owned in undivided interests by the unit owners. Real property is not a
condominium if all of the common elements are owned by a legal entity separate from the unit owners, such as a corporation, even if the separate
legal entity is owned by the unit owners.
Construction sales and services. Commercial use that sells, displays, or stockpiles large-scale intensive outdoor operations and contracting
equipment, machinery, and other materials.
Contractor's shop/storage yard. A building, part of a building, or land area for the construction or storage (inside or out) of materials, tools, products,
and vehicle fleets.
Controlled substance. Marijuana, hashish, cocaine, methamphetamine, any other “controlled substance,” “controlled substance analogue,” “synthetic
controlled substance,” or substance or chemical that mimics the effect of THC such as synthetic cannabinoids or other controlled substances, or any
other substance that violates federal, state, or local law, and is adapted to that purpose by virtue of a distinctive feature or combination of features
associated with drug paraphernalia.
Convenience store. A retail establishment that sells primarily food products, household items, newspapers and magazines, candy, and beverages, and
a limited amount of freshly prepared foods such as sandwiches and salads.
Craft brewing/distillery/winery production with on-premise consumption. A business where specialty beer or wine is produced in limited quantities
with on-site consumption and/or tasting, as regulated by the State of Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
Credit access business. A credit access business has the meaning given the term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code section 393.601(2).
Crematory. A location containing a properly installed and licensed, certified apparatus intended for the use of cremation.
Cul-de-sac. A street having but one (1) outlet to another street, and terminating on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround.
Data center. A facility housing a collection of computer servers and associated components, such as telecommunication, storage and backup systems
that supply information to a single or multiple end users off-site. Facilities typically require large amounts of electricity, strict temperature control
and security, and will generally have few employees present on-site.
Day-care center. A child-care facility that provides care at a location other than the residence of the director, owner, or operator of the child-care
facility for seven (7) or more children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day, but at least two (2) hours a day, three (3) or more days a
week.
Dead-end street. A street other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/526
Direct marketing. The wholesale, retail sale and/or transfer or delivery of merchandise directly to a customer or customer's agent for a business
operation away from seller's residence.
Direct selling. The wholesale, retail sale, and/or transfer or delivery of merchandise directly to a customer or customer's agent for a business
operation from seller's residence.
Discontinued. A use that is interrupted or in which there is a break in continuity regardless of the intent of the owner or operator.
Displacement. The maximum amount of motion in any direction as determined by a three (3) component simultaneous measuring system.
District. A zoning district which is a part of the City of Cedar Park, Texas.
Domestic animals. Recognized domestic breeds of dogs and/or cats, birds, fish, gerbils, hamsters, nonpoisonous reptiles, and pot-bellied pigs. This
definition excludes dangerous wild animals.
Driving range. An outdoor area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and tees for practicing long-distance golf drives.
Drug store. A store where the primary business is the filling and sale of prescription drugs, medical devices and supplies, and non-prescription
medicines.
Dwelling, duplex. There are two (2) types of duplexes:
A. Standard (side-by-side) duplexes are those separated by a shared wall with no penetrations from the ground to the roof, and each unit
has a separate outside door.
B. Vertical (over-under) duplexes are those separated by a floor, in which case the individual units may be accessed from an interior
foyer with a staircase or the units may have separate front doors at the street level.
Dwelling, single-family. A dwelling unit for one (1) family that is located on a separate, privately owned lot or tract with private yards on each side
of the dwelling. Single-family dwellings may also be located on condominium-owned property, surrounded by limited common elements for use by
residents of the single-family homes within the condominium development, which serve the same purpose as a private yard.
Earthen color. Shades of brown, yellow and green suggestive of natural earth tones.
Electric transmission lines. For purposes of this Chapter, those electrical lines operated at normal voltages of 60,000 volts or more. Other lines,
including lateral utility/service lines (meaning those lines that emanate from feeder lines and are used for distribution to smaller areas of consumers)
are to be placed underground in the interior of all residential subdivisions.
Enclosed building. A building providing a fully enclosed space on all sides by walls and with a full roof.
End stage renal disease facility (dialysis). See Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 117, subchapter A, rule 117.2, Definitions. See
also “Medical clinics.”
Established neighborhood. A residential neighborhood that existed as of the effective date of this Chapter.
Extraction (gas, gravel, minerals, oil, or sand). The use of a site for in-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources.
This use includes quarries, borrow pits, sand or gravel operations, oil or gas extraction, and mining operations.
Facade. The portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the entire
length of the building.
Family. One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group not to exceed eight (8) persons not all related by blood or
marriage, adoption or guardianship, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Family home. A home that provides regular care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six (6) children under 14 years of age, excluding
children who are related to the caretaker, and that provides care after school hours for not more than six (6) additional elementary school-age
children, but the total number of children, including children who are related to the caretaker, does not exceed 12 at any given time. The term does
not include a home that provides care exclusively for any number of children who are related to the caretaker.
Farm/ranch. Land devoted to the following uses:
A. The planting, growing, and harvesting of crops; and/or
B. The care and raising of livestock animals or poultry.
Fenestration. The design and placement of windows.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, art. 11.09, adopted 11/9/17)
Flat roof. A nearly horizontal roof pitched for water drainage only. Refer to picture below.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/526
(Ordinance CO32-18-06-28-E1, exh. A, adopted 6/28/18)
Flea market. A site where space is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used
household goods, personal effects, tools, artwork, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities.
Floor-to-area ratio (FAR). The ratio of a building's gross floor area to the area of the lot on which the building is located.
Food processing. The transformation of raw ingredients, by physical or chemical [means]: into food, or of food into other forms. The term includes
the combination of raw food ingredients into a form that can be prepared and used by a consumer. Food processing typically involves activities such
as mincing and macerating, liquefaction, emulsification, and cooking (such as boiling, broiling, frying, or grilling); pickling, pasteurization, and
many other kinds of preservation; and canning or other packaging. Food processing does not include the harvesting, storage, or transportation of
cultivated agricultural products.
Fortuneteller/psychic. The foretelling of the future in exchange for financial or other valuable consideration.
Freestanding emergency medical care facility. See Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 131, subchapter A, rule 131.2. Definitions.
See also “Medical clinics.”
Front porch. An un-air-conditioned roofed structure attached to the front of a house, which may include ramps for handicapped access.
Front yard. A yard extending across the full width of a site that lies between the front lot line and the front line of a building or if there is no principal
building, between the front lot line and the required front setback line. A through lot shall have a front yard on each of the opposing streets.
Funeral home or mortuary. A building used primarily for human funeral services. Such building may contain space and facilities for embalming,
preparation of the dead for burial, casket storage, and undertaking services.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, art. 11.09, adopted 11/9/17)
Gable roof. A roof type that consists of two roof sections sloping in opposite directions and placed such that the highest, horizontal edges meet to
form the roof ridge. Refer to picture below.
Gambrel roof. A symmetrical two-sided roof with two slopes on each side. The upper slope is positioned at a shallow angle, while the lower slope is
steep. Refer to picture below.
(Ordinance CO32-18-06-28-E1, exh. A, adopted 6/28/18)
Gasoline service station. Any building, land area, or other premises that sells gas and/or diesel fuels primarily to passenger vehicles, with or without
the following accessory uses: sales of lubricants, tires, accessories or supplies, minor repairing of automobiles.
Gateway. A narrowed threshold at a road intersection, with an optional median, intended to slow traffic speed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/526
General hospital. See the Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 133, subchapter A, rule 133.2, Definitions. See also “Hospital
services.”
Glare. The direct light emitting from a luminaire that causes reduced vision or momentary blindness.
Government facilities (outdoor operations). A location owned, operated, or occupied by a governmental agency that functions as a service yard that
may have outdoor operations, [and] outdoor storage of materials and equipment, to provide governmental services to the public.
Government office. Government owned and operated institutions or facilities including but not limited to a library, museum, park, playground,
recreational center, jail or correctional facility, police, fire or utility facilities.
Green. A relatively short linear park providing pedestrian connections and pedestrian access, which is not designed for vehicular use.
Green roof. The roof of a building that is partially or completely covered with vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing
membrane. It may also include additional layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems.
Grocery. Any building where most of the gross floor area is devoted to the sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, but may also
offer prepared food for on- or off-site consumption, retail personal and household items, and a pharmacy. As an accessory use, the grocery may also
have gasoline pumps.
Gross building area. The total floor area of a building, both above and below ground. Gross building area is measured from the exterior faces of a
building or structure. Gross building area does not include roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls
that are more than 42 inches in height for 50 percent or more of their perimeter.
Gross floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. Gross floor area does not include basements when at least one-half the floor-to-ceiling height is
below grade, accessory parking (i.e. parking that is available on- or off-site that is not part of the use's minimum parking standard), attic space having
a floor-to-ceiling height less than seven (7) feet, exterior balconies, uncovered steps, or inner courts.
Gym. A facility where members or non-members use equipment or space for the purpose of physical exercise.
Head shop. Any retail establishment open to the public that presents, displays, or offers for sale paraphernalia, items, equipment, or products
commonly used, intended to be used, or commonly known to be used, for the ingestion, inhalation, preparation, or injection of illegal substances, to
include any device which has been fabricated, constructed, altered, adjusted, or marked especially for use in the smoking or ingestion of a controlled
substance, notwithstanding that it might also be possible to use the device for some other purpose.
Heavy industry.
A. Primary processing or manufacturing or repair operations not specifically defined elsewhere in this section, which involve:
1. A material risk of environmental contamination, explosion, or fire;
2. Perceptible ground vibration;
3. Excessive noise or dust;
4. Emission of objectionable odors; or
B. For illustrative purposes, heavy industrial uses include, but are not limited to:
1. Coal cleaning plants with thermal dryers; coke oven batteries; carbon black plants (furnace process); petroleum refineries;
petroleum storage and transfer units; and bulk fuel dealers;
2. Facilities used in the primary or secondary production of metals, such as primary zinc, copper, or lead smelters; primary
aluminum ore reduction plants; iron and steel mills; sintering plants; secondary metal production plants; and blacksmith shops;
3. Sawmills and pulp mills;
4. Incinerators with the capacity to charge more than 250 tons of refuse per day;
5. Lime plants; phosphate rock processing plants; sulfur recovery plants; and hydrofluoric, sulfuric, or nitric acid plants;
6. Fossil fuel combustion, such as boilers or electricity generation, totaling more than 250 million BTUs per hour of heat input;
7. Dry cleaner processing plants that use PERC or comparable petrochemical solvents;
8. Plasma arc welding, cutting, gouging, surfacing, or spraying; gas welding (but not brazing); arc welding with equipment that is
rated at more than 200 amps; TIG welding; and other heavy welding procedures, such as for structural steel, automotive body, or
heavy equipment manufacture or repair; and
9. Fossil fuel power plants, waste-to-energy plants, and biomass plants that produce more than 100 megawatts of electricity.
C. Semi-conductor related uses shall be considered to be a heavy industrial use when the use relates to weapons, nuclear energy,
pharmaceutical and biotechnology applications.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/526
Heliport (accessory). An area of land or water or a structural surface which is used for the landing and take-off of helicopters, and any appurtenant
areas which are used for fueling, maintenance, repairs, storage, buildings, and other heliport facilities.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, art. 11.09, adopted 11/9/17)
Hip roof. Roof type where all sides slope downwards to the walls, usually with a fairly gentle slope. Refer to picture below.
(Ordinance CO32-18-06-28-E1, exh. A, adopted 6/28/18)
Home occupation. A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain or support entirely within a residential building, or a structure
accessory thereto, which is incidental and secondary to the use of such building for dwelling purposes and which does not change the essential
residential character of such building.
Horizontal mixed use development. A grouping of single-use buildings, both residential and nonresidential, within one (1) cohesive development.
Hospital services. An institution providing primary health services, psychiatric services, and medical or surgical care to persons primarily on an
inpatient basis. The use differs from medical clinics in that it may require stays for longer than 24 hours. Includes the following land uses: cancer
center; birthing center; general hospital; private psychiatric hospital; niche hospital; special hospital; and trauma facilities.
Hotel. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and which may include additional facilities and services, such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services, and recreational facilities.
Indoor arena or theater. A building with tiers of seats for spectators used for sporting, performances, lectures, or other recreational or cultural events.
Accessory uses or activities subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use, which are customarily established in conjunction with the
operation are permitted, including accessory sales of alcoholic beverages, accessory food services and accessory sales.
Indoor commercial amusement. Uses that provide commercial amusement indoors, except sexually oriented uses, including, but not limited to:
A. Movie theaters;
B. Bowling alleys and billiard rooms;
C. Video arcades;
D. Indoor swimming pools;
E. Tennis, racquetball, or handball courts;
F. Indoor paintball course;
G. Local area network computer gaming centers; and
H. Internet cafes.
Industrialized home. Factory-built housing certified as meeting the state building code as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state,
modular homes are subject to the same codes and regulations as conventional site-built homes.
Kennel. The overnight boarding of either small or large animals by a facility licensed by the State of Texas.
Landfill (disposal). An area of land or an excavation in which wastes are placed for permanent disposal. For the purposes of this Code, the word
“landfill” does not include clean debris, e.g., dirt, trees, rocks, etc.
Laundromat. A facility where patrons wash and/or dry clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron (self-serve washers/dryers).
Local street. A local street provides access within a neighborhood. Local streets form the framework and compose the majority of streets within a
district and shape the identity and character of a neighborhood.
Lot. A parcel of land which is designated as a separate tract, and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol on a subdivision plat approved
in the manner required by chapter 212 of the Local Government Code which has been properly filed of record, and which is, or in the future may be,
offered for sale, conveyance, transfer, or improvement.
Lot, corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets.
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/526
Lot line, front. That boundary of a building lot which is also the line of an existing or dedicated street. Upon corner lots, either street line may be
selected as the front lot line provided a front and rear yard are established adjacent and opposite, respectively to the front lot line.
Lot line, rear. The boundary of a lot which is the most distant from and is, or is most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
Lot line, side. The boundary of a lot which is neither a front lot line nor a rear lot line.
Lot width. The width of a lot at the building line.
Lot of record. An area of land designated as a lot on a subdivision plat duly recorded with the County Clerk; or an area of land held in ownership
described by metes and bounds upon a deed recorded or registered with the County Clerk.
Lumberyard, wholesale. An area and structures used for the storage, distribution, and sale of finished or rough-cut lumber and lumber products.
Main street. A main street provides mobility between areas of a district and is designed to insure a calm, safe street that enhances the livability and
preserves the character of neighborhoods. Main streets have a more urban character than collector streets.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, art. 11.09, adopted 11/9/17)
Mansard roof. A roof type having two slopes on every side, the lower slope being considerably steeper than the upper. The same roof profile is
displayed on all sides. Refer to picture below.
(Ordinance CO32-18-06-28-E1, exh. A, adopted 6/28/18)
Manufactured home. A structure:
A. Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;
B. Built on a permanent chassis;
C. Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities;
D. Transportable in one (1) or more sections; and
E. In the traveling mode, at least eight (8) body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on-site, at least 320
square feet, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home, and not including a recreational vehicle
as defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g), pursuant to Texas Occupations Code, section 1201.003(12) and (18).
Manufactured home sales. The sale of trailers or manufactured homes on a parcel of land but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either
on a temporary or permanent basis.
Manufacturing and fabrication, general. The industrial processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw
materials unless materials are classified as hazardous by the Fire Marshal.
Manufacturing and fabrication, light. Manufacturing of finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials, including
fabrication, assembly, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
Marble. A rock that will polish and that is composed mainly of calcite or dolomite or, rarely, serpentine.
Massage, unlicensed. Massage therapy performed by an unlicensed practitioner.
Mechanical equipment. For purposes of this Chapter, mechanical equipment includes all equipment, including but not limited to utility huts,
condensers, air ducts, meters, roof equipment, etc. that are located on the site and/or are attached to the exterior of the building.
Medical clinic. The use of the site for the provision of medical, psychiatric, or surgical services on an outpatient basis. These facilities can be
differentiated from a medical office in that such facilities would be primarily open to and operated for the general, walk-in public, and would not
normally require an appointment. This use includes ambulatory surgical centers (ASC); end-stage renal disease facility (dialysis); outpatient services;
and freestanding emergency medical care facility.
Medical office. The use of the site for the consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative, or corrective personal treatment by doctors, dentists, or
similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans, medical or dental laboratories. These facilities can be differentiated from a medical
clinic in that such facilities primarily operate on an appointment basis, are generally not open to the general walk-in public, and offer specialized
services or attention.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/526
Mirrored glass. 80 percent or higher reflectivity of glazed, treated or manufactured glass.
Mixed use building. A building that contains at least one (1) floor devoted to allowed nonresidential uses and at least one (1) devoted to allowed
residential uses.
Mobile food establishment court. The primary use of a site by one (1) or more semi-stationary mobile food establishments.
Mobile home. A structure:
A. Constructed before June 15, 1976;
B. Built on a permanent chassis;
C. Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities;
D. Transportable in one (1) or more sections; and
E. In the traveling mode, at least eight (8) body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on-site, at least 320
square feet, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home, as defined by Texas Occupations Code,
section 1201.003(20).
Model home/on-site real estate office. A dwelling in a developing subdivision located on a legal lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a
sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same
subdivision.
Museum. A building, place, or institution devoted to the acquisition, conservation, study, exhibition, and educational interpretation of objects having
scientific, historical, or artistic value.
Natural areas. Waterways, wetlands, and native landscape areas, which are intended to be preserved in their natural state.
Neckdown. A staggered roadway at an intersection or other point intended to slow traffic speed.
Net acre. The area within the platted limits of a lot that is available for development. For the purpose of calculating residential density, net acreage
shall not include the following: right-of-way, parkland and open space, detention and land used for nonresidential purposes.
Niche hospital. See Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 133, subchapter A, rule 133.2, Definitions. See also “Hospital services.”
Nonconforming building. Building that was lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of this Chapter, or amendment hereto, that does not
conform to the standards found within Article 11.03, Development and Design Standards, that is applicable to the same type of building in the district
in which the building is located.
Nonconforming lots. Lots that were lawfully created before the effective date of this Chapter, or amendments hereto, but which no longer comply
with the minimum lot width, frontage, depth, or area requirements of this Chapter, as stated in Article 11.03, Development and Design Standards.
Nonconforming structure. A structure other than a building that was lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of this Chapter, or amendment
hereto, that does not conform to the standards that are applicable to the same type of structure in the district in which the structure is located.
Nonconforming use. A use that does not conform to the use regulations of this Chapter, but that was lawfully established under the regulations in
force at the beginning of operation and has not ceased, as defined herein, since that time.
Non-emergency transport service. A medical transfer service for the transportation of individuals to or from a medical facility, nursing home, or
residence under circumstances which do not constitute an emergency, in which the use of lights and sirens is prohibited, except when in the course of
transport, said transport becomes an emergency, per chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code.
Nursery/greenhouse, retail. An enterprise that conducts the sale of plants grown on and/or off the premises. The term also includes, as an accessory
use, the sale of a limited selection of items, such as soil, planters, pruners, mulch, lawn or patio furniture, and garden accessories that are directly
related to the care and maintenance of landscapes and gardens.
Nursery/greenhouse, wholesale. The growing, cultivation, storage, and sale of garden plants, flowers, trees and shrubs to landscapers, developers,
builders, and retail nurseries.
Nursing or convalescent home. An institution which provides food and shelter to four (4) or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the
establishment; as well as minor treatment under the direction and supervision of a physician licensed by the Texas Medical Board, or other services
that meet some need beyond the basic provision of food, shelter, and laundry. These are licensed by the Texas Board of Human Services and further
defined in chapter 242 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
Office, general. A site used for the provision of executive, management, administrative, professional, or consulting services.
A. Typical executive, management, or administrative services include real estate, insurance, property management, investment,
personnel, travel, secretarial services, organizations, and associations.
B. Typical professional or consulting services include the field of law, architecture, design, engineering.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/526
Office/showroom/warehouse. An establishment with a maximum of 75 percent of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not
accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale sale areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and
distributed from the storage and warehousing areas. This use does not include processing, manufacturing or fabrication conducted on-site, but may
include the light assembly of merchandise.
Off-street parking. Vehicular parking outside the street right-of-way that has adequate drives, aisles, and turning and maneuvering areas for access
and usability.
On-street parking. Vehicular parking contained on the street pavement (public and private streets) located outside the primary travel way, which
spaces shall be designated and located parallel or at an angle to the street centerline.
One-car garage. An attached or detached, fully enclosed structure that is built to house one (1) full-size automobile.
Outdoor arena, stadium or amphitheater. An open air facility or building with tiers of seats for spectators used for sporting, performances, lectures,
or other recreational or cultural events. Accessory uses or activities subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use, which are
customarily established in conjunction with the operation are permitted, including accessory sales of alcoholic beverages, accessory food services
and accessory sales.
Outdoor commercial amusement. Uses that provide commercial amusement outdoors, except for sexually oriented businesses, as defined herein,
including, but not limited to:
A. Amusement parks or theme parks;
B. Fairgrounds;
C. Miniature golf establishments;
D. Golf driving ranges;
E. Sports fields;
F. Drive-in theaters;
G. Water slides; and
H. Batting cages.
Outdoor patio. An open outdoor eating and gathering area which may be covered, but must remain open on at least three (3) sides.
Outdoor recreation (athletic field/facility). Public or private parks, golf courses, swimming pools, ball fields, tennis courts, and other such uses
providing recreational opportunities for a neighborhood or the community at-large. This use is not intended for commercial purposes.
Outdoor recreation (park, playground). Outdoor park facilities designed for passive recreational activities such as walking trails and child
playground equipment.
Outdoor storage. The storage of inventory or the storage of materials that are or are not for sale or lease. This definition shall not mean sample
merchandise or goods on display; however, at no time shall any salvage or construction material be considered as merchandise or goods on display.
Merchandise located within a pole barn is excluded from this definition.
Outdoor storage/sales or display (primary use). An operation that stores, displays, and sells products in the outdoors. This use includes trucks,
trailers, portable buildings, and fleet storage.
Outpatient services. See Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 133, subchapter A, rule 133.2, Definitions. See also “Medical clinics.”
Owner. A person, corporation, partnership, or legal entity, which is the legal or equitable owner of land.
Paintball course. A specially designed outdoor space in which players eliminate opponents from play by hitting them with dye-filled breakable, oil
and gelatin balls or pellets, usually shot from a carbon dioxide or compressed air (nitrogen) powered “paintball” marker.
Parapet. The portion of a wall that extends above the roofline.
Park. An open space, available for recreation with landscaping consisting of paths and trails, open lawn, trees, open shelters, recreational facilities,
[and] public or private open space improvements, including swimming pools, sports fields, courts and amenity centers.
Parking garage (primary use). A structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the
deck surface of a building. The phrase includes freestanding parking structures, deck parking, and parking pedestals under buildings.
Parkland, active. An open space, available for recreation with landscaping consisting of paths and trails, open lawn, trees, open shelters, recreational
facilities, and public or private open space improvements including but not limited to swimming pools, sports fields, courts, and amenity centers.
Parkland, passive. An open space that does not significantly alter the natural environment and that functions either as a nature preserve or to
facilitate passive recreational opportunities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/526
Parkway. A street with a separated travel lanes including a landscaped area between each street section. Parkways are differentiated from boulevards
in that they typically have a wider separated section.
Pawnshop. An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the owners (pawnbroker); and the
retail sales of items purchased also takes place.
Person. Means a natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, or their
successors or assigns or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
Personal services. The use of a site for the provision of periodically needed services of a personal nature. This use includes beauty and/or barber
shops, hairdressers, manicurists, seamstress or tailor services, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning and/or laundering drop-off/pick-up station services,
handicraft or hobby instruction, weight loss centers, photography studios, driving schools, spas, full-service beauty salons with permanent makeup,
licensed massage therapy and ear piercing.
Place of public assembly. An indoor place where people gather for civic or cultural purposes. The phrase “place of assembly” includes place of
worship, meeting hall, lecture hall, or fraternal organization. The phrase “place of assembly” does not include the phrase “indoor recreation” or
“indoor commercial amusement.”
Planting strip. A linear portion of land of public street right-of-way lying between the street pavement curb and the sidewalk, which is reserved for
the purpose of landscaping and installation of street trees.
Playground. A children's play area, including related amenities, that is designed for group use.
Pole barn. An open air structure having at least four (4) posts/poles to support a roof canopy for purposes of providing covered storage/livestock
shelter.
Portable storage unit. A container that may be used to transport goods, but may then also be stationary on a single site for a period of time before or
after transport.
Portico. A small entrance porch.
Power or solid waste recovery plant. Any facility that is engaged in the recovery of energy or power from solid waste, biomass, or other
technologies.
Primary entrance. The front door to an establishment intended as the primary customer access point. The area of an entrance shall include the area on
either side of the door for a distance of at least 10 feet.
Primary materials. See section 11.03.152(B)(1), Permitted Exterior Building Materials.
Principal building. A building in which is conducted the principal use(s) of the lot on which it is located or, in a group development, of the building
site on which it is located.
Principal dwelling structure. The primary use of a residential lot on which the dwelling is located.
Print shop. An establishment which reproduces, in printed form, individual orders from a business, profession, service, industry or government
organization.
Private interior drive. A minor private access way, either two-way or one-way, located within development areas and providing vehicular and other
access to public streets.
Private open space. Open space that is owned and maintained by a property owners' association or by an individual property owner.
Private psychiatric hospital. See Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 134, subchapter A, rule 134.2, Definitions. See also “Hospital
services.”
Private school (grades K-12). A privately owned accredited institution that provides full-time instruction for students from kindergarten to 12th
grade.
Public art. Any work of art or design created by an artist and sited in a public place.
Public open space. Open space that is owned and maintained by the City or by a property owners' association, including land that is dedicated for
parkland.
Public school (grades K-12). An public institution that provides full-time instruction for students from kindergarten to 12th grade.
Reception/banquet hall. A room or building for the purpose of hosting a party, banquet, wedding or other reception, or other social event.
Recreational vehicle park. A park that includes temporary overnight parking for licensed motor vehicle that can be towed, hauled, or driven.
Permitted vehicles include travel trailers, self-propelled motor homes, and camping trailers.
Recreational vehicle sales and service. Any building or structure used for the sale of a vehicle designed and/or used for living or sleeping and/or
recreational purposes and equipped with wheels to facilitate movement from place to place, and automobiles when used for living or sleeping
purposes and including pick-up coaches (campers), motorized homes, boats, travel trailers, and camping trailers not meeting the specifications
required for a manufactured home.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/526
Recycling processing and collection. The use of a site for collection, transfer, or processing of recyclable materials. Recyclable materials include
glass, paper, plastic, cans, or other source-separated, nonperishable materials. This use excludes bulk or single-feed reverse vending machines.
Redevelopment. Modification of an existing developed lot/parcel that will require a building permit.
Research, testing lab, or product development. A business that engages in research, or research and development, of innovative ideas in technology
intensive fields, and may include light assembly of merchandise. Examples include computer software, information technology, communications
systems transportation, and multi media.
Restaurant, dine-in only. The use of a site for the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages for on-premises consumption, including the onpremises
sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use (must be less than 51 percent of gross sales). The use does not include
drive-in or drive-through facilities.
Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through. A restaurant which:
A. Contains a drive-in or drive-through facility;
B. Primarily serves food that is prepared and packaged within five (5) minutes; and
C. Customarily serves food in disposable containers.
Retail sales. The sale of merchandise in small quantities directly to the ultimate consumer.
Right-of-way. Land dedicated or reserved for streets, utilities, or other public facilities.
Roundabout. A one-way circular traffic rotary intersection, which reduces the need for traffic lights, allowing up to four (4) streets to converge at a
single point and at acute angles, and which are intended to move traffic through an intersection in a smooth and orderly fashion while lessening
traffic delays.
Salvage facility and yard. A yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing salvage or junk, upon which
occurs one (1) or more acts of buying, storage, dismantling, processing, recycling, selling, or offering for sale any such salvage, in whole units or by
parts, for a business or a commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity.
Secondary materials. Materials that are not counted as primary materials and are used in a secondary capacity for building treatment, as referenced in
section 11.03.152(B)(2), Secondary Materials.
Secondary use. A support use to the principal, permitted use that remains incidental to the principal use, both in building square footage and, when
applicable, in gross sales. A space that utilizes 90 percent of its space for the primary, permitted use purposes, can use the balance for the secondary
use.
Self-storage facility. A structure containing separate storage spaces, which may be of various sizes, leased or rented on an individual basis which may
have interior and/or exterior access. This use also includes outdoor RV and boat storage.
Service area. Any area for loading docks, outdoor storage (other than an outdoor display, sales, and storage area), trash collection or compaction,
truck parking, or other similar functions.
Setback, front. A setback extending the full width of a lot between the street lot line and the front building line.
Setback, rear. A setback extending the full width of the lot in the area between the rear lot line and the rear building line.
Setback, side. A setback extending the full length of the lot in the area between a side lot line and a side building line.
Setback, street. A setback extending the full width of a lot between the street lot line and a side building line.
Sexually oriented business. See Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Article 4.07.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, art. 11.09, adopted 11/9/17)
Shed roof. A roof type having a single-sloping plane and no hips, ridges or valleys. Refer to picture below.
(Ordinance CO32-18-06-28-E1, exh. A, adopted 6/28/18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/526
Side yard lot. A lot created for the purpose of a dwelling to be constructed along or near an interior side lot line with a yard created on the opposite
side of the lot.
Site area. The cumulative total area of contiguous land containing the same zoning designation.
Solar panel. A small solar collector designed to be incorporated onto the roof of a residential or nonresidential building. Solar panels for purpose of
this Chapter are considered as an optional, associated use to any building.
Special hospital. See the Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 133, subchapter A, rule 133.2, Definitions. See also “Hospital services.”
Sport shooting range. A business establishment, private club, or association that operates an area for the discharge or other use of firearms for
silhouette, skeet, trap, black powder, target, self-defense, or similar recreational shooting.
Start of construction. The first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Stone. Rock selected or processed by shaping, cutting, or sizing for building or other use.
Stone cutting. A land use whereby stone is cut or carved.
Street. Any public thoroughfare or space more than 20 feet in width which has been dedicated or otherwise established for use as a public roadway.
Streetscape. The built and planned elements of a street, which define its character.
Street width. The portion of the street between the face of curbs.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached or resting on something having a fixed location on the
ground. The following shall always be considered structures:
A. Buildings;
B. Billboards;
C. Fences;
D. Signs;
E. Storage tanks; and
F. Walls.
Swimming pool. A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the
surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than 30 inches designed, used, and maintained for swimming and bathing.
Tattoo parlor/body piercing studio. The workshop of a tattoo artist and/or a facility where the piercing of body parts, other than ears, is performed for
the purposes of allowing the insertion of jewelry.
Temporary construction building. A building for the purpose of temporary office space during construction of new permanent office structures.
Temporary construction dumpster. A dumpster set up temporarily to use for garbage during a construction project.
Temporary construction yard. A storage yard for construction supplies, materials, or equipment for temporary use during a construction project.
Throttle. A road narrowed at a tree grouping, at the end of a parking lane, or other feature intended to slow traffic speed.
Town Center Code. The regulations and development standards set forth herein, which are applicable to the Cedar Park Town Center.
Townhome. A single-family attached dwelling with three (3) to no more than six (6) units, with each single unit extending from the ground to the roof
and with each unit having individual outside access.
Traffic calming measures. Street design elements intended to slow the speed of vehicular traffic. Traffic calming measures may include, but are not
limited to, the following terms: chicane, gateway, neckdown, roundabout, and throttle.
Transit stop. An area designated for public transportation pick-up and drop-off.
Transportation terminal. The use of a site for the provision of a facility for the loading, unloading, or interchange of passengers, baggage, or
incidental freight or package express between modes of transportation, when located in conjunction with the offices, dispatching facilities, garage,
maintenance and services facilities that are directly associated with the principal use, which includes public transit facilities, shipping and freight
services, and private or public taxicab or shuttle services and facilities.
Trauma facility. See the Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 157, subchapter A, rule 157.2, Definitions. See also “Hospital services.”
Two-car garage. An attached or detached, fully enclosed structure that is built to house two (2) full-size automobiles.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/526
Utility easement. An interest in land granted to the City, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining
utilities across, over or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for maintenance of said
utilities.
Utility services, general. The use of a site for the provision of public and/or private utility services that are necessary to support the development in
the area and involve only minor structures and small buildings including, but not limited to lift stations, telephone switching centers, service
extensions or similar facilities.
Utility services, major. The use of a site for the provision of generating plants, electrical switching facilities or primary substations, or similar
facilities.
Vacated structure. A structure and/or site vacated for at least 90 days without an active renovation/rehabilitation building permit for either the site or
structures.
Vending kiosk. Any unattended self-service devices that, upon the insertion of coins, tokens, or consumer credit cards will dispense merchandise,
banking services or other things of value. A vending kiosk may be portable or permanently installed.
Veneer. Nonstructural facing of brick, concrete, stone, tile, or other similar material attached to a backing for the purpose of ornamentation,
protection or insulation.
Vertical mixed use building. A building that combines different uses in the same building. Residential uses are prohibited on the ground floor.
Warehouse and distribution. The use of a site for the provision of wholesaling, storage, warehouse services, or handling of materials and equipment.
The use includes wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, and moving or storage firms.
Wireless telecommunication facilities, building-mounted. Wireless telecommunication facilities mounted onto a building.
Wireless telecommunication facility. An unstaffed facility operating for the transmission and reception of low-power radio signals consisting of an
equipment shelter or cabinet, a support structure, antennas or other similar equipment.
Wrecker, impound yard. A wrecker service that includes the temporary storage or impoundment of primarily operable or repairable motor vehicles
and in which the owner or operator has an active licensed franchise agreement with the City of Cedar Park police department for wrecker rotation.
Yard. An open space, on the same building lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided.
(Ordinance CO02-17-11-09-H1, exh. A, art. 11.09, adopted 11/9/17)
CHAPTER 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Title and enacting clause
This Chapter is known as the subdivision ordinance of the City of Cedar Park, Texas (City). References in this Chapter shall be cited as “the
Chapter,” “this Chapter,” or “subdivision regulations” and shall be interpreted as references to the subdivision ordinance.
Sec. 12.01.002 Authority
(a) This Chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State, including particularly chapters 212 and 43 of Texas Local
Government Code.
(b) In accordance with the City's police powers and authority, and as specifically authorized by chapter 212, Texas Local Government Code, and
other applicable laws, the Planning and Zoning Commission, as a condition of subdivision plat or replat approval, shall require the owners and
developers of land who desire to subdivide, plat or replat land within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, for urban development, to provide for
building setback lines, to dedicate streets, alleys, parks, easements or other public places or facilities of adequate width and size and to coordinate
street layouts and street planning with the City's transportation master plan, Transportation Criteria Manual, with other municipalities, and with
County, State and federally designated highways, as they may deem best in the interest of the general public, in order to provide for the orderly
development of the areas and to secure adequate provision for traffic, light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewage and other facilities.
Sec. 12.01.003 Purpose
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/526
The City Council of the City does hereby adopt the following regulations to hereafter control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of
the City and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction thereof, in order to promote the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the municipality and
the safe, orderly and healthful development of the municipality.
Sec. 12.01.004 Consistency with the comprehensive plan and comprehensive zoning ordinance
It is the intent that this Chapter shall provide for the implementation of the comprehensive plan, including the future land use plan, transportation
master plan and other applicable elements; and any supplemental land use and community development policies that may be hereafter adopted by the
City Council, and shall be consistent with the comprehensive zoning ordinance. No plat or subdivision of land within the City or its ETJ shall be
approved unless it conforms to such plans and ordinances.
Sec. 12.01.005 Repeal
Ordinances and parts of ordinances in effect prior to the effective date of this Chapter as amended and/or are in conflict are repealed.
ARTICLE 12.02 ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 12.02.001 Plat required
(a) Subdivision plats required under Local Government Code chapter 212 subchapter A, as amended.
(1) The owner of a tract of land located within the City limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City who divides the
tract in two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the City, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots,
or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of the purchasers
or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts must have a plat of the subdivision prepared
and submitted to the City for review for conformance with the rules and regulations set forth in this Chapter and other Chapters of the
City Code of Ordinances with applicable regulations and obtain approval from the City of such plat.
(2) A division of a tract under this subsection includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds
description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by
using any other method.
(3) A division of land under this section does not include a division of land into parts greater than five (5) acres, where each part has a
minimum width of fifty (50) feet frontage onto a public roadway and no public improvement is being dedicated.
(b) Development plats required under Local Government Code chapter 212 subchapter B, as amended.
(1) Any person who proposes the development of a tract of land located within the limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
municipality must have a development plat of the tract prepared in accordance with Local Government Code 212 Subchapter B, as
amended, and this Subdivision Ordinance.
(2) If a property owner proposes to divide land within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction that results in parcels or lots all greater
than five (5) acres in size, a development plat shall be required.
(3) If no public improvements are required in conjunction with development of a tract of land, a development plat is required.
Sec. 12.02.002 Exemptions
(a) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Cemeteries complying with all State and local laws and regulations;
(2) Acquisition of public right-of-way or public land by the State, County, or City.
(b) The provisions of this Chapter shall be construed, interpreted and applied to land located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City in
accordance with section 212.003 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
Sec. 12.02.003 Discrepancies
Where a discrepancy exists between the applicable provisions established in this Chapter and the requirements of the building codes, fire codes,
zoning ordinance or any other applicable code or ordinance of the City, or any applicable County or State law, then the more restrictive requirements
shall apply.
ARTICLE 12.03 PROCEDURES
Sec. 12.03.001 Procedures for plat approval
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/526
(a) An application for a subdivision plat, including without limitation an application for approval or amendment of a development plat, preliminary
plan, final plat, replat, amending plat, plat vacation, or other approval authorized by these subdivision regulations, shall expire on or after the 45th
day after the date the application is filed, pursuant to section 245.002(e) of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, if:
(1) The applicant fails to provide documents of other information necessary to comply with the City's technical requirements relating to
the form and content of the permit application;
(2) The City provides to the applicant not later than the 10th business day after the date the application is filed written notice of the
failure that specifies the necessary documents or other information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other
information is not provided; and
(3) The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the time provided in the notice.
(b) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on a plat within thirty (30) days after the plat is formally filed with the City, unless otherwise
agreed to in writing by the applicant.
(c) The Planning Department shall review all plat applications in conjunction with other City departments and utility companies for compliance
with this Chapter and other applicable City codes and regulations.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.03.002 Rules and regulations of Planning and Zoning Commission
The Planning and Zoning Commission may adopt rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions. Such rules shall be consistent with the
provisions of this chapter and shall become effective upon being filed with the City Secretary. (Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.03.003 Project expiration
Any project, as defined under chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, shall expire on the fifth anniversary of the date the first
permit application was filed for the project, pursuant to section 245.005 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
Sec. 12.03.004 Variances
(a) When an applicant can show that a provision of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of
some condition peculiar to the site in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of
such provisions, the Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize a variance.
(b) Variances from the terms of this chapter shall be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the conditions stated in the Texas
Local Government Code, and provided further that the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have no authority to grant a variance based on a
special or unique condition which was created as a result of the method by which a person voluntarily subdivides that land, and provided that
pecuniary hardship to the applicant, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute grounds for a variance.
(c) A variance may be applied for as part of a plat or replat request or as a separate request if the property is already platted. The applicant shall be
responsible for providing all necessary information pertinent to the request, including the justification for such variance.
(d) Any applicant aggrieved by action on a variance by the Planning and Zoning Commission may appeal to the City Council within thirty (30)
days from the day of such action and not thereafter. The City Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(Ordinance CO10-15-01-08-C1 adopted 1/8/15)
Sec. 12.03.005 Enforcement of chapter
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City Council shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for a violation of this chapter. This
chapter may be further enforced by injunction and other judicial proceedings, either at law or in equity; and, in lieu of or in addition to any other
authorized enforcement or action taken, any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter, with respect to any land or development
within the city, by fine and penalties as provided herein. (Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.03.006 Interpretation and validity
The provisions of this Chapter shall be considered to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare. These regulations shall be consistently applied in order to accomplish the purposes within section 12.01.003. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2
adopted 8/9/18)
ARTICLE 12.04 DEVELOPMENT PLAT
Sec. 12.04.001 Purpose
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/526
The purpose of the development plat is to demonstrate conformance with the comprehensive plan, compatibility of the proposed development with
this and other applicable City ordinances, and to ensure the safe, orderly, and healthful development of the municipality.
Sec. 12.04.002 Content
A development plat shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor and shall contain or have attached thereto:
(1) Name, address and phone numbers of the applicant(s), record owner, and authorized agents (engineer, surveyor, land planner, etc.).
(2) Proposed name of the development; date revised and/or prepared; north indicator; scale.
(3) Location map.
(4) A layout of the entire tract and its relationship to adjacent property, existing development and recorded plats.
(5) The owner's name, deed or plat reference and property lines of property within three hundred (300) feet of the development
boundaries, as determined by current tax rolls.
(6) Each existing or proposed building, structure, or improvement or proposed modification of the external configuration of the
building, structure, or improvement involving a change of the building structure, or improvement.
(7) Each easement and right-of-way within or abutting the boundary of the surveyed property.
(8) The dimensions of each street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part of the property intended to be dedicated to public use or
for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the street, sidewalk, alley, square, park or other part.
(9) Significant drainage features and structures including any regulatory one-hundred-year floodplains.
(10) Significant existing features on, or within two hundred (200) feet of the property, such as railroads, roads, buildings, utilities and
drainage structures.
(11) Location of City limit lines and/or outer border of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as depicted on the City's most recent base
map, if either such line traverses the development or is contiguous to the development's boundary.
(12) Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line,
boundary line, block line and building line whether curved or straight, including the true north point. This shall include the radius, central
angle and tangent distance for the property lines of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets.
(13) The location of all permanent monuments and control points.
(14) A letter of intent for parkland dedication.
(15) If applicable, a City-approved TIA pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 16 Article 16.04.
(16) A statement signed and acknowledged by the owner and any person holding a lien on the property dedicating all streets, alleys,
easements, parks and other open spaces to public use or, when the applicant has made provision for perpetual maintenance thereof, to the
inhabitants of the subdivision.
(17) The signature block for the chair of the Planning and Zoning Commission and secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission
attesting approval of the plat.
(18) The signature block of the Director of Development Services, or his designee, attesting to the approval and authorization for
recordation of the plat.
(19) A certificate bearing the signature and seal of the surveyor who made the survey that the requirements of this Chapter have been
complied with.
(20) Signature blocks for the engineer and property owner.
(21) If the development is not to be served immediately by a water utility, the following is required to be shown on the plat: a restriction
prohibiting occupancy of any lot until water satisfactory for human consumption is available from a source on the land or a community
source in adequate and sufficient supply for family use and operation of a septic tank and system. Plans and specifications for a private
water supply for subdivisions must be submitted by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ). If private water wells are proposed, lots are required to comply with minimum lot size requirements of
the Williamson Cities and County Health District and/or Austin-Travis County Health Department, depending on whose jurisdiction the
subdivision falls within.
(22) If the development is not to be served immediately by a sewage collecting system connected to a treatment plant or to a public
sewer system, disposal of domestic sewage through an on-site sewage disposal facility is required to be approved by the County Health
Officer. The following restriction is required to be placed on the plat: occupancy of any lot is prohibited until an on-site sewage facility
has been installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the TCEQ, the Williamson County and Cities Health District and/or the
Austin-Travis County Health Department and has been inspected and approved by the County Health Officer.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/526
(23) The plat shall indicate the route of sidewalks in compliance with the City's adopted street standards.
(24) Tree survey and tree preservation plan indicating all protected trees as per the requirements of section 12.12.022.
(25) One (1) copy of the drainage plan.
(26) Surveyor's certified perimeter field notes. Beginning point is to be an original corner of the original survey of which the plat is a
part. At least one corner of a subdivision shall be tied by course and distance to a corner of the original survey of which it is a part or to a
previously platted lot. The plat shall include a note describing the corner tie, and if the subdivision is located within one mile of a global
positioning system (GPS) monument accepted by the City, the location, coordinates and elevation of a 5/8-inch iron rod set in concrete at
two locations on the boundary of the subdivision shall be tied horizontally and vertically to the GPS monument.
(27) A minimum of two (2) survey ties are required across all right-of-way and at all changes in the width of right-of-way.
(28) All information necessary to demonstrate compliance with driveway and/or street intersection spacing rules of section 12.12.015
and the Transportation Criteria Manual.
(29) For all developments for which a landscape plan is required separately pursuant to Article 14.07, as amended, or as part of the site
development permit application, a grading and tree protection plan shall be submitted with the site development plans. The plan shall be
prepared so as to maximize, as much as is practicable, the number of existing trees six (6) caliper inches and larger on the site that will be
retained with the development.
(30) Additional information necessary to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter.
(31) All other application requirements specified in the development plat application/checklist.
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
Sec. 12.04.003 Procedure
The procedure for review and approval of a development plat shall follow the procedure for final plats, except that:
(1) The development plat, prepared by a surveyor, and engineer if required, and bearing their seals shall be submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for approval before recordation of the plat.
(2) Legible prints, as indicated on the development plat application form shall be submitted along with the following:
(A) Completed application form and the payment of all required fees.
(B) Certification from all applicable taxing authorities that all taxes due on the property have been paid.
Sec. 12.04.004 Approval
The approval process for a development plat shall be the same as the approval of a final plat.
Sec. 12.04.005 Expiration
A development plat shall expire two (2) years from the date such permit was approved if no progress has been made towards completion of the
project, pursuant to section 245.005 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
Sec. 12.04.006 Revision
The revision process for a development plat shall be the same as the revision process for a final plat in section 12.06.008.
Sec. 12.04.007 Recordation
The recordation procedures of a development plat shall be the same as the procedures for a final plat in section 12.06.009.
Sec. 12.04.008 Responsibility
Notwithstanding the approval of any development plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant and the engineer that prepares and
submits such plats shall be and remain responsible for the adequacy of the design and nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to relieve
or waive the responsibility of the applicant or his/her engineer for or with respect to any plat submitted.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
ARTICLE 12.05 PRELIMINARY PLAN*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/526
Sec. 12.05.001 Purpose
A preliminary plan is required if a property is being subdivided into five (5) or more lots or right-of-way dedication with roadway improvements is
required. The purpose is to present a detailed layout of the proposed subdivision in order to facilitate a review by the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the proposed subdivision's street and drainage system, easements, utilities, building lots, and other lots including parkland.
Preliminary plans are submitted for approval prior to the approval of a final plat unless meeting the requirements of a short form final plat as
provided for in this chapter. A final plat (short form final) may be approved without a preliminary plan if each lot abuts an existing dedicated public
street with a minimum of fifty (50) feet of public frontage and the director determines that:
(1) A new street or an extension of a street is not necessary to provide adequate traffic circulation;
(2) The applicant has dedicated additional right-of-way necessary to provide adequate street width for an existing street abutting a lot;
and
(3) Drainage facilities are not necessary to prevent flooding, or if necessary, the applicant has arranged for the construction of drainage
facilities; and
(4) Adequate utilities are available to serve the tract or the applicant has made arrangements for the extension of public utilities to serve
the tract.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.05.002 Content
Required preliminary plan information:
(1) The preliminary plan shall consist of a drawing on tracing paper or Mylar, drawn to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1)
inch. If the subdivision layout exceeds one sheet, it shall be accompanied by an overall layout sized to fit on a 22-inch by 34-inch sheet.
(2) The date, scale and north point, a key plan showing the location of the tract, the title under which the plan is to be recorded and the
name of the owner, engineer or surveyor.
(3) The existing boundary lines and acreage of the land to be subdivided and the property lines and names and addresses of owners of
adjacent properties.
(4) The location of the centerline of existing watercourses, railroads and other similar drainage and transportation features and the
location and sizes of existing streets, alleys, easements, lots and public areas on or adjoining any part of the land.
(5) Topographical information approximately equivalent to, or better than, five (5) foot contour lines, such contour lines to be not more
than one hundred (100) horizontal feet apart and based on North Atlantic datum 1983, which shall be specified on the plat. Such
topographical information, locations and dimensions shall be of sufficient accuracy as to permit the planning of water lines, sanitary sewer
lines, storm drainage facilities, streets and other proposed improvements.
(6) The location, size and flow line of all existing drainage structures on the land being subdivided and on adjoining tracts.
(7) The names, locations, widths and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other public spaces, sites for all
private uses other than single-family dwellings, lot lines and building lines.
(8) All information necessary to demonstrate compliance with driveway and/or street intersection spacing rules of the Transportation
Criteria Manual.
(9) The location of all existing structures, with a light dashed line and labeled.
(10) Limits of 100-year floodplain as identified per FEMA.
(11) A plan that indicates the availability of utilities, streets and drainage to the tract or identifies the availability of extensions of
utilities, streets and drainage necessary to serve the tract.
(12) Sidewalk locations and widths.
(13) Fence locations.
(14) Tree survey indicating all protected trees. See Article 12.23 for definition of protected trees.
(15) A letter of intent for parkland dedication.
(16) A letter from Williamson County 911 addressing division indicating street name approval.
(17) If applicable, a City-approved TIA pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 16, Article 16.04.
(18) Additional information necessary to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/526
(19) An electronic copy of the preliminary plan.
(20) All other application requirements specified in the preliminary plan application/checklist.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.05.003 Approval
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the request for preliminary plan approval.
(1) Upon approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall furnish one (1) Mylar reproducible copy of the approved plan to be kept
on file at the city as public record.
(2) Preliminary plan approval does not ensure approval of a final plat failing to meet specific requirements of this chapter, and approval
does not comprise any vesting of development rights or any assurance that permits of any kind will be issued.
Sec. 12.05.004 Disapproval
Upon disapproval of the preliminary plan, the preliminary plan is invalid and the applicant shall begin the subdivision approval process again,
including paying all of the fees associated with this process.
Sec. 12.05.005 Expiration
(a) The approved preliminary plan shall expire two (2) years from the date such permit was approved if no progress has been made towards
completion of the project, pursuant to section 245.005 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
(b) If a preliminary plan expires, it may be reinstated only upon resubmittal of the unaltered, approved plat to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. All new fees shall be paid as if the plat were initially being submitted.
(c) Should a final plat apply to only a portion of the land governed by the preliminary plan, the preliminary plan governing the remaining portion
of the land shall expire after two (2) years pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code section 245.005, as amended.
Sec. 12.05.006 Extension
The applicant may apply for an extension, in writing no less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a preliminary plan, stating reasons for
needing the extension and demonstrating pursuit of approvals for final plat in accordance with this chapter. Upon receipt of this written request, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall grant a two (2) year extension so long as the preliminary plan remains consistent with the current Cedar Park
Code of Ordinances.
(Ordinance CO10-15-01-08-C1 adopted 1/8/15)
Sec. 12.05.007 Revision
The director of planning may approve a minor change from an approved preliminary plan if the director determines that the minor change complies
with the requirements of this subsection [section]. An applicant shall identify the proposed minor deviation on a copy of the preliminary plan
submitted to the director. A formal application is not required.
(1) A minor deviation may not:
(A) Remove a property restriction or subdivision note;
(B) Modify a variance;
(C) Change an easement, except with the director's approval;
(D) Increase impervious cover;
(E) Modify a landscape easement, common area, green space, or other open space shown on the preliminary plan;
(F) Affect property outside the proposed plat;
(G) Increase the number of lots;
(H) Change the use of a lot; or
(I) Change the basic street layout.
(2) Except as provided in subsection 12.05.007(1), a minor change may include:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/526
(A) Change in lot size or configuration;
(B) Change in street width or alignment or name; or
(C) Change in a utility or access easement.
(3) The director may approve a minor revision to an approved preliminary plan if the director determines that the minor revision
complies with the requirements of this subsection [section]. An applicant shall request a minor revision in an application submitted to the
director.
(4) A minor revision may not:
(A) Remove a property restriction or subdivision note;
(B) Modify a variance;
(C) Change an easement, except with the director's approval;
(D) Increase impervious cover;
(E) Modify a landscape easement, common area, green space, or other open space shown on the preliminary plan;
(F) Affect property outside the preliminary plan; or
(G) Increase the number of dwelling units.
(5) Except as provided in subsection (3)(4) [subsection (4)], a minor revision may:
(A) Include a minor deviation;
(B) Change the street layout;
(C) Increase in the number of lots; or
(D) Modify a subdivision to accommodate a change in use resulting from rezoning or land acquisition through eminent domain.
(6) The director of planning may determine that other changes similar in scope and effect to those described in subsection (3)(5)
[subsection (5)] are minor revisions.
(7) The director of planning shall provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with an approved minor deviation or minor revision
before the Planning and Zoning Commission considers approval of any plat.
ARTICLE 12.06 FINAL PLATS
Sec. 12.06.001 Purpose
The final plat provides detailed graphic information and associated text indicating property boundaries, easements, streets, utilities, drainage, and
other information required for the maintenance of public records of the subdivision of land. A final plat may be submitted only after submission of a
preliminary plan for the subject property. However, it is highly recommended that the applicant not submit a final plat application until the
preliminary plan has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If the applicant wishes to submit a final plat application prior to
approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit a letter with the final plat application acknowledging that the applicant is subject to
liabilities associated with making any necessary changes to the final plat application to bring it into conformance with an approved preliminary plan.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.06.002 Content
The final plat shall include the entire tract intended to be developed at one (1) time, and shall contain or have attached thereto:
(1) The plat shall consist of a drawing on Mylar or comparable substitute sheets twenty-four (24) inches by eighteen (18) inches and to
a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. Where more than one (1) sheet is required, an index sheet of maximum size, twenty-four
(24) inches by eighteen (18) inches shall be filed showing the entire subdivision. If the plat consists of five (5) acres or less the scale shall
be of fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch.
(2) A location map showing the relation of the subdivision to streets and other prominent features.
(3) The submittal date, subdivision title, scale and north point shall be indicated on the first sheet.
(4) The names of the adjoining subdivisions or the names of the adjoining property owners, together with their respective plat or deed
references.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/526
(5) The lines and names of all proposed streets or other ways or easements, including a statement of the purpose for which such
easements are dedicated; also the lines and names of other open spaces to be dedicated for public use granted for use of the inhabitants of
the subdivision.
(6) Identification and location of proposed uses and reservations for all lots within the subdivision.
(7) Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line,
boundary line, block line and building line whether curved or straight, including the true north point. This shall include the radius, central
angle and tangent distance for the property lines of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets.
(8) The location of all permanent monuments and control points.
(9) Suitable primary control points to which all dimensions, bearings and similar data shall be referred; dimensions shall be shown in
feet and hundredths of a foot.
(10) Restrictive covenants imposed on the land if desired by the applicant.
(11) Engineering standard subdivision notes.
(12) A statement signed and acknowledged by the owner and any person holding a lien on the property dedicating all streets, alleys,
easements, parks and other open spaces to public use or, when the applicant has made provision for perpetual maintenance thereof, to the
inhabitants of the subdivision.
(13) The signature block for the chair of the Planning and Zoning Commission and secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission
attesting approval of the plat.
(14) The signature block for the director of planning attesting to the approval and authorization for recordation of the plat.
(15) A certificate bearing the signature and seal of the surveyor who made the survey that the requirements of this Chapter have been
complied with.
(16) Signature blocks for the engineer, and property owner.
(17) If the subdivision is not to be served immediately by a water utility, the following is required to be shown on the plat: a restriction
prohibiting occupancy of any lot until water satisfactory for human consumption is available from a source on the land or a community
source in adequate and sufficient supply for family use and operation of a septic tank and system. Plans and specifications for a private
water supply for subdivisions must be submitted by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ). If private water wells are proposed, lots are required to comply with minimum lot size requirements of
the Williamson Cities and County Health District and/or Austin-Travis County Health Department, depending on whose jurisdiction the
subdivision falls within.
(18) If the subdivision is not to be served immediately by a sewage collecting system connected to a treatment plant or to a public
sewer system, disposal of domestic sewage through an on-site sewage disposal facility is required to be approved by the County Health
Officer. The following restriction is required to be placed on the plat: occupancy of any lot is prohibited until an on-site sewage facility
has been installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the TCEQ, the Williamson County and Cities Health District and/or the
Austin-Travis County Health Department and has been inspected and approved by the County Health Officer.
(19) Subdivisions outside City limits are required to be reviewed and approved by the appropriate health officer for applicable
environmental regulations.
(20) The plat shall indicate the route of sidewalks in compliance with the City's adopted street standards.
(21) Tree survey indicating all protected trees as per the requirements of section 12.12.022.
(22) Three (3) copies of the approved utility plan.
(23) Three (3) copies of the approved preliminary plan.
(24) Surveyor's certified perimeter field notes. Beginning point is to be an original corner of the original survey of which the plat is a
part. At least one corner of a subdivision shall be tied by course and distance to a corner of the original survey of which it is a part or to a
previously platted lot. The plat shall include a note describing the corner tie, and if the subdivision is located within one mile of a global
positioning system (GPS) monument accepted by the City, the location, coordinates and elevation of a 5/8-inch iron rod set in concrete at
two locations on the boundary of the subdivision shall be tied horizontally and vertically to the GPS monument.
(25) A minimum of two (2) survey ties are required across all right-of-way and at all changes in the width of right-of-way.
(26) Existing easements on or adjacent to the proposed subdivision including record references and a statement signed and sealed by
the surveyor indicating that all existing easements on or adjacent to the proposed subdivision shown on the title policy or discovered with
a title search prepared in conjunction with the most recent purchase of property currently being subdivided have been shown or noted on
the plat.
(27) All information necessary to demonstrate compliance with driveway and/or street intersection spacing rules of section 12.12.015,
Chapter 14 site development ordinance and the Transportation Criteria Manual.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/526
(28) Additional information necessary to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter.
(29) An electronic copy of the final plat.
(30) All other application requirements specified in the final plat application/checklist.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.06.003 Procedure
After approval of the preliminary plan for a proposed subdivision, a final plat for that subdivision shall be submitted to the city for consideration by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. The preliminary plan for the subdivision must be valid at the time the final plat for the subdivision is
submitted to the city for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve or disapprove
any final plat unless otherwise allowed under the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances.
(1) Legible prints, as indicated on the application/checklist form shall be submitted to the Planning Department, along with the
following:
(A) Completed application/checklist forms and the payment of all applicable fees listed on the application/checklist.
(B) Any materials or documents required by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a condition of preliminary plan approval.
(C) A letter requesting any variances from the provisions of this chapter, if not previously approved as part of the preliminary
plan.
(D) Any additional documents needed to supplement the information provided on the final plat.
(2) City staff shall review all final plat submittals for completeness at the time of submission. If, in the judgment of city staff, the final
plat submittal substantially fails to meet the minimal informational requirements as outlined above or does not meet the requirements set
forth in the application/checklist, it will not be accepted as filed.
(3) Prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the final plat is presented, city staff shall review the plat for
consistency with the preliminary plan as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, as well as for consistency with city codes,
policies and plans.
(4) City staff shall prepare a report analyzing the final plat submittal, as well as any comments received concerning the preliminary
plan, and recommending either approval or disapproval of the final plat.
Sec. 12.06.004 Approval
If a final plat is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the corrected and signed final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Department
with the appropriate number and format of electronic and paper copies as required by the Planning Department, for recording with the appropriate
County Clerk. The plat shall be filed and recorded within two (2) years of the date of final approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Otherwise, the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission becomes invalid. Planning and zoning commission approval becomes effective on
the date the Planning and Zoning Commission takes final action on the plat.
Sec. 12.06.005 Disapproval
Upon disapproval of the final plat, the final plat is invalid and the applicant shall begin the final plat approval process again, including paying all of
the fees associated with this process prior to action by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ordinance CO10-15-01-08-C1 adopted 1/8/15)
Sec. 12.06.006 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 12.06.006 pertaining to the final plats expiration and deriving from Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07, was deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance CO10-15-01-08-C1 adopted 1/8/15.
Sec. 12.06.007 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 12.06.007 pertaining to the final plats extension and deriving from Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07, was deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance CO10-15-01-08-C1 adopted 1/8/15.
Sec. 12.06.008 Revision
If a revision of the final plat is required by the Planning and Zoning Commission, then the final plat shall be considered statutorily disapproved until
all revisions are met and fully acceptable, and shall not be recorded until the revised final plat has been resubmitted and approved by city staff for
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/526
compliance with the commission's requirements.
Sec. 12.06.009 Recordation
Prior to the recordation of the final plat, one (1) original Mylar of the final plat shall be submitted to the city for signatures, and:
(1) The final plat shall have been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) All conditions of final plat approval established by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have been determined to be complete
by city staff.
(3) Fees-in-lieu of parkland dedication as required by this chapter, if applicable, shall have been paid.
(4) Copies of any agreements required providing for the proper and continuous operation, maintenance, and supervision of any facilities
that are of common use or benefit which cannot be satisfactorily maintained, or which have been rejected for operation and/or
maintenance, by an existing public agency shall be executed.
(5) Written acceptance of all improvements required by this chapter by the city or, in lieu of acceptance, assurance of completion of
said improvements pursuant to this chapter, shall be received by the city.
(6) Applicable fees pursuant to city ordinance(s) shall be paid.
(7) Notes shall be added to the plat describing any variances approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(8) City staff shall, upon determination that all provisions of this chapter have been satisfied, and all the above conditions have been
met, obtain signatures certifying final plat approval by the chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and director of planning.
(9) Once the original final plat has been signed by the chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the director of
planning, city staff shall send the original Mylar for the reproduction of two (2) photographic Mylars at the applicant's expense.
(10) City staff shall, after the photographic Mylar copies and the original final plat have been duly recorded in the official county
records, return the original final plat to the surveyor within five (5) working days by notifying the surveyor that the original final plat is
available for pick-up at City Hall.
(11) The city shall keep one (1) photographic Mylar copy of the original approved final plat on file as public record.
Sec. 12.06.010 Responsibility
Notwithstanding the approval of any final plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant and the engineer that prepares and submits
such plats shall be and remain responsible for the adequacy of the design and nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to relieve or waive
the responsibility of the applicant or his/her engineer for or with respect to any plat submitted.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
ARTICLE 12.07 SHORT FORM FINAL PLATS
Sec. 12.07.001 Purpose
The applicant may follow a short form final plat procedure when the land proposed to be subdivided or resubdivided meets the following conditions
and requirements:
(1) Such land abuts upon a street of adequate width and is so situated that no additional streets and no alleys, easements or other public
property are required in order to meet requirements of this Chapter. Each of the lots is contiguous with at least one (1) of the other lots in
the subdivision for a distance of at least fifty (50) feet[.]
(2) The perimeter of the tract being subdivided has been surveyed and marked on the ground and a plat thereof prepared and filed with
the City and the nearest corner of each lot or parcel of such proposed subdivision is within two hundred (200) feet of a known corner
which is adequately marked by a concrete monument or iron stake.
(3) The utilities, as required by this Chapter, are in place to serve each parcel or lot of such subdivision or re-subdivision in compliance
with the procedures of approval established in chapter 212 LGC, and arrangements to provide such utilities have been made and fiscal or
other surety acceptable to the Director of Engineering or his/her designee have been provided.
(4) The Planning and Zoning Commission may require the standard final plat procedures outlined in section 12.06.003 of this Chapter,
if the City determines that the plat is inconsistent with any established City ordinances, codes or policies.
Sec. 12.07.002 Format
The format of the short form final plat shall correspond with the format for final plats as required in section 12.06.002 of this Chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/526
Sec. 12.07.003 Content
The content of the short form final plat shall correspond with the content for final plats as required in section 12.06.002, except that:
(1) The City may permit omission of any informational requirements that are determined by the City to place an excessive burden on
the applicant, including, but not limited to contours, centerlines of existing watercourses, etc.
(2) The City shall require the following note on the short form final plat (if applicable):
This subdivision is subject to all covenants and restrictions appearing on the plat of __________, Lot(s) _____, recorded at Cabinet
_____, Slide ______ of Plat Records of _________ County, Texas
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.07.004 Procedure
The procedure for review and approval of a short form final plat shall follow the procedure for final plats, except that:
(1) The short form final plat may be submitted without approval of a preliminary plan. The plat, prepared by a surveyor, and engineer if
required, and bearing their seals shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval before recordation of the plat.
(2) Legible prints, as indicated on the short form final plat application form shall be submitted along with the following:
(A) Completed application form and the payment of all required fees.
(B) Certification from all applicable taxing authorities that all taxes due on the property have been paid.
(C) Notification materials if required herein.
Sec. 12.07.005 Notification
If during the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by a permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more
than two (2) residential units per lot; or any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two (2)
residential units per lot, all owners of property (as determined by the most recent tax rolls from the County Appraisal District), any part of which is
located within two hundred (200) feet of the perimeter of the land to be subdivided, shall be notified by mail.
(1) The city shall publish a public notice in the official newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the municipality is
located; not fewer than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to said public hearing.
(2) The city shall mail public notification forms, postmarked no fewer than fifteen (15) days prior to the appropriate Planning and
Zoning Commission hearing, to the owners of all property, any part of which is located within two hundred (200) feet of the perimeter of
the property included within the subdivision.
Sec. 12.07.006 Approval
The Planning and Zoning Commission, after holding a public hearing in accordance with city ordinances and codes, shall approve or disapprove the
subdivision plat. The approval process of a short form final plat shall be the same as the approval of a final plat.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.07.007 Revision
The revision process of a short form final plat shall be the same as the revision process described for a final plat in section 12.06.008.
Sec. 12.07.008 Recordation
The recordation procedures of a short form final plat shall be the same as the procedures for a final plat in section 12.06.009.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.07.009 Responsibility
Notwithstanding the approval of any short form final plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant and the engineer that prepares and
submits such plats shall be and remain responsible for the adequacy of the design and nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to relieve
or waive the responsibility of the applicant or his/her engineer for or with respect to any plat submitted. (Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted
7/12/07)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/526
ARTICLE 12.08 AMENDED PLATS – DIRECTOR APPROVAL
Sec. 12.08.001 Purpose
An amended plat that meets all of the informational requirements set forth in this Chapter may be approved administratively in accordance with
section 212.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.08.002 Format
The format of an amended plat - director approval shall be the same as the format for a short form final plat.
Sec. 12.08.003 Content
The content of an amended plat - director approval shall be the same as the content requirements for a short form final plat.
(1) The city shall require the following note on the amended plat:
This subdivision is subject to all covenants and restrictions appearing on the plat of ____, Lot(s) ______ , recorded at Cabinet ____ ,
Slide ___ of the Plat Records of __________________ County, Texas.
Sec. 12.08.004 Procedure
(a) The amended plat. Director approval, prepared by a surveyor, and engineer if required, and bearing their seals shall be submitted to the city for
approval before recordation of the plat.
(b) Legible prints, as indicated on the application/checklist form shall be submitted to the city along with the following:
(1) Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees.
(2) Certification from all applicable taxing authorities that all taxes due on the property have been paid.
(3) Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the plat.
Sec. 12.08.005 Notification
Public notification and public hearings shall not be required for an amended plat - director approval.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.08.006 Approval
The Planning Director shall approve any amended plat meeting the requirements of this Chapter within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete
submittal. However, if in the Planning Director's determination, the amended plat does not satisfy this Chapter, the Planning Director may require the
plat to be processed in accordance with the final plat procedures in section 12.06.003 of this Chapter. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.08.007 Expiration
The amended plat shall expire two (2) years from the date such permit was approved if no progress has been made towards completion of the project,
pursuant to section 245.005 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. (Ordinance CO10-15-01-08-C1 adopted 1/8/15)
Sec. 12.08.008 Recordation
Recordation of an amended plat. Director approval shall follow the same recordation provisions of a final plat.
Sec. 12.08.009 Responsibility
Notwithstanding the approval of any amended plat by the planning director, the applicant and the engineer that prepares and submits such plats shall
be and remain responsible for the adequacy of the design and nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to relieve or waive the
responsibility of the applicant or his/her engineer for or with respect to any plat submitted.
ARTICLE 12.09 PLAT VACATION
Sec. 12.09.001 Purpose
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/526
(a) The purpose of a plat vacation is to nullify all or part of a previously recorded plat.
(b) Vacating plat:
(1) The owners of the tract may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. A signed vacation instrument declaring the
plat vacated must be approved and recorded, in accordance with the Texas LGC.
(2) If any lots have been sold, the plat or any part of the plat may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat. (e.g.
vacation instrument)
Sec. 12.09.002 Procedure
(a) A letter from the applicant explaining the reason for the plat vacation.
(b) Legible prints, as indicated on the application/checklist form shall be submitted to the city along with the following:
(1) Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees.
(2) Certification from all applicable taxing authorities that all taxes due on the property have been paid.
(3) Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the plat.
ARTICLE 12.10 RELEASE/ABANDONMENT OF EASEMENTS
Sec. 12.10.001 Purpose
(a) The purpose of a release of easement is to nullify a portion or the entire easement established by a previously recorded plat or by separate
instrument. A release of easement may be initiated by the respective lot owner(s) or by the city.
(b) The applicant shall submit a release of easement application to the Engineering Department. The application shall contain release forms signed
by all owners and entities authorized to use the easement, a written letter of justification to explain the intent and reason for the proposed release, a
metes-and-bounds description and sketch of the proposed area to be released and signed by the owner of the land requesting the city to vacate the
easement, in order to release all or a portion of an easement, including but not limited to a public utility easement, drainage easement, conservation
easement, public access easement or combination public easement.
(c) The Director of Engineering or his/her designee shall review and recommend approval or disapproval of the release of the easement. If the
request is approved, then the city engineer shall prepare a report to the City Manager informing the City Manager of the administrative action on the
release of easement. The request will also require the approval of the City Manager.
(d) If recommended for approval by the City Manager, the easement shall be released when all owners and entities authorized to use the easement
sign and acknowledge a release form, and the release of easement instrument declaring the easement released is recorded.
Sec. 12.10.002 Application requirements
A release of easement application must include the following:
(1) A copy of the deed(s) identifying the owners of the property;
(2) A letter signed by the owners of the lot to the Director of Engineering or his/her designee containing the following:
(A) A metes and bounds description and survey sketch including a description of the easement or portion of the easement to be
released including the lot description and orientation to the nearest lot line;
(B) An explanation of the purpose of the release request; and
(C) Signatures by the entities authorized to use the easement agreeing to the requested release of easement, in the format provided
in the application;
(3) Payment of applicable fees for requesting a release/abandonment. See appendix A fee schedule.
ARTICLE 12.11 ACTION ON SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS
Sec. 12.11.001 Approval
A subdivision shall be approved for recordation only if:
(1) The subdivision complies with the provisions of this chapter as well as the transportation ordinance (including the Transportation
Criteria Manual and drainage criteria manual), the site development regulations, the stormwater management ordinance, the Cedar Park
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/526
comprehensive plan, the recreational trails system plan, and the transportation master plan (including the cedar park arterial map and the
Cedar Park collector map);
(2) If inside the city limits, the proposed plat is in conformance with the zoning ordinance of the city;
(3) The subdivision is in compliance with the provisions of all the city's adopted ordinances applicable to the property being planned
and/or platted;
(4) In a subdivision within city limits, the applicant has constructed and installed the facilities in the subdivision in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the subdivision has been accepted for operation and maintenance by the City Council or has made
provisions as follows that in the event of the failure of the applicant to make such improvement, within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the city in its sole discretion, the same will be constructed and installed without cost to the city. Such provisions shall be
made as follows, each in an amount equal to the estimated cost, as approved by the city, of constructing and installing the required
improvements. See Sec. 12.15.003 Completion of improvements.
(5) In a subdivision located in the ETJ the applicant has constructed and installed streets, roads, bridges and drainage structures in
accordance with the approved construction plans and the requirements of the city or the county as defined within this chapter, and the
county has approved and accepted such streets and roads for maintenance; or provisions satisfactory to the county for such construction,
installation, approval and acceptance for maintenance have been made with the county.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
ARTICLE 12.12 DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 12.12.001 Adoption of City of Austin Standards and Standard Specifications Manuals
Through adoption of this Chapter, the City of Cedar Park has hereby adopted the standards, criteria, rules and regulations as set forth in the City of
Austin Standards Manual and the City of Austin Standard Specifications Manual*, being the most current addition thereof, as amended from time to
time, including later editions, except such portions as are hereinafter amended, deleted or modified by the City of Cedar Park. Said manuals are
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the same shall be controlling over all improvements within the City limits and extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Cedar Park, Texas.
* Use of the Austin Criteria Manual provides the latest designs and construction standards. Cedar Park selectively adopts revisions to these manuals.
Sec. 12.12.002 General design standards
(a) In addition to the requirements established by this Chapter, all development within the City limits shall be designed so as to comply with the
intent and provisions of applicable City codes and ordinances; and all development within the ETJ of the City shall comply with this Chapter and
applicable City/County codes and ordinances.
(b) The minimum design standards as contained herein shall provide the basic criteria for evaluating proposed development. The City may,
however, establish reasonable design requirements in excess of these established minimum standards, as set forth herein.
(1) Development Plats shall comply with all standards within this Article.
(2) For subdivisions that require submittal of a site development permit, the requirements of sections 12.12.015 driveways, 12.12.018
sight distance requirements, 12.12.020 electrical and communication utilities, 12.12.021 lighting standards and 12.12.022(b) through (d)
tree preservation may be addressed upon site development submittal.
(c) After completion of construction improvements and prior to City Council acceptance of operation and maintenance of the subdivision the
applicant shall provide a certificate of compliance from the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR).
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.12.003 Streets
All transportation improvements including streets, driveways, sidewalks, bikeways, traffic control, and parking areas within the city's jurisdiction
shall be designed in accordance with the City of Austin's Transportation Criteria Manual, the transportation master plan, the recreational trails system
plan, and any City of Cedar Park applicable codes or ordinances.
(1) Street names cannot be duplicated within the same 911 calling area.
(2) Relationship to street system. Streets of a new subdivision shall be in line with existing streets in adjoining property except when, in
the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, topography, requirements of traffic circulation or other considerations make it
desirable to depart from such alignment.
(3) Street alignment. To encourage lower motor vehicle speeds through residential neighborhoods, local residential streets shall be
designed to avoid straight sections in excess of 800 feet in length and residential collector streets shall be designed to avoid straight
sections in excess of 1,200 feet in length unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that there is no other reasonable alternative.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/526
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
(4) Access to lots. Each lot in a subdivision shall abut on an existing or proposed public or private street, except those lots meeting
criteria set forth in section 12.12.010(c) lot arrangements regarding public utility facility lots, provided a perpetual access easement is
dedicated to the lot at time of platting or prior to lot development. (Ordinance CO39-14-04-10-C6 adopted 4/10/14)
(5) Street right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths in subdivisions shall be in conformance with the Transportation Criteria
Manual as adopted in the code of ordinances and shall in no event be less than fifty (50) feet for local streets, sixty (60) feet for collector
streets and eighty (80) feet for thoroughfares and industrial streets. The full roadway row width shall be platted and dedicated adjacent to
the full length and/or width of all lots in the subdivision at the time of platting of the lots. No voids may be left within the subdivision
with the intent of avoiding responsibility for constructing roads or bridges, nor along the subdivision boundary to avoid connecting with
adjacent subdivisions or roads.
(6) Street classification and characteristics.
(A) Local streets. The purpose of a local street is to provide lot street frontage and carry traffic to a higher classification street.
Because of its limited purpose, a local street generally carries an average daily traffic volume no greater than two thousand (2,000)
vehicle trips. Local streets are divided into three subcategories: local-residential, local-nonresidential or local-rural. Unless approved
by the director of planning, a local street shall not connect to two separate higher classification streets or connect directly to arterial
streets.
(B) Collector streets. Collector streets are divided into two subcategories: local and major. The purpose of collector streets is to
convey traffic from intersecting local streets and to expedite the movement of traffic to an arterial street or other collector street. A
local collector street generally carries an average daily traffic volume of two thousand (2,000) to six thousand (6,000) vehicle trips.
A major collector street generally carries an average daily traffic greater than six thousand (6,000) vehicle trips. Generally, major
collector streets shall not permit on-street parking. A collector street may exceed one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet provided
that no residential lots front the collector street, and the collector street shall not have any straight sections exceeding one thousand
(1,000) feet.
(C) Arterial streets. The purpose of an arterial street is to carry high volumes of through traffic. Arterial streets serve as a link
between major activity centers within the urban area. Access is usually limited to intersections, multifamily developments and
commercial driveways. All arterial streets are designated in the general plan. An arterial street shall not end as a cul-de-sac.
Generally, arterial streets shall not permit on-street parking.
(7) Street names. New streets in subdivisions shall be named so as to provide continuity of name with existing streets and so as to
prevent conflict with identical or similar names in other parts of the city and within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(8) Street signs. Street signs may incorporate the city's official logo.
(9) Speed limit signs. Speed limit signs shall be placed throughout the subdivision as directed by the Director of Engineering or his/her
designee and shall also be shown on the subdivision improvement plans.
(10) Street intersections. Acute angles between streets in subdivisions at their intersection shall be avoided; provided, that when
intersecting angles sharper than eighty (80) degrees are deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the property line in
the small angle of the intersection shall be rounded so as to permit the construction of curbs having a radius of not less than twenty-five
(25) feet without decreasing the normal width of the sidewalk area.
(11) Stub streets.
(A) A proposed subdivision or addition must provide access to adjacent land subdivided by stubbing appropriate streets to the
boundaries of the proposed addition or subdivision. When the abutting land is platted, the developer shall integrate the stubbed
streets into the existing traffic system of streets in a logical manner as well as continue the same street classification of the stub
street. The developer shall present a schematic plan to demonstrate how the stub street will eventually extend through the adjacent
property and connect with a collector or arterial roadway.
(B) Temporary paved turnarounds shall be provided at the end of stubbed streets which are more than one hundred fifty feet (150')
long.
(12) Cul-de-sacs. Except as provided herein, the maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be seven hundred fifty feet (750'),
measured from the centerline of the nearest intersecting outlet street to the center point of the turnaround; except that a longer length may
be allowed upon a recommendation by the fire department and if the Planning and Zoning Commission determines any of the following:
(A) That no secondary access can be reasonably provided to the portion of the subdivision which is to be served by the cul-de-sac;
(B) That limited access to the subdivision is due to a topographical condition on the property or a particular physical surrounding;
or
(C) That the cul-de-sac is temporary and the road is planned to extend to the adjacent property.
(13) Curbing. All streets shall have standard curbing and gutter except for the rural streets in the ETJ where ribbon curb is allowed. All
raised medians and islands located within the street pavement shall be bordered by standard curb and gutter, unless otherwise approved by
the Director of Engineering or his/her designee. All concrete curb and gutter shall be installed and constructed in accordance with all
applicable city codes and ordinances.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/526
(14) Curb Ramps.
(A) Curb ramps are required within a street right-of-way wherever a sidewalk or pedestrian route intersects with a curb. The
design and construction of curb ramps shall be in accordance with the design and construction standards, and shall meet the Texas
Accessibility Standards administered by the state department of licensing and regulation and the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990, as amended.
(B) Whenever a sidewalk or pedestrian route crosses a raised median, the raised median shall be cut through level with the street,
or shall have curb ramps at both median curbs plus a level area at least four (4) feet long between the curb ramps in the median.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
(15) At-grade rail crossings. Prior to the city's acceptance of the subdivision improvements or prior to the issuance of a building permit,
the developer of a proposed subdivision that includes a public at-grade rail crossing shall provide the city with written approval from
Capital Metro stating that the rail crossing improvements have been designed and installed with adequate supplemental safety measures as
required by the Federal Railroad Administration to establish a quite [quiet] zone. (CO29-12-01-12-C9 adopted 1/12/12)
Sec. 12.12.004 Sidewalks
(a) Sidewalks shall be provided and located on both sides of all streets within and immediately adjacent to a proposed development and shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Texas Accessibility Standards administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation,
Americans with Disabilities Act, Transportation Criteria Manual, Texas Accessibility Standards, and the City's zoning ordinance, transportation
master plan, and hike and bike trails master plan, as amended.
(b) The Director of Development Services or their designee may grant an administrative waiver for this sidewalk requirement if a rural subdivision
comprised of three or fewer lots, or one single-family home on a single-family zoned lot, meets all of the following criteria:
(1) The roadway adjacent to the proposed development is existing and was constructed without raised curb and gutter;
(2) The existing roadway adjacent to the proposed development has no existing sidewalks on the lots on both sides of the proposed
development along the same street frontage; and
(3) The proposed development has provided a minimum ten-foot (10') wide pedestrian easement along the frontage of the existing
roadway on the proposed lot for which the waiver is being requested.
(c) Any requested variance to the sidewalk requirements of this section which is not eligible for a waiver by the Director of Development Services
as described in subsection (b) must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with section 12.12.023 variances for design
standards.
(d) When the delay of sidewalk construction is deemed appropriate due to future right-of-way improvements, escrow funds in lieu of the
construction of sidewalks may be approved by the Engineering Department. Such funds shall be escrowed with the City prior to the filing of the
subdivision plat with the appropriate County Clerk's office. If the tract has already been platted and filed, then the funds must be escrowed prior to
final approval of a site plan. The escrow amount shall be determined by the square foot cost of constructing such sidewalk, as estimated by the
Engineering Department.
Sec. 12.12.005 Park trails
(a) Hike and bike trails shall be constructed in accordance with the hike and bike trails master plan, as amended. Locations of such trails shall be
consistent with the locations designated on the plan unless otherwise approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee. No
development shall interrupt the future trail routes or otherwise hinder efficient public access to or from a trail.
(b) The location of trails within developments adjacent to major creeks or greenway trails recognized on the hike and bike trails master plan, as
amended, must be approved by the Parks and Recreation Department prior to approval of a preliminary plan and/or final plat. Prior to submittal of
the preliminary plan and/or final plat, the applicant must coordinate with the Parks and Recreation Department to walk and stake a designated
location for the hike and bike trail. The location of the trail shall be specified on the preliminary plan and/or final plat as the approved location for the
hike and bike trail.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.12.006 Monuments and property markers
(a) Concrete monuments in subdivisions shall be placed at all corners of boundary lines of subdivision and in any case not more than thirteen
hundred (1,300) feet apart. Such monuments shall be eighteen (18) inches deep, except where rock is encountered within fourteen (14) inches of the
surface, in which case such monuments shall be countersunk four (4) inches in such rock. The exact intersection point on the monument shall be
marked by a copper pin one-fourth (1/4) inch in diameter embedded at least three (3) inches in the monument. The top of the monument shall be
placed flush with the natural ground.
(b) Intermediate property corners, curve points and angle points shall be marked by iron stakes, not less than twelve (12) inches in length, driven
flush with the ground or countersunk if necessary in order to avoid being disturbed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/526
Sec. 12.12.007 Easements
(a) Except where alleys of not less than twenty (20) feet in width are provided in a subdivision, easements for utilities and enclosed or open
drainage ways not less than seven and one-half (7-1/2) feet in width shall be retained on each side of rear lot lines. Where deemed necessary by the
Public Works Department, such easements not less than five (5) feet in width, on each side of side lot lines, shall be retained. Easements for any of
such purposes shall be required across parts of lots other than as described above as deemed necessary by the Public Works Department. All such
easements shall be so aligned as to permit construction of utilities therein at a minimum cost.
(b) A ten-foot wide public utility easement (PUE) is required adjacent to all street ROW on all lots.
(c) A five-foot wide PUE is required along each side lot line from the front property line to the front building line except where a side lot line is
also the rear lot line of an adjacent lot in which case the 5-foot wide PUE is dedicated along the entire length of the side lot line.
(d) Easements; in areas adjoining proposed subdivisions. When the Public Works Department finds that easements in areas adjoining a proposed
subdivision are necessary to provide adequate drainage thereof or to serve such subdivision with utilities, the applicant shall obtain such easements.
(e) All existing and proposed easements, safety lanes, and rights-of-way shall be clearly indicated on the plat or plan, as well as an indication to the
use of each easement or right-of-way.
(f) No permanent structure may be placed in or over any easement or right-of-way except a structure whose use and location are necessary to the
designated use of the right-of-way or easement or which otherwise will not affect the use, maintenance or repair of such easement.
(g) Easements shall be established and dedicated for all public utility and drainage appurtenances, including common access areas, and other
public uses requiring dedication of property rights.
Sec. 12.12.008 Block standards
(a) Except as provided otherwise in this section, the terms and provisions of the zoning ordinance establishing the minimum lot area, width,
setback line, side yard and rear yard requirements for each zoning or use category are incorporated herein by reference. Such regulations and
standards shall be applied to property within the city limits based upon the zoning of the property and to property within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction based on the land use proposed by the applicant.
(b) Block lengths. Residential blocks in subdivisions shall not exceed one thousand twelve hundred (1,200) [sic] feet in length nor be less than five
hundred (500) feet in length. Commercial and industrial block lengths may be up to two thousand (2,000) feet in length; provided that the
requirements of traffic circulation and utility services are met. A block shall be considered broken if at the preliminary plan phase, the dedication of
an easement or right-of-way not less than ten (10) feet wide bisecting the center of any block in excess of eight hundred (800) feet in length is used to
accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, and/or pedestrian access to greenbelts or park areas.
(c) The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a block length variance if they determine that the proposed block length adequately meets the
requirements of traffic circulation, utility service, and topography.
(d) Block widths. Block widths in subdivisions shall be such as to allow for two (2) tiers of lots back to back, except where abutting a
thoroughfare, to which access to the lots is prohibited, or where prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property.
Sec. 12.12.009 Lot and block numbering
(a) All lots are to be numbered consecutively within each block. Lot numbering may be cumulative throughout the subdivision if the numbering
continues from block to block in a uniform manner that has been approved on an overall preliminary plan. Use block numbers only when previously
platted units of the same subdivision have numbered blocks.
(b) Blocks are to be numbered consecutively within the overall plan and/or sections of an overall plat.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.12.010 Lot arrangements
(a) Standard lot requirements.
(1) On the basis of the zoning district in which they lie and the use to which they are to be put, all lots or tract sizes must conform to the
regulations of the zoning ordinance, including minimum area, width and depth, within the City limits.
(2) Irregular shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet frontage requirements for the appropriate zoning district.
(3) The sidelines of lots in subdivisions shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
(4) Lot lines shall be arranged to avoid unusable areas such as long, narrow areas, sharp acute angles or flag lots.
(b) Flag lots.
(1) Flag lots are only allowed where:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/526
(A) The proposed lot configuration is needed to abate an acute topographical condition or other unusual property accessibility
constraint not created by the applicant;
(B) The proposed lot is located within the Development Reserve (DR) district or the Estate Residential (ES) district or for lots
under two (2) acres within the City's ETJ;
(C) The unusual adjacent property boundary configuration constrains the arrangement of an otherwise standard lot configuration;
or
(D) Where any of the above items are present, the Development Services Director or their designee, may allow the proposed flag
lot configuration, provided the following conditions are met:
(i) The proposed lot does not circumvent the normal platting of streets for public and emergency access;
(ii) The proposed lot does not prevent the extensions of streets to adjacent property;
(iii) The proposed lot width is not less than fifty (50) feet in width at its frontage connection with the adjacent public or
approved private street; and
(iv) The narrow or elongated part of the proposed lot ‘pole' does not exceed one hundred (100) ft. in length, measured from
the connecting street frontage to where the lot widens into a ‘flag' shape to receive a suitable building area where a building
setback line shall be established; nor shall more than two (2) adjacent neck lots be connected.
(E) Where any of the foregoing requirements are not met, or a variance request is denied by the Development Services Director or
their designee, the Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize a variance from these regulations pursuant to section 12.12.023
of this Chapter.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
(c) Exception for public utility facilities. Where a proposed lot shall be used exclusively as an unmanned utility facility primarily serving a public
necessity as approved by the City and as reflected by a note on the recorded subdivision plat, these lots shall be exempt from the requirements of
subsections (a) and (b) above. (Ordinance CO33-14-03-06-C3 adopted 3/6/14)
Sec. 12.12.011 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 12.12.011 pertaining to lot sizes within the City limits and deriving from Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07, was deleted in its entirety
by Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18.
Sec. 12.12.012 Subdivision lots within the ETJ
(a) For subdivisions located in the ETJ where each lot within the proposed subdivision will be served by a state commission on environmental
quality (TCEQ) approved public water supply and will utilize individual on-site sewage facility methods for sewage disposal, shall provide for
individual lots having surface areas of at least one (1) acre.
(1) Criteria. A subdivision may be approved with rural standards if the following conditions are met:
(A) All lots shall be a minimum of one (1) acre;
(B) All lots shall have direct access to an approved public or private street or street right-of-way;
(C) All lots shall have a minimum twenty-five-foot front building setback;
(2) Standards.
(A) Streets may have either standard or ribbon curbs;
(B) Open channels may be utilized and shall be constructed in accordance with the drainage criteria manual;
(C) Sidewalks are required on one side of the street for all residential subdivisions comprised of four (4) lots or greater, for three
(3) or fewer lots no sidewalks are required; and
(D) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable city codes and ordinances.
(b) For subdivisions located in the ETJ where each lot within the proposed subdivision will not be served by a TCEQ approved public water
supply and will utilize individual on-site sewage facility methods for wastewater treatment, shall provide for individual lots having surface areas of at
least two (2) acres.
(1) Criteria. A subdivision may be approved with rural standards if the following conditions are met:
(A) All lots shall be a minimum of two (2) acres;
(B) All lots shall have direct access to an approved public or private street or street right-of-way;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/526
(C) All lots shall have a minimum fifty-foot front building setback;
(2) Standards.
(A) Streets may have either standard or ribbon curbs;
(B) Open channels may be utilized and shall be constructed in accordance with the drainage criteria manual;
(C) Sidewalks are required on one side of the street for all residential subdivisions comprised of four (4) lots or greater, for three
(3) or fewer lots no sidewalks are required; and
(D) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable city codes and ordinances.
(c) For subdivisions located in the ETJ and within a municipal utility district the following criteria shall apply:
(1) Criteria.
(A) All lots shall be a minimum of seven thousand four hundred (7,400) square feet;
(B) All lots shall have a minimum width of sixty-five (65) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred ten (110) feet;
(C) All lots shall have a minimum twenty-five-foot front building setback;
(D) All lots shall have a minimum five-foot side setback and a minimum fifteen-foot side setback if adjacent to a public or private
street; and
(E) All lots shall have a minimum ten-foot rear setback.
(2) Standards.
(A) Streets shall have raised curb and gutter;
(B) Open channels shall not be utilized;
(C) Sidewalks are required on both sides of all streets located in the subdivision; and
(D) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable city codes and ordinances.
Sec. 12.12.013 Maintenance of common areas, etc.
Any plat containing private common areas, landscape lots, detention lots, water quality lots and other lots for which no residential or commercial
development is proposed, shall be noted on the plat as such and accompanied by a restrictive covenant to be recorded and referenced on the plat
defining the responsibilities of the owner for maintenance, taxation and the use allowed on the lot.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.12.014 Building lines
(a) Each lot shall have a front twenty-five-foot front building setback line, which runs parallel to the property line.
(b) The front and rear building setback lines shall run between the side lot lines.
(c) The side building setback lines, and street side building setback lines for corner lots, shall extend from the front building setback line to the rear
building setback line.
(d) The building setback line for each designated lot shall conform to the City's zoning ordinance, as currently amended.
(e) For purposes of these regulations related to building setback lines, both opposing frontages of a double frontage lot are treated as the “front.”
The building setback for the rear frontage (that is opposite of the front of the principle structure), or to which access is prohibited, shall only regulate
the setback for the principle structure and shall not regulate the setback for covered porches or decks, swimming pools, accessory structures, etc.
which, if within City limits, shall instead be regulated by the normal rear yard setback of the zoning ordinance.
Sec. 12.12.015 Driveways
(a) For single-family, and town home lots, residential driveways are permitted on local streets and local collector streets only. Residential
driveways for double frontage lots and corner lots must be located on the lesser classification street. Driveways serving single-family or single-unit
townhouse residences are not permitted on major or minor collectors or arterial streets unless the Director of Development Services determines no
other access is possible.
(b) For multifamily and nonresidential lots, driveways are permitted on all streets; however, the driveways must have a minimum of two hundred
(200) feet spacing between driveways and other streets on divided arterial roadways and three hundred (300) feet spacing between driveways and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/526
other streets on undivided arterial roadways.
(c) Driveway construction shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) General principles.
(A) Driveways shall be located and designed with respect to both the public street and the on-site circulation to provide maximum
safety and to minimize interference with street traffic. To ensure this, a traffic impact study may be required at the owner's expense.
(B) The owner, successor or assigns shall do all work and pay all costs in connection with the construction of access driveways
and their appurtenances on the right-of-way.
(C) Temporary or permanent nonpublic all-weather drive surfaces will be required at the beginning of construction for emergency
access or turnaround for emergency vehicles.
(D) Driveway entrances must be able to accommodate all vehicle types having occasion to enter the site, including delivery
vehicles.
(E) No single-family dwelling, condominium, townhouse, or duplex unit may take direct access to arterial streets if the property
has alternative access. If it can only be accessed by an arterial street, then adequate on-site maneuvering space must be provided, as
vehicles will not be allowed to back directly into these streets.
(F) Driveways shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of roadway frontage.
(2) Driveway types.
(A) Type I. A concrete driveway approach designed and intended to serve as access from a roadway to a lot or parcel of land
which is used for a single-family or townhome residence.
(B) Type II. A concrete driveway approach designed and intended to serve as access from a roadway to a lot or parcel of land
used for any development or purpose other than single-family or townhome residences.
(C) Type III. A temporary asphalt driveway approach intended to provide vehicular access to a lot or parcel of land, such access
being from a roadway not yet constructed to permanent lines and grades or a roadway not having curb and gutter. Driveways shall
be reconstructed under type I or type II standards within sixty (60) days after construction of the abutting street to permanent line
and grade with concrete curb and gutter. See tables below.
(3) Driveway design.
(A) All type II and III driveways on undivided arterial streets shall be designed to align with opposing streets or driveways or be
offset by a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet (measured from edge to edge).
(B) All type II and III driveways on undivided collector streets shall be designed to align with opposing street or driveways or be
offset by a minimum of eighty (80) feet (measured from edge to edge).
(C) All type II and III driveways on divided streets shall be designed to align with median breaks or be offset by a minimum of
one hundred (100) feet (measured from the nose of the median to the nearest edge of the driveway).
(D) Alignment of driveways with opposing streets is discouraged for signalized intersections unless approved by the Director of
Engineering Services or his/her designee. When such a design is approved, the driveway approach shall be constructed without an
apron and the maximum driveway widths shown in the table below may be increased to match the cross-section of the opposing
street.
(E) All adjacent and opposite corner clearance and commercial driveway spacing is determined by the functional classification of
the street as prescribed in the TCM:
Type II Commercial Driveway Criteria
Driveway Type
Roadway Type
Local Street, Residential or
Neighborhood Collector
Commercial or
Industrial
Collector
Primary
Collector
Minor Arterial Major Arterial Major Corridor
Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max
One Way
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/526
Width 15(a) 20 15(a) 20 18(a) 25 18(a) 25(b) 18(a) 25(b) - -
Curb Return
Radius 10 25 15 25(c) 15 30(c) 20 30(c) 20 30(c) - -
Throat Length (d) - - 20 - 20 - 40 - 50 - - -
Distance Between
Entry and Exit Drive
50 - 50 - 50 - 75 - 75 - - -
Driveway Spacing 50 - 75 - 100 - 150 - 200 - - -
Two-Way Undivided
Width 25 40 25 40 30 40 30 45 30 45 - -
Curb Return Radius 10 25 15 25(c) 15 30(c) 20 30(c) 20 30(c) - -
Throat Length (d) - - 20 - 20 - 40 - 50 - - -
Driveway Spacing 50 - 75 - 100 - 150 - 200 - 300(f) -
Two Way Divided
- -
Width (each side of
median) (e)
20 24 20 24 20 24 20 30 20 30 - -
Curb Return Radius 15 25 15 25 15 25 20 30 20 30 - -
Throat Length (d) 20 - 20 - 20 - 40 - 50 - - -
Median Width (e) 4 15 4 15 4 15 4 15 4 15 - -
Median Length 10 - 10 - 10 - 20 - 20 - - -
Driveway Spacing 50 - 75 - 100 - 150 - 200 - 200(f) -
(a) Greater width may be required for fire department emergency access.
(b) 30-foot minimum width may be required on State highways.
(c) Radius may be increased to 40 feet at driveways serving large trucks.
(d) Distance from the edge of pavement to first conflict point.
(e) On State highways, State standards may vary from City standards.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/526
(f) All standards are per the street classification except as shown.
(4) Single-family detached, and duplex driveway spacing (See also TCM):
(A) No driveway shall be constructed closer than fifty (50) feet or sixty (60) percent of parcel frontage, whichever is less, to the
right-of-way of an intersecting local or collector street.
(B) No driveway shall be constructed closer than one hundred (100) feet or sixty (60) percent of parcel frontage, whichever is
less, to the right-of-way of an intersecting arterial street.
(5) In the event that a particular parcel or parcels lack sufficient thoroughfare frontage to maintain the desirable spacings, the
landowner/applicant has one of two options:
(A) They may seek a waiver from the Planning Director and the Director of Engineering for minimum spacing; or
(B) The adjacent landowners may agree to establish a common driveway. Common driveways shall meet the standards set forth in
the TCM.
(d) For all driveways and new streets proposed on State roadways, an approval letter is required from the Texas Department of Transportation
(TxDOT) prior to plat approval.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.12.016 Signage, striping and signalization
(a) Signage and striping. The developer shall design, install and pay all costs for traffic control signs and pavement striping. Traffic control signs
and pavement striping shall conform to the accepted construction plans and to the most recent edition of the “Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices” a copy which is on file with the Public Works Department.
(b) Signalization. The developer shall design, install and pay all costs for providing any required traffic signalization system identified in an
approved TIA, including all related devices, conduits, wiring and junction boxes.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 12.12.017 Subdivision walls
(a) Walls required. Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear and/or side yards of residential lots are adjacent to a roadway identified as a
major corridor, major or minor arterial or higher classification street, the developer shall construct, at his/her sole expense, walls along said rear
and/or side yards and said street, in accordance with the standards set forth below in subsection (b). Where said lots are corner lots, the wall
requirements of this section shall take precedence over corner lot fencing specifications regulated by Chapter 14 Site Development regulations of this
Code.
(b) Standards. It is intended that all walls erected pursuant to this section be constructed in such a manner to last thirty (30) years with minimal
maintenance required during said period. All walls required by this section shall conform to the following minimum standards:
(1) Where applicable, materials and installation of walls shall comply with the most recent edition of “Selected ASTM Standards for
Fence Materials and Products,” a copy of which shall be maintained by the Public Works Department and the Planning Department.
Structural plans and specifications for walls shall be approved by the Engineering Department. Such plans and specifications are to be
submitted at the same time as other construction plans required by this Chapter. In approving said plans and specifications, the
Engineering Department shall consider the site's soil characteristics, wind loadings and other environmental considerations.
(2) Walls shall be constructed of the following materials: brick, stone, split-faced or decorative concrete masonry unit (CMU),
decorative reinforced concrete or other equivalent materials approved by the Planning Department, subject to the following:
(A) Wall pillars shall be constructed of masonry of sound structural integrity set in concrete with rebar support.
(B) Wall panels shall be constructed of brick, stone, split-faced or decorative concrete masonry unit (CMU), decorative reinforced
concrete or other equivalent materials approved by the Planning Department. Panels shall be top capped as determined by the
Planning Department.
(3) Walls shall be no greater than eight (8) feet in height. The materials, color and design of walls shall be uniform within the area of an
approved preliminary plan, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Department. A finished side of all walls shall face the
thoroughfare.
(4) All walls shall be placed at least five (5) feet from any existing or proposed City water line.
(5) All walls required herein shall be placed on the lot or lots along the property line adjacent to the right-of-way.
(6) Should an active property owner's association or homeowner's association be in effect, it shall be the responsibility of the
association to adequately maintain the fence and to prevent it from becoming unsightly or objectionable. Should an association no longer
be active or default in its responsibility, it shall be the responsibility of any person, firm, or corporation who shall own or occupy any lot
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/526
or lots on which a wall is constructed pursuant to the terms of this section to adequately maintain the wall and to prevent it from becoming
unsightly or objectionable. The City shall not be responsible for the construction or maintenance of walls or fences required per this
section.
Sec. 12.12.018 Sight distance requirements
(a) Sight obstruction standards for streets, alley corners and access points.
(1) All sight distance standards and criteria shall be in accordance with the TCM.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or cause or allow to be placed or maintained any plant, tree, fence, object or
vehicle in such a position on a corner lot in the City such that a driver of a vehicle cannot see down the intersecting streets the distance
specified in the TCM.
(3) This restriction shall not apply to traffic-control devices, street signs, fire hydrants, utility poles and any other utility-related
equipment placed within such area by authority of the City Council.
(b) Obstruction of rights-of-way prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, permit or cause to be placed or maintained any
tree, shrub, or plant of any kind or vehicle of any kind on or across public right-of-way as to:
(1) Obstruct passage on or use of that area by the public.
(2) Create a hazard to persons using the right-of-way.
(3) Restrict drainage flow.
(c) All parts of any vehicles parked adjacent to a public street or other public right-of-way shall be parked entirely on private property, shall not
extend into the public right-of-way and shall be in observance of sight obstruction standards. Curbs or guideposts shall be installed as necessary to
prohibit vehicle parking in the public right-of-way.
(d) Sight obstruction standards for fire hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any plant, tree, fence or object that would
visually obstruct the location of a fire hydrant from the public right-of-way.
Sec. 12.12.019 Traffic impact analysis (TIA)
(a) General principles.
(1) A TIA shall be submitted with a development plat, preliminary plan, final plat or replat when the subdivision or addition will
generate one hundred (100) or more vehicle trips, inbound or outbound, during the peak hour. The analysis shall be performed for the
most intense use permitted in the existing or proposed zoning district. A scoping meeting is required.
(2) The TIA shall be prepared in accordance with the recommended guidelines for traffic impact studies as issued by the Institute of
Transportation of Engineers, a copy of which is maintained by the Planning Department.
(3) The final plat or replat shall be prepared in conformance with the TIA and the preliminary plan.
(4) Approved TIA. The developer must have a city-approved TIA prior to the approval of the final plat, if required.
(5) Off-site improvements. If off-site improvements are required in the TIA, the improvements shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with all applicable city codes and ordinances.
(6) Signage and striping. If off-site signage and/or striping are required in the TIA, the signage and/or striping shall conform to all
applicable city codes and ordinances.
(7) Signalization. If off-site signalization is required in the TIA, the signalization shall be installed with all applicable city codes and
ordinances.
(8) Preliminary plan, final plat and replat TIA. The TIA submitted with a preliminary plan, final plat or a replat shall include any
revisions to the TIA required for changes in the proposed development of the plat since the submission of the last TIA.
Sec. 12.12.020 Electrical and communication utilities
(a) General.
(1) Utilities shall be installed in accordance with this section.
(A) All new residential utility installations, including, but not limited to, electrical, gas, television and
telephone/telecommunication, shall be placed underground.
(B) All new nonresidential utility installations, including but not limited to electrical, gas, television, and
telephone/telecommunication, shall be placed underground where service is provided adjacent to public street or right-of-way.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/526
Where electrical service is provided from an alley or rear easement not located adjacent to a public street, primary electrical service
may be provided overhead along the property line. Primary and secondary service routed on the site shall be placed underground.
(C) All new construction within the public street rights-of-way shall be located underground. Where a street is scheduled for
reconstruction, new development may be required to provide an escrow of the difference between overhead and underground
service.
(D) Nothing herein shall prevent temporary service during construction from being located overhead.
(E) New development shall assume responsibility for all expense related to the underground placement of utilities.
(F) Utility meters and other utility apparatus, including, but not limited to, transformers and switch boxes, shall be located to the
rear of the structure unless adequately screened from view from public streets and adjoining properties and shall be suitable for
access required for service and maintenance. Adequately screened from view shall include screening walls as well as the utilization
of landscaping and other site elements.
(G) All required screening shall meet clearances required by affected utility companies and shall be suitable for access required
for service and maintenance. Wall-mounted equipment, including meters (such as banks of electric meters on the rear or side wall of
multitenant buildings), shall be screened from public streets by one of the following methods.
(i) Landscaping, including trees or evergreen shrubbery.
(ii) Masonry walls in conjunction with landscaping.
(iii) Wall-mounted screening devices, such as cabinets or partitions which are architecturally compatible with the building
facade.
(H) Electrical transmission (59 or more kilovolts) may be located overhead.
(I) Existing overhead electrical, television, and/or telephone/telecommunication utilities located on the developing property or
adjacent right-of-way shall be excluded from the requirement to be placed underground.
(2) When development along a major corridor, including relocating all existing aboveground utilities underground along all perimeter
roads and alleys, all aboveground electrical and telephone support equipment including, but not limited to, transformers, amplifiers, and
switching devices shall not be located in the right-of-way of the above-referenced major corridor.
(3) When development occurs outside the major corridor, no new aboveground utility support structures (poles) may be installed. When
existing pole space is not available, all new electrical and communication utilities including but not limited to, transformers, amplifiers,
and switching devices shall be placed underground or be pad-mounted at ground level.
(4) Groundmounted equipment shall not be placed in visibility, access and maintenance easements.
(5) The Director of Engineering, or their designee, may grant an exception to the requirements of this section if:
(A) Compliance with this section is not in the best interest of public safety; or
(B) The placement of utility lines is the result of an upgrade, reconstruction, or reconductoring of existing overhead facilities that
is not associated with a specific development(s).
Sec. 12.12.021 Lighting standards
(a) General requirements.
(1) Lighting shall be nonflashing as to eliminate objectionable glare.
(2) Lighting shall be directed downward and be arranged so as to direct the light away from the adjacent property.
(3) Lighting shall not glare onto adjacent properties or streets[.]
(4) The light source shall not be visible.
(5) Lighting shall not negatively impact the site, building architecture or adjacent properties.
(6) The light source shall be completely concealed within an opaque housing and shall not be visible from the street or adjacent
properties. In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spill into the night sky and onto adjacent properties, all
lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff fixtures.
(7) Lighting shall be oriented not to direct glare or illumination onto streets in a manner that may distract or interfere with the vision of
drivers on such streets.
(8) Lighting fixtures shall not be more than twenty-five (25) feet in height within an on-site parking area.
(9) Lighting fixtures located within fifty (50) feet of any residential use shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/526
(10) Lighting fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is contained on site and does not cross any property line
of the site.
(11) Wall-mounted floodlamps/wall-packs internal to a site that are not visible from a public road or adjacent to residential or
multifamily district may be of any design. Wall-mounted floodlamps/wall-packs visible from public roads and adjacent to any residential
or multifamily use shall not be allowed.
(12) Fixtures used to accent architectural features, landscaping or art shall be located, aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the
night sky.
(13) Architectural and landscaping lighting. Outdoor lighting used to illuminate flags, statues, signs or other objects mounted on a pole,
pedestal or platform, spotlighting or floodlighting used for architectural or landscape purposes, must use full cutoff or directionally
shielded lighting fixtures that are aimed and controlled so that the directed light is substantially confined to the object intended to be
illuminated.
(b) Recreational facilities. Any light source permitted by this Article may be used for lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private),
such as, but not limited to, football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, tennis courts, or show areas, provided all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The mounting height of outdoor sports field and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall not exceed eighty (80) feet from
finished grade unless approved by the Development Services Committee as having no adverse effect or approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission as part of a variance request;
(2) All outdoor sports field and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall be equipped with a glare control package (louvers,
shields, or similar devices);
(3) The fixtures must be aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area;
(4) Lighting shall be shielded so as to cast no direct light on adjacent properties;
(5) Nonconforming fixtures lighting sports fields may be replaced or otherwise changed on an individual/small cluster basis with new
nonconforming fixtures; however, when all the fixtures are upgraded or otherwise changed, the fixtures must be brought into compliance
with the requirements of this Chapter;
(6) All stadium and other sports arena lights used for the illumination of the playing area must be extinguished by 10:00 p.m. or
immediately after the conclusion of the final event. No new event, activity, or game may start after 10:00 p.m. The remainder of the
facility lights, except for reasons of security, must be extinguished at 10:00 p.m. or within one hour after the final event;
(7) Lighting shall be shielded so as to cast no direct light on adjacent properties; and
(8) Any stadium-lit outdoor facility shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any residential use.
(c) Prohibited light sources.
(1) Neon light sources that blink or flash.
(2) Cobra-head-type fixtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors which house other than incandescent sources.
(3) Searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures.
(4) Lighting fixtures that have flashing, rotating, moving, pulsing or alternating colored sources except between Thanksgiving Day and
January 15th
(5) Laser source light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when
projected above the horizontal is prohibited.
(6) Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.12.022 Tree survey/tree preservation requirements
(a) General tree survey standards. The plat shall include a survey not older than 2 years old of all hardwood trees six (6) caliper inches and larger
(measured four-and-one-half feet above ground level), and shall include all tree locations, caliper inches and types. The plat is not required to show
the crown area. Trees shall be represented by circles using the formula of one foot of radius for every one (1) inch of trunk caliper. Unbroken circles
shall indicate trees that will remain and dashed circles shall indicate trees proposed for removal.
(1) Tree surveys must be as accurate as possible, but need not be certified. Levels of inaccuracy, which will result in a failure to comply
with the City tree preservation, design criteria and construction specifications may necessitate new surveys and plan adjustments either
prior to permit approval or project release.
(2) For small areas with few trees, taping the distance to the center of the trunk from two (2) known points is a viable option. For large,
tree-covered sites, using a total station survey system from a platform elevated above the tree line may be the most practical method.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/526
(3) Caliper inches of existing trees are measured at four-and-one-half (4-1/2) feet above grade. If the tree is on a slope, measure from
the high side of the slope. Measure above or below unusual swells in the trunk.
(A) To determine the caliper inch of a multitrunk tree, measure all the trunks; add the total caliper inch of the largest trunk to onehalf
(1/2) the caliper inch of each additional trunk. A multitrunk tree is differentiated from individual trees growing from a common
root stock if there is a visible connection between the trunks aboveground.
(B) Caliper inch measurements should be accurate to the nearest one-half (1/2) inch. This data is used in the determination of tree
significance and replacement value (if necessary).
(C) Trees may be measured with a caliper, cruise stick, standard tape measure or diameter tape.
(D) Trees defined by their size and location as protected trees shall be noted as such and measured as shown:
(4) Tree types should be accurate to the species level (e.g., post oak, Spanish oak, cedar, elm, etc.). Tree types may be listed by common
names or botanical names. Additional information which would greatly aid project designers and reviewers in their efforts would include
crown configuration, crown clearance, condition, and tree number.
(5) If there is an area which is known at the time of the survey to be on the project site or easement but outside the buildable area, a
limit-of-construction line may be established. Trees beyond this line need not be surveyed provided the following conditions are met:
(A) The limits of construction must be fenced throughout all phases of construction.
(B) A general description of the numbers, types and sizes of trees in the area beyond the limits of construction must be provided
as a plan note.
(6) The standard tree graphics discussed below are important to provide consistent information in the most useful format for efficient
plan review.
(A) The trunk location on the plan must represent the center of the trunk at ground level in the field. If the tree leans substantially
above that point, show the direction of the lean with an arrow. For example, an oak tree with a trunk caliper measuring fifteen (15)
inches would be represented to scale on plans with a fifteen-foot circle.
(B) Trees are to be represented on plans by a concentric circle centered on the trunk location, with a diameter equal in feet to
twice the number of inches of the tree's trunk caliper inches.
(i) The area within the circle is referred to as the critical root zone (CRZ). The CRZ is used by plan reviewers to determine
compliance with design standards and construction specifications.
(ii) A circle is graphically efficient to produce and represents the most likely configuration of a tree's root pattern even when
the crown is skewed or one sided. The ratio of circle diameter to trunk caliper inch is based on typical dripline distances noted
on open grown trees with full crowns. The dripline standard for critical root zone area is being used as a practical meter despite
the fact that a tree's roots often extend two (2) to three (3) times beyond the dripline.
(iii) Trees proposed to be retained are to be represented by a solid circle. Trees proposed to be removed are to be represented
by a dashed circle.
(iv) Trees proposed to be planted are to be graphically differentiated from existing trees.
(C) Tree caliper inches and types shall be shown on the plan. This information should be shown adjacent to each trunk location.
(D) For very large sites with many trees, this data may be shown in legend form referenced by a tree number adjacent to each
trunk location subject to the following restrictions:
(i) Legends must be shown on the plan sheets on which the corresponding trees appear; or
(ii) Legends may be submitted in book format for review purposes, but the legend [sic]
(b) Tree preservation design criteria.
(1) Critical root zone impacts. A tree's root system ranges well beyond the dripline. The critical root zone (CRZ) has been established
to set a practical limit beyond which any loss of roots would not have a significant impact on a tree's survival. Design constraints often
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/526
dictate that trees slated for preservation have some encroachment on their critical root zone. Weighing this fact with what appears to be an
acceptable degree of risk to most trees, the following minimum design criteria (maximum allowable impacts) have been established:
(A) A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the critical root zone shall be preserved at natural grade, with natural ground cover.
(B) No cut or fill greater than four (4) inches shall be located closer to the tree trunk than one half (1/2) the CRZ radius distance.
(C) This standard requires that construction impacts associated with various design features be considered. For example, the
installation of a curb typically requires excavation of two (2) feet behind the back of curb. In such a case, the line of impact on the
CRZ will be two (2) feet behind the curbline shown on the plan.
(2) In order to assure that the remaining root zones are adequately preserved, project designers should show the tree protection fence
locations on plans for those trees with CRZ infringements.
(3) The following is the minimum design criteria (maximum allowable impact) for tree crowns:
(A) A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the viable portion of a tree's crown may be removed.
(B) Construction methods must also be considered when implementing this design standard. For example, a building wall may
only require the removal of thirty percent (30%) of the crown, but the scaffolding necessary to construct the building may require
the removal of another twenty percent (20%) of the crown.
(4) These criteria represent minimum standards for determining whether or not a tree is “preserved.” Greater impacts may be allowed,
provided that all design alternatives have been proven unfeasible and that some acceptable form of mitigation such as a remedial care
program is negotiated. Conversely, some cases may require that a larger area of root zone be preserved to increase the survival potential of
particularly significant trees.
(5) These design criteria are enforced in the field as well as on the plan. Plan adjustments made during construction must be reviewed
and approved by the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
(6) Fifty percent (50%) of the existing number of trees or total caliper inches of trees on site that are eight-inch caliper or greater and
are from species included in the preferred plant list or of equivalent value shall be retained and protected.
(7) The existing hardwood trees surveyed between 6" and 7.9" and retained on site may count toward the site tree cover and mitigation
of heritage and protected trees, pursuant to subsection (c) and (d), herein as amended, at a ratio of 0.5:1.
(c) Preservation of protected trees.
(1) General requirements.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) or in accordance with subsection (1)(B) of this section, it is unlawful to
remove a protected tree without written approval of the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
(B) Preliminary plans and site development plans depicting any protected trees shall be submitted to the Director of Development
Services, or their designee for evaluation and recommendation for administrative approval or, when required, submission to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Final approval of the final plat or site plan constitutes an approval for removal of a protected
tree, provided it is specifically identified on the plat or site plan as being removed with the development and provided that each such
removal is specifically reviewed and approved by the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
(C) The location of all proposed buildings and improvements shall be oriented by the applicant, to the greatest extent in a manner
which allows for the preservation of protected trees.
(D) In the case of new development, any mitigation or contribution required under this section shall be satisfied prior to issuance
of a final certificate of occupancy or commencement of permanent utilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/526
(E) All pruning must be performed by an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist, or under the direct
supervision of an ISA certified arborist, and must follow the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 standards.
(2) Exceptions. A protected tree may be removed without an application only if the protected tree is damaged by a natural disaster such
as a tornado, storm, flood or other act of God, and presents an immediate hazard that endangers public health, welfare or safety, then no
application shall be required for removal of only the hazardous portion of the tree, provided that the removal is effected in a timely
manner so as to maintain the integrity and vigor of the tree and the owner preserves and forwards to the Director of Development
Services, or their designee documentation of the damage, which shall include photographs of any damage.
(3) Application requirements.
(A) Application for the removal of a protected tree located on public property or in any public street, alley, right-of-way, or
easement shall be made by any City department or any public utility or political subdivision of the State with authority to install
utility lines or other public facilities in or above the property, street, alley, right-of-way or easement on which such tree is located, or
by the owner of real property abutting upon the site of the tree or its crown.
(B) Application for the removal of a protected tree located on privately owned property shall be made by the owner of the
property on which such tree is located, except that an appropriate City official may make application on behalf of the owner of the
property on which the tree is located to remove a tree that constitutes a hazard to the safety of persons or property, or that is
seriously diseased.
(C) The application shall be via the City's protected tree removal application form, signed by the applicant or their authorized
representative, and submitted to the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
(D) Upon receipt of a completed application for removal of a protected tree, the Director of Development Services, or their
designee shall inspect the subject tree and shall approve or deny the request within a period of ten (10) working days. The Director
of Development Services, or their designee shall promptly send written notice of such approval or denial to the applicant.
(E) The Director of Development Services, or their designee shall not approve a protected tree removal application unless such
removal is within the spirit and intent of this Article and:
(i) The City or the State department of transportation determines the protected tree is located in a sight triangle or clear zone
of a public street;
(ii) The Director of Development Services, or their designee determines the protected tree to be dead, dying, or diseased and
either:
a. It constitutes a hazard to life or property which cannot reasonably be mitigated without removal of the tree; or
b. Its restoration to sound condition is not practicable or its disease is reasonably transmittable and expected to
endanger the health of other trees;
(iii) The protected tree is located on or within twenty (20) feet of an area that will be used for a building, recreation area,
roadway, public street, alley, or right-of-way, drainage right-of-way, public access easement, or utility easement;
(iv) The protected tree would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use and enjoyment of their single-family residential
property; or
(v) The protected tree would deny a governmental entity or political subdivision of this State reasonable use of public
property for the achievement of its public purposes.
(F) If a protected tree removal is approved pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the applicant must comply with all
applicable provisions of this section, including mitigation.
(G) Approval for removal of a protected tree shall remain valid for the shorter of:
(i) The period stated on the Director of Development Services, or their designee written approval issued pursuant to this
section or on a final plat, site development plan, or alternative landscape plan approved pursuant to this Article; or
(ii) The minimum period allowable by law.
(4) Mitigation; on-site.
(A) Upon approval of protected tree removal application, the applicant shall, no later than thirty (30) days from the date of
approval of the application, submit a mitigation plan showing the proposed type, location, and irrigation plan for the proposed
replacement trees.
(B) The mitigation plan must provide for planting of replacement shade/canopy trees at a 1:1 ratio for each protected tree that is
8" to 18.9" caliper inch and will be removed.
(C) The mitigation plan must provide for planting of replacement shade/canopy trees at a 2:1 ratio for each protected tree that is
19" to 25.9" caliper inch and will be removed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/526
(D) No replacement trees shall be planted until the Director of Development Services, or their designee has reviewed and
approved the mitigation plan.
(E) Replacement trees shall comply with the preferred plant list of this Article.
(F) Transplanting of protected trees. Protected trees can be transplanted to a suitable location on the same property or off site,
without the requirement of further mitigation, if the applicant complies with the generally accepted transplanting methods of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI A300 Standards) and the tree survives for a period of at least two (2) years.
(G) No mitigation required. The mitigation provisions of this section shall not be required under the following circumstances:
(i) For the removal of a protected tree located in a sight triangle or clear zone of a public street, as confirmed by the City or
the state department of transportation;
(ii) For the removal of any protected tree the Director of Development Services, or their designee determines to be dead,
dying, or diseased and hazardous, unlikely to recover, or reasonably expected to endanger the health of other trees;
(iii) For the removal of a protected tree that is located in a dedicated public right-of-way or that would otherwise deny a
governmental entity or political subdivision of this State reasonable use of public property for the achievement of its public
purposes.
(H) Maintenance. If any of the trees required to be retained or trees planted as part of the landscaping plan should die within a
period of two (2) years after issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the owner of the property shall replace the trees within six (6)
months.
(5) Mitigation; off-site or cash in lieu. If the Director of Development Services, or their designee determines that mitigation for
protected tree removal by replanting trees on site is not feasible, e.g., planting capacity has been reached on site, the Director of
Development Services, or their designee may approve:
(A) Planting the same number and type of replacement trees required under this subsection (c)(4), as amended, in a City park or
other designated area;
(B) Payment into the tree fund of $150.00 per caliper inch at a ratio of 1:1 for removal of protected trees that are 8" to 18.9". This
fee will be used by the City for installation and maintenance of trees in City parks and other City-owned properties;
(C) Payment of $300.00 per caliper inch at a ratio of 2:1 for removal of protected trees that are 16" to 25.9". This fee will be used
by the City for installation and maintenance of trees in City parks and other City-owned properties;
(D) Some reasonable combination of such off-site mitigation and payment.
(6) Preservation incentives. If removal of a protected tree is proposed due to efforts to comply with other provisions of this code, the
applicant may request that the Parks Director, Director of Engineering, and Director of Development Services, after consultation with the
Director of Development Service, or their designee, consider the following preservation incentives in exchange for the nonremoval and
preservation of the protected tree:
(A) Parking space reductions. Reduction in the minimum parking requirements as necessary to save and/or properly protect a
protected tree.
(B) Sidewalks. Modification to sidewalks, their location and possibly the width and curb requirements as necessary to facilitate
protecting a protected tree.
(C) Landscape credits. The actual tree canopy of a protected tree may be credited toward the requirements of section 14.07.011 of
this Code; however, any credits earned will not count towards replacement credits of any other protected tree in the event a
subsequent protected tree removal application is approved for the same project.
(D) Parkland dedication credit. The parkland dedication requirement for a residential subdivision may be reduced up to five (5)
dwelling units for each protected tree saved, provided that the protected tree saved is located on public parkland, private parkland, or
open space.
(7) Protected tree protection during construction.
(A) Prior to the commencement of any development, a tree protection fence constructed of approved materials shall encompass
the CRZ of any protected tree. Said tree protection fence must be maintained throughout the construction process.
(B) During construction, no materials including but not limited to excess soil, vehicles, equipment, liquids, trash, or construction
debris may be placed inside of the tree protection fence, nor shall the tree protection fence be altered in any way so as to increase the
encroachment of the construction.
(C) Excavation, grading, soil deposit, impervious covering, drainage and leveling within the CRZ of protected trees is prohibited
unless approved by the Director of Development Services, or their designee. Any impervious cover proposed within the CRZ of a
protected tree will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the Director of Development Services, or their designee upon field
inspections and or plan reviews. In any case, generally no more than 25% of the CRZ of any protected tree can be covered with
impervious cover. Any protective fencing being used around heritage trees may only be reduced while impervious cover activity is
being done. The remainder of the protective fencing must stay intact for the duration of the project.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/526
(D) Disposal or depositing of oil, gasoline, chemicals, paints, solvents or other materials is prohibited within the CRZ of protected
trees.
(E) The attachment of wires, signs and ropes to any protected tree is prohibited.
(F) The location of utility service and irrigation lines inside the CRZ of protected trees is only allowed when approved by the
Director of Development Services, or their designee. If boring is used to provide underground utility access, the minimum length of
the bore shall be the width of the tree's mature canopy. The minimum depth of the bore shall be specified by the Director of
Development Services, or their designee, but in no event be less than 24" below the natural grade existing prior to any development
activity within the CRZ.
(G) Soil disturbance or other injurious and detrimental activity within the CRZ of protected trees is prohibited.
(H) At applicant's expense, an ISA certified arborist or their employee(s) shall be present whenever activities occur which will
pose a potential threat to the health of the protected tree such as pruning, or whenever any work needs to be done within the CRZ of
such tree.
(I) The applicant shall notify the Director of Development Services, or their designee whenever any damage or injury occurs to a
protected tree during construction so that proper treatment may be administered.
(8) Violations; penalties.
(A) Any person intentionally, knowingly, or negligently causes damage to a protected tree shall be required to take such steps as
may be required by the Director of Development Services, or their designee to assure the future vitality of the tree, including costs
of chemical or other types of treatment and/or construction of protective barriers, or if the Director of Development Services, or
their designee determines that the damaged protected tree is no longer reasonably sustainable, the person shall be required to replant
replacement trees at two (2) times the amount specified in subsection (c)(4), as amended, and shall pay a civil penalty in the amount
of $1,000.00 for each protected tree that was damaged.
(B) Any person who intentionally, knowingly, or negligently removes a protected tree in violation of this Article shall be required
to replant replacement trees at two (2) times the amount specified in subsection (c)(4), as amended, and shall pay a civil penalty in
the amount of $1,000.00 for each protected tree that was removed.
(C) If the Director of Development Services, or their designee, determines that the on-site replacement required by this subsection
is not feasible, the Director of Development Services, or their designee, may approve either:
(i) Planting replacement trees from the selection specified in the preferred plant list at two (2) times the amount specified in
subsection (c)(4), as amended in a City park or other designated area;
(ii) Payment of two (2) times the amount specified in subsection (c)(5), as amended inch of protected tree removed into the
tree fund or account for use by the City for installation and maintenance of trees in City parks and other City-owned
properties; or
(iii) Some reasonable combination of such off-site replacement and payment, as determined by the Director of Development
Services, or their designee.
(d) Preservation of heritage trees.
(1) General requirements.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) or in accordance with subsection (1)(B) of this section, it is unlawful to
remove or prune a heritage tree without written approval of the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
(B) Preliminary plans and site development plans depicting any heritage trees shall be submitted to the Director of Development
Services, or their designee for evaluation and recommendation for administrative approval or, when required, submission to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Final approval of the final plat or site plan constitutes an approval for removal or pruning of a
heritage tree, provided it is specifically identified on the plat or site plan as being removed with the development and provided that
each such removal is specifically reviewed and approved by the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
(C) The location of all proposed buildings and improvements shall be oriented by the applicant, to the greatest extent in a manner
which allows for the preservation of heritage trees.
(D) In the case of new development, any mitigation or contribution required under this section shall be satisfied prior to issuance
of a final certificate of occupancy or commencement of permanent utilities.
(E) All pruning must be performed by an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist, or under the direct
supervision of an ISA certified arborist, and must follow the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 standards.
(2) Exceptions. A heritage tree may be removed or pruned without an application only under the following circumstances:
(A) Hazardous condition. If a heritage tree is damaged by a natural disaster such as a tornado, storm, flood or other act of God,
and presents an immediate hazard that endangers public health, welfare or safety, then no application shall be required for removal
or pruning of only the hazardous portion of the tree, provided that the removal or pruning is effected in a timely manner so as to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/526
maintain the integrity and vigor of the tree and the owner preserves and forwards to the Director of Development Services, or their
designee documentation of the damage, which shall include photographs of any damage.
(B) City, public utilities, and governmental entities. Pruning the canopy of heritage trees may be carried out by the City, public
utility, governmental entity, or political subdivision of this State without an application if performed by an International Society of
Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist or under the direct supervision of an ISA certified arborist.
(3) Application requirements.
(A) Application for the removal or pruning of a heritage tree located on public property or in any public street, alley, right-of-way,
or easement shall be made by any City department or any public utility or political subdivision of the State with authority to install
utility lines or other public facilities in or above the property, street, alley, right-of-way or easement on which such tree is located, or
by the owner of real property abutting upon the site of the tree or its crown.
(B) Application for the removal or pruning of a heritage tree located on privately owned property shall be made by the owner of
the property on which such tree is located, except that an appropriate City official may make application on behalf of the owner of
the property on which the tree is located to remove a tree that constitutes a hazard to the safety of persons or property, or that is
seriously diseased.
(C) The application shall be via the City's protected tree removal application form, signed by the applicant or their authorized
representative, and submitted to the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
(D) Upon receipt of a completed application for heritage tree removal or pruning, the Director of Development Services, or their
designee shall inspect the subject tree and shall approve or deny the request within a period of ten (10) working days. The Director
of Development Services, or their designee shall promptly send written notice of such approval or denial to the applicant.
(E) The Director of Development Services, or their designee shall not approve a heritage tree removal or pruning application
unless such removal or pruning is within the spirit and intent of this Article and:
(i) The City or the State department of transportation determines the heritage tree is located in a sight triangle or clear zone
of a public street;
(ii) The application seeks approval for pruning of thirty (30) percent or less of a heritage tree's viable crown;
(iii) The Director of Development Services, or their designee determines the heritage tree to be dead, dying, or diseased and
either:
a. It constitutes a hazard to life or property which cannot reasonably be mitigated without removal or pruning of the
tree; or
b. Its restoration to sound condition is not practicable or its disease is reasonably transmittable and expected to
endanger the health of other trees;
(iv) The heritage tree is located on or within twenty (20) feet of an area that will be used for a building, recreation area,
roadway, public street, alley, or right-of-way, drainage right of-way, public access easement, or utility easement;
(v) The heritage tree would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use and enjoyment of their single-family residential
property; or
(vi) The heritage tree would deny a governmental entity or political subdivision of this State reasonable use of public
property for the achievement of its public purposes.
(F) If a heritage tree removal application is approved pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the applicant must comply with
all applicable provisions of this section, including mitigation.
(G) Approval for removal of a heritage tree shall remain valid for the shorter of:
(i) The period stated on the Director of Development Services, or their designee's written approval issued pursuant to this
section or on a final plat, site development plan, or alternative landscape plan approved pursuant to this Article; or
(ii) The minimum period allowable by law.
(4) Mitigation; on-site.
(A) Upon approval of heritage tree removal application, the applicant shall, no later than thirty (30) days from the date of
approval of the application, submit a mitigation plan showing the proposed type, location, and irrigation plan for the proposed
replacement trees.
(B) The mitigation plan must provide for planting of replacement shade/canopy trees at a ratio of 3:1 for each heritage tree
removed.
(C) No replacement trees shall be planted until the mitigation plan has been approved by the Director of Development Services, or
their designee.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/526
(D) Replacement trees shall comply with the preferred plant list of this Article.
(E) Transplanting of heritage trees. Heritage trees can be transplanted to a suitable location on the same property or off site,
without the requirement of further mitigation, if the applicant complies with the generally accepted transplanting methods of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI A300 Standards) and the tree survives for a period of at least two (2) years.
(F) No mitigation required. The mitigation provisions of this section shall not be required under the following circumstances:
(i) For the removal of a heritage tree located in a sight triangle or clear zone of a public street, as confirmed by the City or
the State department of transportation;
(ii) For the removal of any heritage tree the Director of Development Services, or their designee determines to be dead,
dying, or diseased and hazardous, unlikely to recover, or reasonably expected to endanger the health of other trees;
(iii) For pruning of thirty (30) percent or less of a heritage tree's viable crown; or
(iv) For the removal of a heritage tree that is located in a dedicated public right-of-way or that would otherwise deny a
governmental entity or political subdivision of this State reasonable use of public property for the achievement of its public
purposes.
(G) Maintenance. If any of the trees required to be retained or trees planted as part of the landscaping plan should die within a
period of two (2) years after issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the owner of the property shall replace the trees within six (6)
months.
(5) Mitigation; off-site or cash in lieu. If the Director of Development Services, or their designee determines that mitigation for heritage
tree removal by replanting trees on site is not feasible, e.g., planting capacity has been reached on site, an applicant may choose one of the
following alternatives in lieu of replanting on site:
(A) Planting the same number and type of replacement shade/canopy trees required under subsection (d)(4), as amended, in a City
park or other designated area;
(B) Payment of $450.00 per caliper inch at a ratio of 3:1 for removal of heritage trees 26" and above. This fee will be used by the
City for installation and maintenance of trees in City parks and other City-owned properties;
(C) Some reasonable combination of such off-site mitigation and payment.
(6) Preservation incentives. If removal of a heritage tree is proposed due to efforts to comply with other provisions of this code, the
applicant may request that the Parks Director, Director of Engineering, and director of planning, after consultation with the Director of
Development Services, or their designee, consider the following preservation incentives in exchange for the nonremoval and preservation
of the heritage tree:
(A) Parking space reductions. Reduction in the minimum parking requirements as necessary to save and/or properly protect a
heritage tree.
(B) Sidewalks. Modification to sidewalks, their location and possibly the width and curb requirements as necessary to facilitate
protecting a heritage tree.
(C) Landscape credits. The actual tree canopy of a heritage tree may be credited toward the requirements of section 14.07.011 of
this Code; however, any credits earned will not count towards replacement credits of any other heritage tree in the event a
subsequent heritage tree removal application is approved for the same project.
(D) Parkland dedication credit. The parkland dedication requirement for a residential subdivision may be reduced up to five (5)
dwelling units for each heritage tree saved, provided that the heritage tree saved is located on public parkland, private parkland, or
open space.
(7) Heritage tree protection during construction.
(A) Prior to the commencement of any development, a tree protection fence constructed of approved materials shall encompass
the CRZ of any heritage tree. Said tree protection fence must be maintained throughout the construction process.
(B) During construction, no materials including but not limited to excess soil, vehicles, equipment, liquids, trash, or construction
debris may be placed inside of the tree protection fence, nor shall the tree protection fence be altered in any way so as to increase the
encroachment of the construction.
(C) Excavation, grading, soil deposit, impervious covering, drainage and leveling within the CRZ of heritage trees is prohibited
unless approved by the Director of Development Services, or their designee. Any impervious cover proposed within the CRZ of a
heritage tree will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the Director of Development Services, or their designee upon field
inspections and/or plan reviews. In any case, generally no more than 25% of the CRZ of any heritage tree can be covered with
impervious cover. Any protective fencing being used around heritage trees may only be reduced while impervious cover activity is
being done. The remainder of the protective fencing must stay intact for the duration of the project.
(D) Disposal or depositing of oil, gasoline, chemicals, paints, solvents or other materials is prohibited within the CRZ of heritage
trees.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/526
(E) The attachment of wires, signs and ropes to any heritage tree is prohibited.
(F) The location of utility service and irrigation lines inside the CRZ of heritage trees is only allowed when approved by the
Director of Development Services, or their designee. If boring is used to provide underground utility access, the minimum length of
the bore shall be the width of the tree's mature canopy. The minimum depth of the bore shall be specified by the Director of
Development Services, or their designee, but in no event be less than 24" below the natural grade existing prior to any development
activity within the CRZ.
(G) Soil disturbance or other injurious and detrimental activity within the CRZ of heritage trees is prohibited.
(H) At applicant's expense, an ISA certified arborist or their employee(s) shall be present whenever activities occur which will
pose a potential threat to the health of the heritage tree such as pruning, or whenever any work needs to be done within the CRZ of
such tree.
(I) The applicant shall notify the Director of Development Services, or their designee whenever any damage or injury occurs to a
heritage tree during construction so that proper treatment may be administered.
(8) Violations; penalties.
(A) Any person intentionally, knowingly, or negligently causes damage to a heritage tree shall be required to take such steps as
may be required by the Director of Development Services, or their designee to assure the future vitality of the tree, including costs
of chemical or other types of treatment and/or construction of protective barriers, or if the Director of Development Services, or
their designee determines that the damaged heritage tree is no longer reasonably sustainable, the person shall be required to replant
replacement trees at two (2) times the amount specified in subsection (d)(4), as amended, and shall pay a civil penalty in the amount
of $1,000.00 for each heritage tree that was damaged.
(B) Any person who intentionally, knowingly, or negligently removes a heritage tree in violation of this Article shall be required
to replant replacement trees at two (2) times the amount specified in subsection (d)(4), as amended, and shall pay a civil penalty in
the amount of $1,000.00 for each heritage tree that was removed.
(C) If the Director of Development Services, or their designee, determines that the on-site replacement required by this subsection
(d) is not feasible, the Director of Development Services, or their designee, may approve either:
(i) Planting replacement trees from the selection specified in the preferred plant list at a caliper ratio of two (2) times the
amount specified in subsection (d)(4), as amended the same number and type of replacement trees required under this
subsection in a City park or other designated area;
(ii) Payment of two (2) times the amount specified in subsection (d)(5), as amended caliper inch of heritage tree removed
into the tree fund or account for use by the City for installation and maintenance of trees in City parks and other City-owned
properties; or
(iii) Some reasonable combination of such off-site replacement and payment, as determined by the Director of Development
Services, or their designee.
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
Sec. 12.12.023 Variances for design standards
(a) The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a variance from the regulations of this Article if it finds that all of the following are met:
(1) There are special conditions unique to the property, such as lot size, shape, orientation, topography, or other physical features, that
are not generally characteristic of other properties in the area;
(2) Due to these special conditions, strict application of this section would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of the property and
result in an undue hardship;
(3) The undue hardship is not self-induced or created by the applicant, nor is it strictly pecuniary/financial;
(4) The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the applicant;
(5) Granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare;
(6) Granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly development of the applicant's land and/or land in the
vicinity in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter; and
(7) Granting of the variance would be within the spirit of this Chapter and would result in substantial justice.
(b) In granting a variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission may impose such additional conditions if necessary and desirable in the public
interest.
(c) Such findings of the Planning and Zoning Commission, together with the specific facts upon which findings are based, shall be incorporated
into the official minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which such variance is granted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/526
(d) All requested variances from this Chapter shall be made to the Development Services Department in writing at least thirty (30) working days
prior to the date on which consideration is to be given by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(e) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each application:
(1) Written notice of all public hearings on proposed variances shall be sent to all owners of property, or to the person rendering the
same for City taxes, located within the area of application and within two hundred feet (200') of any property affected thereby, within not
less than ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the latest
approved tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail.
(2) Notice of all public hearings on proposed variances shall also appear in the local newspaper of general circulation within not less
than ten (10) days before such hearing is held.
(f) Positive action by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be recorded in the County Clerk's office.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.12.024 Appeals
If the applicant disagrees with the action of the planning and zoning commission, he may appeal the decision to city council. The request for appeal
must be made in writing within ten (10) days of the planning and zoning commission's decision.
ARTICLE 12.13 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Sec. 12.13.001 Compliance
(a) In addition to the requirements established by this chapter, all development within the city limits shall be designed so as to comply with all
applicable city codes and ordinances as well as the City of Austin Standards, except for environmental and utility; and all development within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall comply with this chapter and all applicable city/county codes and ordinances.
(b) A subdivision inspection fee shall be paid to the city for the inspection of subdivision improvements, including street, drainage, water,
wastewater and revegetation improvements and erosion controls used during construction. The subdivision inspection fee shall be paid prior to the
approval of plans and specifications by the Public Works Department. The subdivision inspection fee shall be in accordance with the fee schedule
found in appendix A of the city's code of ordinances.
Sec. 12.13.002 Construction plans
(a) Purpose. Construction plans, based upon the approved final plat, and consisting of detailed specifications and diagrams illustrating the location,
design, and composition of all improvements identified in the preliminary plan phase and required by this chapter and other applicable city
ordinances, codes and policies, shall be submitted to the city for approval. In addition, any project that necessitates the construction, reconstruction or
modification of existing city infrastructure shall also be submitted to the city for approval. The plans shall be kept by the city as a permanent record
of required improvements in order to:
(1) Provide better records that facilitate the operation and maintenance of, and any future modifications to existing city infrastructure.
(2) Provide data for evaluation of materials, methods of construction and design.
(3) Provide documentation of approved public improvements to ensure that all such improvements are built to city standards and
specifications.
(4) No final plat shall be certified by the city, and no construction activities shall commence, until such time as construction plans
completely describing the on-site and off-site improvements required by this chapter and other applicable city ordinances and codes, have
been approved by the Public Works Department.
(b) Format. Drawings shall be on twenty-two-inch by thirty-four-inch (22"x34") sheets at generally accepted horizontal and vertical engineering
scales.
(c) Content. Construction plans shall include all on- and off-site improvements required to serve the proposed development as indicated on the
approved preliminary plan and in compliance with applicable ordinances, codes, standards and policies of the city, and other applicable governmental
entities. All construction plans shall be signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Texas, and shall
contain or have attached thereto:
(1) Cover sheet.
(A) The appropriate project name, date, and the name, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant, engineer and surveyor, etc.
(B) A location map showing the relation of the subdivision to streets and other prominent features in all directions for a radius of
at least one (1) mile using a scale of one inch equals two thousand feet (1" = 2,000'). The latest edition of the USGS 7.5 minute
quadrangle map is recommended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/526
(C) An index with consecutive sheet numbers.
(2) General notes. Current City of Cedar Park subdivision construction notes.
(3) Street and roadway systems.
(A) The horizontal layouts and alignments showing geometric data and other pertinent design details. The horizontal layout shall
also show the direction of stormwater flow and the location of manholes, inlets and special structures;
(B) Vertical layouts and alignments showing existing and proposed centerline, right and left right-of-way line elevations along
each proposed roadway.[;]
(C) Typical right-of-way cross-sections showing pertinent design details and elevations as prescribed in the city standard details
and specifications;
(D) Typical paving sections showing right-of-way width, lane widths, median widths, shoulder widths, and pavement
recommendations;
(E) Attendant documents containing any additional information required to evaluate the proposed roadway improvements,
including geotechnical information and traffic impact studies; and
(4) Drainage improvements.
(A) Detailed design of all drainage facilities as indicated in the preliminary plan phase, including typical channel or paving
section, storm sewers and other stormwater control facilities.
(B) Typical channel cross-sections, plan and profile drawings of every conduit/channel shall be shown.
(C) Existing and proposed topographic conditions indicating one-foot contour intervals for slopes less than 5%, two-foot contour
intervals for slopes between five percent (5%) and ten percent (10%), and five-foot contour intervals for slopes exceeding ten
percent (10%), and referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coastal and Geodetic Survey benchmark or monument.
(D) Attendant documents containing design computations in accordance with this chapter, and any additional information required
to evaluate the proposed drainage improvements.
(E) A copy of the complete application for floodplain map amendment or revision, as required by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), if applicable.
(5) Erosion and sedimentation controls.
(A) Proposed fill or other structure-elevating techniques, levees, channel modifications and detention facilities.
(B) Existing and proposed topographic conditions with vertical intervals not greater than one (1) foot referenced to a United
States Geological Survey or Coastal and Geodetic Survey benchmark or monument.
(C) The location, size, and character of all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control facilities with specifications
detailing all on-site erosion control measures which will be established and maintained during all periods of development and
construction.
(D) Contractor staging areas, vehicle access areas, temporary and permanent spoils storage areas.
(E) A plan for restoration for the mitigation of erosion in all areas disturbed during construction.
(6) Water distribution systems.
(A) The layout, size and specific location of the existing and proposed water mains, pump stations, storage tanks and other related
structures sufficient to serve the proposed land uses and development as identified in the preliminary plan phase and in accordance
with the city standard details and specifications.
(B) The existing and proposed location of fire hydrants, valves, meters and other fittings.
(C) Design details showing the connection with the existing city water system.
(D) The specific location and size of all water service connections for each individual lot.
(E) Attendant documents containing any additional information required to evaluate the proposed water distribution system.
(7) Wastewater collection systems.
(A) The layout, size and specific location of the existing and proposed wastewater lines, manholes, lift stations, and other related
structures sufficient to serve the land uses and development as identified in the preliminary plan phase, in accordance with all
current city standards, specifications, and criteria for construction of wastewater systems.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/526
(B) Plan and profile drawings for each line in public rights-of-ways or public utility easements, showing existing ground level
elevation at centerline of pipe, pipe size and flow line elevation at all bends, drops, turns, and station numbers at fifty-foot intervals.
(C) Design details for manholes and special structures. Flow line elevations shall be shown at every point where the line enters or
leaves the manholes.
(D) Detailed design for lift stations, package plants or other special wastewater structures.
(E) Attendant documents containing any additional information required to evaluate the proposed wastewater system, and
complete an application for state health department approval.
(8) Street lighting.
(A) The location, size, type and description of street lights according to city standard details and specifications.
(B) All electric service lines to serve street lights shall be located entirely within the city's right-of-way, unless approved in
writing by the Director of Engineering or his/her designee.
(9) Street signs. The location, size, type and description of street signs according to city standard details and specifications.
(10) Speed limit signs and permanent traffic barricades. The location, size (where applicable), and type of speed limit signs and
permanent traffic barricades according to city standard details and specifications.
(11) Sidewalks.
(A) All sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standard details and specifications, Transportation
Criteria Manual, transportation master plan and any other applicable city codes and ordinances[.]
(b) Sidewalks associated with a residential subdivision that are not located adjacent to a residential lot are required to be built by
the developer at the same time as the subdivision improvements.
(C) Sidewalks associated with a residential subdivision that were not built with the subdivision improvements and are adjacent to
residential lots are required to be built by the homebuilder.
(D) Sidewalks associated with commercial development are required to be constructed on all sides of all streets within and
immediately adjacent to the proposed development.
(12) Improvements for parks and other public and common areas. As identified and/or approved on the preliminary plan.
(13) The location, size and description of all significant trees (to remain and to be removed), and replacement trees to meet the
requirements of landscape and tree ordinance.
(14) Landscaping and screening. The location, size and description of all landscaping and screening materials as required by the zoning
ordinance and landscape and tree ordinance.
(15) Design criteria. Final design criteria, reports, calculations, and all other related computations, if not previously submitted with the
preliminary plan.
(16) Cost estimates. A cost estimate of each required improvement, prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Texas.
(d) Procedure. After all necessary approvals of the preliminary plan have been granted, construction plans, together with a completed application
form and review fee, shall be submitted to the Public Works Department for approval.
(1) Construction plans may be submitted for review and approval simultaneously with a final plat, provided however that the final plat
shall not be approved until the construction plans have been approved. If the construction plans and the final plat are to be reviewed
simultaneously, a complete application for construction plans and a complete application for final plat must be submitted to the city
simultaneously.
(2) City staff shall review all construction plan submittals for completeness at the time of application. If in the judgment of the city, the
construction plan submittal substantially fails to meet the minimal informational requirements as outlined above, it will not be accepted
for review.
(3) The Engineering Department shall review the construction plans to insure compliance with this chapter, and other applicable city
ordinances, codes, standards and specifications, and good engineering practices.
(4) For projects located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the construction plans and attendant documents shall also be
provided to the county for review and approval. The applicant shall be responsible for any additional information required by the county
for construction plan approval.
(5) For projects located within the Lake Travis watershed, the construction plans shall be provided to the city for compliance with the
Lake Travis and Upper Highland Lakes Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Ordinance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/526
(e) Approval. Within thirty (30) days of the date on which all required information has been accepted for review, the Public Works Department
shall either approve or disapprove the construction plans.
(1) If the construction plans are disapproved, the Public Works Department shall notify the applicant, in writing, of disapproval and
indicate the requirements for bringing the construction plans into compliance.
(2) If construction plans are approved, then the Public Works Department shall sign the cover sheet of the construction plans, returning
one (1) signed copy to the applicant and retaining the other signed copy for city records.
(3) The applicant should be aware that specific approvals from other agencies may be required.
(4) All improvements shown in the approved construction plans shall be constructed pursuant to and in compliance with the approved
plans, except as otherwise specifically approved.
(f) Revision. Where it becomes necessary, due to unforeseen circumstances, for corrections to be made to construction plans for which approval
has already been obtained, the Public Works Department shall have the authority to approve such corrections when, in his/her opinion, such changes
are warranted and also in conformance with city requirements. Approval of such changes agreed to between the applicant and Public Works
Department shall be noted by initialing and dating by both parties on the two (2) original signed copies of the construction plans. Revisions to the
construction plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Department prior to construction of the revisions.
(g) Responsibility. Notwithstanding the approval of any construction plans by the council, the Engineering Department, the applicant and the
engineer that prepares and submits such plans and specifications shall be and remain responsible for the adequacy of the design of all such
improvements; and nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to relieve or waive the responsibility of the applicant or his/her engineer for
or with respect to any design, plans and specifications submitted.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/7/12)
ARTICLE 12.14 PRIVATE STREETS AND GATED SUBDIVISIONS
Sec. 12.14.001 Use of private streets
Private streets and alleys in lieu of public streets and alleys may be used providing that the development complies with the requirements of this
Article. The term private street shall include alleys.
Sec. 12.14.002 Design and construction standards
(a) Private streets shall be designed in accordance with the design standards of this Chapter, and all other applicable standards as prescribed by the
City.
(b) All alleys, sidewalks, drainage facilities, storm sewer lines, water and wastewater lines, street lighting, signage, markings and related
improvements shall be designed, placed and constructed in accordance with the City's general design standards, as amended.
(c) Alternative street/drive designs may be considered in the mixed use (MU), planning area (PA) and planned development (PD) zoning districts
upon approval by the Director of Engineering.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.14.003 Streets excluded
(a) Streets designated on the transportation master plan as a major arterial or minor arterial shall not be used, maintained or constructed as private
streets.
(b) The Planning and Zoning Commission may deny the creation of a private street if it makes a finding of fact, based upon the evidence provided,
that it would:
(1) Negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets; or
(2) Impair access to property either on site or off site of the subdivision; or
(3) Impair access to or from public facilities including schools, parks and libraries.
Sec. 12.14.004 Property owners association
(a) Subdivisions developed with private streets shall establish a mandatory property owners association and shall record applicable deed
restrictions and association documents concurrent with the recordation of the final plat. The association shall own and be responsible for the
maintenance of the private streets and related improvements including but not limited to alleys, sidewalks, drainage facilities, storm sewer lines,
water and wastewater lines, street lighting, signage and markings. Lot deeds shall convey membership in the association and provide for the payment
of dues and assessments required by the association in order to provide for the continuous maintenance of the facilities. The association may not be
dissolved, and no portion of the association documents pertaining to this section may be amended without the written consent of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/526
(b) The property manager shall be required to maintain and file a fidelity bond. The name of the association's president shall be submitted to the
Public Works Department and updated as needed.
(c) The following notice shall appear in bold print on each deed to property in the subdivision, on the plat of the subdivision and on each contract
on the sale of land within the subdivision:
Notice: The lots within this subdivision are governed by a property owners association requiring the payments of fees and/or assessments
for the maintenance of private streets. Failure to pay fees or assessments could result in attachment of a lien on your property by the
association or by the city.
(d) The association documents shall establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of private streets and other improvements, and contain provisions
for reliable access to provide city services and to other utility service providers with appropriate identification. A reserve fund balance report shall be
submitted to the Public Works Department annually to ensure that adequate fund reserves are being maintained for future repairs and/or replacement
costs of the private streets and related improvements.
(e) A professional engineer for the developer shall provide a projected maintenance schedule and an estimate of the annual costs required to repair
and maintain the private streets. The information shall be the basis for the annual reserve fund balance report.
(f) In the event the association fails to maintain the streets in accordance with city standards, the city may repair and maintain the streets and
charge the cost to the association. If the association fails to pay for the maintenance cost, after notice to the property owners, the costs shall be filed
as a lien on all property within the subdivision.
(g) There shall be included on the final plat a statement confirming compliance of all association documents with applicable city ordinances, and
all association documents shall be filed concurrent with the recordation of the final plat.
Sec. 12.14.005 Private streets and easements
(a) Private streets shall be constructed within a designated separate lot or lots owned by the property owners association. Every lot shall have
frontage on, and access to, said lot or lots in lieu of a public street.
(b) An easement encompassing the lot shall be granted to the city providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and their maintenance. The
right shall extend to all utility providers, including telecommunication companies operating within the city. The easement shall also provide the city
with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police
protection, inspection, animal control and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the lot that
impairs emergency access.
Sec. 12.14.006 Construction and maintenance cost
The city shall not be responsible for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street, including but not limited to street lighting,
traffic signs, sidewalks and sidewalk ramps, and pavement markings.
Sec. 12.14.007 Utilities
Water, wastewater, drainage facilities, and water meters shall be placed within the “street lot” and shall be dedicated to the city upon final acceptance
of the subdivision by the city.
Sec. 12.14.008 Improvements and inspections
(a) Developments proposed with private streets shall comply with article 12.13, construction standards, of the comprehensive subdivision
ordinance. In lieu of the two-year maintenance bond provided to the city from the contractor in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
contract price for the street, such period measured from the date of the issuance of a letter of acceptance by the Engineering Department, the bond
shall be issued to the property owners association.
(b) The city may periodically inspect private streets and require repairs necessary to ensure emergency access.
Sec. 12.14.009 Signs
All private traffic signs and markings shall conform to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices. The entrances to all private streets
shall be marked with a sign stating that it is a private street.
Sec. 12.14.010 Access provisions
(a) Guard houses, access-control gates and crossarms shall be constructed within the “street lot.” All restricted access entrances must be provide[d]
a means of ensuring access to the subdivision by the city and other utility service providers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/526
(b) If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required to provide city services, the city may enter the subdivision and remove any gate or
device, which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association, as provided for in the association documents.
Sec. 12.14.011 Entrance design standards
(a) Any private street with an access-control gate shall have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet at the location of
the access-control device. All restricted access gates shall be approved by the fire department and meet access requirements for emergency vehicles
and shall not obstruct pedestrian pathways[.]
(b) Overhead barriers shall not be allowed.
(c) Internal storage for three (3) vehicles shall be provided between the public right-of-way line and the point of the access-control device.
(d) A turnaround area with a radius of forty (40) feet between the point of the access-control device and the access gate shall be provided to allow
a vehicle which is denied access to safely turnaround and exit onto a public street.
(e) On lots adjacent to access gates, screening walls may exceed thirty (30) inches in height, up to a maximum of six (6) feet within the front yard
setback of the adjacent lot. Such wall shall be constructed of wrought iron with brick columns. Solid fencing panels shall not be allowed.
Sec. 12.14.012 Waiver of services
The subdivision final plat, property deeds and property owner association documents shall note that certain city services shall not be provided on
private streets. Among the services, which will not be provided, are: regular street maintenance, with the exception of street sweeping at a frequency
consistent with other subdivisions, routine police patrols, enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and preparation of accident reports.
Depending on the characteristics of the proposed development other services may not be provided.
Sec. 12.14.013 Petition to convert to public streets
(a) The property owners association documents shall allow the association to request the city to accept private streets and alleys and the associated
property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members and upon the favorable vote of fifty-one percent (51%) of
the membership.
(b) Nothing herein shall be construed to require the city's acceptance of private streets as public, and in no event shall the city accept private streets
as public unless said streets have been constructed and maintained to city standards. Should the city elect to accept private streets as public, the city
may inspect the private streets and assess the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the city's acceptance of the streets and
alleys.
(c) The city shall be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. The city may also require, at the association's expense, the removal of
guardhouses, access-control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street lot, and/or replacement of any noncompliant
improvements. The association documents shall provide for the city's right to such assessment. Those portions of the association documents
pertaining to the subject matter contained in this section shall not be amended without the written consent of the city.
Sec. 12.14.014 Hold harmless
(a) Language shall be placed on the subdivision final plat whereby the property owners association, as owner of the private streets and
appurtenance, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, any governmental entity and public utility for damages to the private
street occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the city, governmental entity or public utility; for damages and injury (including
death) arising from the condition of said private street; for damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use by the city, governmental
entity or public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and for damages and injury (including death) arising out of any use of the subdivision
by the city, government entity or public utility.
Further, such language shall provide that all lot owners shall release the city, governmental entities and public utilities for such damages and injuries.
The indemnification contained in this paragraph apply regardless of whether or not such damages and injury (including death) are caused solely by
the negligent act or omission of the city, governmental entity or public utility, or their representative officers, employees or agents.
(b) The property owners association shall provide general liability insurance in the amount of not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence and
$1,000,000.00 aggregate. Such insurance shall protect the property owners association and city from any claim, suit or demand resulting from any
activity by the city within the subdivision, including the operation, maintenance or repair of water, sewer and drainage facilities. The insurance shall
be occurrence based and name the city an additional insured. The insurance shall not include any exclusions that would deny coverage from the
operation of sewer lines.
(c) A signed certificate of insurance, satisfactory to the city, showing compliance with the requirements of this section shall be furnished to the city
at the time all improvements are accepted by the city. Such certificate shall provide thirty-day written notice to the city prior to the cancellation or
modification of any insurance referred to therein. Language shall be placed on the subdivision final plat indicating that a signed certificate of
insurance shall be furnished to the city which complies with this article.
(Ordinance CO16-14-01-09-C1 adopted 1/9/14)
ARTICLE 12.15 ASSURANCES FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/526
Sec. 12.15.001 Purpose
The provisions of this chapter, as set forth in this section, are designed and intended to insure that, for all subdivisions of land within the jurisdiction
of the city, all improvements as required herein are installed in a timely manner in order that:
(1) The city can provide for the orderly and economical extension of public facilities and services.
(2) All purchasers of property within the subdivision shall have a usable, buildable parcel of land.
(3) All required improvements are constructed in accordance with the city standard details and specifications.
Sec. 12.15.002 Policy
(a) Policy. Upon approval of a final plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and prior to it being signed by the chairperson of the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the planning director, and before said final plat shall be allowed to be recorded in the plat records of the county, the
applicant requesting final plat approval shall, within the time period for which the final plat has been conditionally approved by the city:
(1) Construct all improvements as required by this chapter, and provide a surety instrument guaranteeing their maintenance as required
herein; or
(2) Provide a surety instrument guaranteeing construction of all improvements required by this chapter, and as provided for herein.
(3) In all instances, the original copy of the final plat, without benefit of required signatures of city officials, shall be held in escrow by
the city and shall not be released for any purpose until such time as the conditions of this section are complied with.
(4) Upon the requirements of this section being satisfied, the final plat shall be considered fully approved, except as otherwise provided
for in this chapter, and the original copy of the final plat shall be signed by the appropriate city officials and city staff shall file said final
plat in the plat records of the county.
Sec. 12.15.003 Completion of improvements
(a) Prior to the signing of the approved final plat by the chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the planning director, the applicant
shall:
(1) Complete all improvements required by this chapter in accordance with the approved construction plans and subject to the approval
of the Engineering Department and acceptance by the City Council, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter.
(2) Construct all sidewalks as shown on the approved construction plans and according to the city standard details and specifications.
Sidewalks must be constructed and approved for each lot prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(b) Alternative to completing improvements. The city may waive the requirement that the applicant complete all improvements required by this
chapter prior to the signing of the approved final plat, contingent upon securing from the applicant a guarantee, as provided for by this section, for
completion of all required improvements, including the city's cost for collecting the guaranteed funds and administering the completion of
improvements, in the event the developer defaults. The Planning and Zoning Commission and council must be notified that this waiver was granted
at the time of preliminary plan approval. Such guarantee shall take one (1) of the following forms:
(1) Performance bond. The applicant shall post a performance bond with the city, as set forth herein, in an amount equal to one hundred
ten percent (110%) of the estimated construction costs for all remaining required improvements, using the standard city form.
(2) Escrow account. The applicant shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the city,
or in escrow with a bank or savings and loan institution. The use of any instrument other than cash shall be subject to the approval of the
city. The amount of the deposit shall equal one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated construction costs for all remaining required
improvements. In the case of any escrow account, the applicant shall file with the city an agreement between the financial institution and
the applicant guaranteeing the following:
(A) that the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the city and may not be used or pledged by the
applicant as security in any other matter during that period.
(B) That in the case of a failure on the part of the applicant to complete said improvements, the financial institution shall
immediately make the funds in said account available to the city for use in the completion of those improvements.
(3) Letter of credit. The applicant shall provide a letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution or individual. This letter shall
be submitted to the city and shall certify the following:
(A) That the creditor does guarantee funds equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated construction costs for all
remaining required improvements.
(B) That, in the case of failure on the part of the applicant to complete the specified improvements within the required time
period, the creditor shall pay to the city immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the
completion of those improvements, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/526
(C) That this letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until approved by the city according to provisions of
this chapter.
(4) Cost estimates. A licensed professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas shall furnish estimates of the costs of all
required improvements to the city engineer who shall review the estimates in order to determine the adequacy of the guarantee instrument
for insuring the construction of the required facilities.
(5) Surety acceptance. The bank, financial institution, insurer, person or entity providing any letter of credit, bond or holding any
escrow account, pursuant to this chapter, shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements established by city ordinance and shall be
subject to approval by the city as provided in the ordinances of the city.
(6) Sufficiency. Such surety shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form,
sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in this chapter. All such surety instruments shall be both a payment and performance
guarantee.
(7) If the project is located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, and is subject to the bonding requirements of the county for the
construction of roadways, then that amount of money shall be reduced from the amount required to be posted with the city, provided that
the instrument is transferable from the county to the city upon annexation.
(c) Time limit for completing improvements. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be incorporated in the
surety instrument and shall not in any event, without prior approval of the city, exceed one (1) year from date of final plat approval.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Commission may, upon application of the applicant and upon proof of hardship, recommend to the
council extension of the completion date set forth in such bond or other instrument for a maximum period of one (1) additional year. Such
hardship may include delays imposed due to city projects. An application for extension shall be accompanied by an updated estimate of
construction costs prepared by a licensed professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Texas. A surety instrument for
guaranteeing completion of remaining required improvements must be filed in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
updated estimate of construction costs as approved by the city engineer.
(2) The council may at any time during the period of such surety instrument accept a substitution of principal sureties upon
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
(d) Assurances for completion shall be posted or improvements shall be completed within two (2) years of final plat approval, unless otherwise
approved by the city. In those cases where a surety instrument has been required and improvements have not been completed within the terms of said
surety instrument, the city may declare the applicant and/or surety to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed. (Ordinance
CO10-15-01-08-C1 adopted 1/8/15)
(e) Inspection and acceptance of improvements. The Engineering Department shall inspect all required improvements, to insure compliance with
city requirements and the approved construction plans.
(1) When all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, the Engineering Department shall either:
(A) Accept, in writing, the improvements as having been satisfactorily completed, or
(B) Issue a punch list to the applicant denoting items remaining to be completed.
(2) The Engineering Department shall have ten (10) working days to complete this inspection upon notification by the applicant.
(3) The Engineering Department shall issue the report within ten (10) working days of the date of inspection.
(4) The city shall not accept dedications of required improvements or release or reduce a performance bond or other assurance until
such time it is determined that:
(A) All improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
(B) One (1) Mylar set of as-built plans measuring twenty-two by thirty-four (22 x 34) inches has been submitted to and approved
by the Engineering Department, along with a statement prepared by a licensed professional engineer that all improvements have
been installed and constructed in accordance with the submitted as-built plans.
(C) Copies of all inspection reports, shop drawings and certified test results of construction materials have been submitted to and
approved by the Engineering Department.
(D) Two (2) copies of maintenance bonds meeting the requirements of this chapter have been provided.
(E) Electronic copy containing computed generated Auto CAD drawings of all public improvements shown on the construction
plans, and all lot lines shown on the plat, have been submitted to the Engineering Department to update city maps.
(F) An affidavit of all bills paid and a release of liens have been provided.
(G) Documentation is provided from TDLR that the improvements are acceptable.
(H) Any and all other requirements identified in the final plat process have been satisfied.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/526
(5) The applicant shall provide a certificate of compliance from the state department of licensing and regulation for all pedestrian
improvements within the subdivision.
(f) Reduction or release of improvement surety instrument.
(1) A surety instrument may be reduced with the approval of the Engineering Department, and the director of finance, upon actual
construction of required improvements by a ratio that the improvement bears to the total public improvements required for the
subdivision, as determined by the Public Works Department.
(2) Before the city shall reduce said surety instrument, the applicant shall provide a new surety instrument in an amount equal to one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of the remaining required improvements, and such new surety instrument shall comply
with this engineering.
(3) The substitution of a new surety instrument shall in no way change or modify the terms and conditions of the performance surety
instrument or the obligation of the applicant as specified in the performance surety instrument.
(4) In no event shall a surety instrument be reduced below ten percent (10%) of the principal amount of the original estimated total
costs of improvements for which surety was given, prior to completion of all required improvements.
(5) The city shall not release a surety instrument unless and until all the conditions of this chapter have been met.
(g) Maintenance bond required.
(1) Before the release of any surety instrument guaranteeing the construction of required subdivision improvements, or the signing of
the final plat where subdivision improvements were made prior to the filing of the final plat for recordation, the developer shall furnish
the Public Works Department with a maintenance bond or other surety to assure the quality of materials, workmanship, and maintenance
of all required improvements including the city's costs for collecting the guaranteed funds and administering the correction and/or
replacement of covered improvements.
(2) The maintenance bond or other surety instrument:
(A) Shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution.
(B) Shall clearly state both the applicant and the city as joint obligees.
(C) Shall cover all facilities requested for city acceptance, including water, wastewater, street and drainage improvements.
(D) Shall be in an amount equal to 10% of the cost of improvements for the two (2) calendar years from the date of City Council
acceptance of operation and maintenance of the subdivision. A statement of construction value or final pay estimate shall be
provided to the Engineering Department to support said warranty and maintenance bond amounts.
(E) Shall require the surety to notify the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the end of the calendar year[.]
(3) In an instance where a maintenance bond or other surety instrument has been posted and a defect or failure of any required
improvement occurs within the period of coverage, the city may declare said bond or surety instrument to be in default and require that
the improvements be repaired or replaced.
(4) Whenever a defect or failure of any required improvement occurs within the period of coverage, the city shall require that a new
maintenance bond or surety instrument be posted for a period of two (2) full calendar years sufficient to cover the corrected defect or
failure.
ARTICLE 12.16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Sec. 12.16.001 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public within this jurisdiction. This section seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives.
(1) Manage and control stormwater runoff in a safe and economical manner in developing areas for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety and general welfare of the population, and for the protection of property.
(2) Protect the citizens of Cedar Park by preventing dangers arising from improper drainage facilities, inadequate construction of
drainage facilities and unwise diversion, use and obstruction of waterways and planning for the present and future use of waterways
through the establishment of regulations governing development on and adjacent to the waterways.
(3) Limit the alteration of the native waterways to prevent unnecessary destruction of the natural beauty, character and economic value
their existence provides to the city.
(4) Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to
not exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable.
(5) Provide for stormwater storage within the city where detention/retention basin facilities have been determined to be beneficial in
reducing the peak runoff to subservient lands.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/526
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes through stormwater management controls and ensure that these management controls
are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/7/12)
Sec. 12.16.002 Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to all major subdivision, development plat and/or site development activities requiring land use permits and
approvals within the City limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, unless otherwise excluded within this section. The section also applies
to land development activities that are smaller than the maximum square footage exempted if such activities are part of a larger common plan of
development. In addition, all plans must also be reviewed by either TCEQ (if located within the Edwards Aquifer contributing and/or recharge zones)
or the City on behalf of LCRA (if located within the Lake Travis Watershed) to ensure that established water quality standards will be maintained
during and after development of the site.
Sec. 12.16.003 Exemptions
(a) The following situations are exempt from the requirements of this section:
(1) Agricultural use of land;
(2) Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures;
(3) Development or redevelopment projects whereby no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of additional or new impervious
cover is created, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan;
(4) Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property, or substantial flood or fire hazards.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.16.004 Right of entry
The Director of Engineering or his/her designated representatives may enter upon any property which discharges or contributes, or is believed to
discharge or contribute, to stormwater runoff or the stormwater system, stream, natural drainageway, or other stormwater system during all
reasonable hours to monitor, remove foreign objects or blockages, and to inspect for compliance with the provisions of the chapter.
Sec. 12.16.005 Adoption of City of Austin Drainage Criteria Manual
There is hereby adopted by the City of Cedar Park for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, development, construction,
alteration, enlargement, repair, conversion, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of drainage improvements, that certain codes recommended
by the City of Austin Drainage Criteria Manual, being the most current edition thereof, and the whole thereof, as amended from time to time,
including later editions, except such portions as are hereinafter amended, deleted or modified by the City of Cedar Park. One (1) copy of said code is
now on file in the office of the City Secretary, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the same
shall be controlling in the design, development, and construction of all drainage improvements within the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the City of Cedar Park, Texas.
Sec. 12.16.006 Obstructions to waterways generally
Except as authorized by an approved site plan, no person shall place or cause placement of any obstruction of any kind in any waterway within the
city. The owner, agent, lessor, or other person in control of any property within the city, through which any waterway may pass, shall keep the
waterway free from any obstruction not authorized by a site plan; and any pool of standing water which is formed in any waterway within the city on
account of any unauthorized obstruction shall be deemed and same is hereby defined to be a nuisance.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/7/12)
Sec. 12.16.007 Standards for approval of plats and site plans
(a) No final plat, development plat, subdivision construction plan, or site plan shall be approved unless:
(1) The proposed final plat, development plat, subdivision construction plan, or site plan provides a sufficient waterway for the design
flood, determined in accordance with the drainage criteria manual;
(2) Any proposed improvements are of sufficient strength to resist any pressure of earth or building from the outside and pressure or
abrasion of water and debris from the inside;
(3) All proposed grades are such that water will not gather in pools which may become stagnant or foul;
(4) The proposed development will not result in additional identifiable adverse flooding of other property;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/526
(5) Both temporary and permanent erosion control measures are adequate to minimize siltration of the waterway as approved by the
Engineering Department.
(b) The fiscal security required under Chapter 12 shall be made sufficient to cover the cost of:
(1) Installing and maintaining erosion and sedimentation controls throughout construction;
(2) Revegetation;
(3) On and off-site cleanup; and
(4) Remedying any erosion damage resulting from development pursuant to this permit.
(c) The fiscal security shall insure the installation, maintenance, performance, and/or remedy of the following, without cost to the City, in the event
the applicant fails to:
(1) Install or maintain adequate erosion and sedimentation controls; revegetate;
(2) Perform on and off-site cleanup; or
(3) Remedy erosion damage.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 12.16.008 Additional standards for approval of site plans
(a) In addition to the requirements of sec. 12.16.007, no site plan for property within the zoning jurisdiction of the city shall be approved if a
proposed building shown on the site plan encroaches in the one-hundred-year floodplain, as the same is calculated to exist under fully developed
conditions, in accordance with the drainage criteria manual.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to construction of a parking area of less than 5,000 square feet or an unoccupied structure of less than 1,000
square feet where the Engineering Department has determined the proposed development does not have an adverse effect on the floodplain or
surrounding properties and is otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(c) The engineering director or his/her designee shall have the discretion to approve a site plan for construction, notwithstanding noncompliance
with the conditions set forth in this section, when the applicant submits a written request specifying the conditions requested to be waived,
accompanied by a detailed justification signed and sealed by a Texas registered professional engineer certifying that the request will not result in
additional adverse flooding of other property, and the engineering director or his/her designee determines that the request constitutes a minimum
departure from the conditions set forth in this section, that such departure is necessitated by the unique conditions of the site, and that such departure
does not create an adverse flooding condition for other properties.
(d) No proposed parking area shall encroach upon the one-hundred-year floodplain, as the same is calculated to exist under fully developed
conditions in accordance with the drainage criteria manual unless:
(1) The level of water detention or waterflow in such parking area during the 100-year storm exceeds neither an average depth of eight
inches (8") nor a maximum depth at any point of twelve (12) inches; and
(2) Appropriate notice signs, as approved by the Public Works Department are posted if any water detention or water flow in such
parking area may exceed a depth of eight (8) inches at any point.
(3) No building or parking lot construction shall encroach upon the twenty-five-year floodplain, as the same is calculated to exist under
fully developed conditions in accordance with the drainage criteria manual.
Sec. 12.16.009 Drainage studies and floodplain delineations
(a) The owner of property to be developed may be required by the Engineering Department to provide, at the owner's expense and as a condition
for preliminary plan approval, a drainage study for the total area to be ultimately developed. The study shall be in accordance with the drainage
criteria manual, and shall be submitted to the department for approval prior to the acceptance for review of any construction plans for any portion of
the development.
(b) If any portion of a proposed development is included within a floodplain or floodway delineation accepted or recognized by the city, such
delineation shall be clearly shown on all preliminary plans, subdivision construction plans, and final plats submitted for approval.
(c) The Engineering Department shall designate and maintain official floodplain maps. In any case in which official floodplain maps are not
available, the owner of property to be developed shall designate the boundaries of the one-hundred-year floodplain in accordance with the drainage
criteria manual and shall clearly show such on all preliminary plans, subdivision construction plans, and final plats submitted for approval.
Sec. 12.16.010 Approval required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/526
On any lot designated on a plat or subdivision construction plan as requiring completion or partial completion of drainage improvements prior to any
building construction, no building permit or certificate of compliance shall be issued for the lot until the Engineering Department has approved the
issuance of the permit or certificate.
Sec. 12.16.011 Stormwater drainage facilities
(a) Computation of stormwater runoff shall be based on a fully developed contributing drainage area or watershed and shall be in accordance with
the drainage criteria manual.
(b) Easements or rights-of-way shall be dedicated by the owner of the property to be developed to the public for the purpose of containing all
drainage facilities, open or enclosed, and all stormwater flows to the limits of the one-hundred-year floodplain as determined in accordance with
subsection (a). No easement or right-of-way for such purposes shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet in width for open drainage systems or fifteen
(15) feet for enclosed drainage systems. Additional easements or right-of-way shall be provided as necessary to allow continuous access for
operation, maintenance, and rehabilitation of all drainage facilities. Any part of a lot or tract of land contained within such easement or right-of-way
may be counted as part of the area of the lot or tract of land for the purposes of density and impervious cover calculations.
(c) Within any street right-of-way, an enclosed storm sewer system shall be required to accommodate that portion of the design flow which
exceeds street capacities in accordance with the drainage criteria manual.
(d) The design and construction of all drainage facilities and improvements shall be in accordance with the drainage criteria manual and shall
include provisions for maintenance and protection from erosion.
Sec. 12.16.012 Requirements for manholes when covered
Whenever any creek, drainageway, or watercourse is covered, manholes not less than two (2) feet in diameter, with removable covers, shall be
installed in accordance with the drainage criteria manual. All such work shall be done under the supervision of the Engineering Department and shall
be subject to inspection at any time by officers and employees of the city.
Sec. 12.16.013 Responsibility for stormwater drainage facilities
(a) The owner or developer of property to be developed shall be responsible for the conveyance of all stormwater flowing through the property.
This responsibility includes the stormwater directed to the property by any developed property as well as the drainage naturally flowing through the
property by reason of topography. Future upstream development shall be accounted for in accordance with the drainage criteria manual.
(b) Where the improvement or construction of a storm drainage facility is required along a property line common to two (2) or more owners, the
owner proposing development of property shall be responsible for all required improvements on each side of the common property line, regardless of
ownership, at the time of development, including the dedication by the legal owners of all necessary rights-of-way or easements to accommodate the
improvements.
(c) Where a property owner proposes development of only a portion of the property, stormwater drainage facilities shall only be required in that
portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use unless construction or improvement of a drainage facility outside that portion of
the property is deemed essential to the development or use of that portion.
(d) The owner or developer shall provide adequate off-site drainage improvements to accommodate the full effects of the development. The owner
or developer shall make adequate guarantees that she or he will finance the full cost of acquiring said property rights and shall retain full cost of
acquiring said property rights and shall retain full responsibility for construction of the required off-site improvements.
(e) All detention basins and appurtenances which receive stormwater runoff from commercial or multifamily development shall be maintained by
the record owner in accordance with the maintenance standards in the drainage criteria manual.
Sec. 12.16.014 Curbs and gutters
Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets within an urban subdivision along lines and grades approved by the Engineering Department. All
curbs and gutters shall comply with the drainage criteria manual.
Sec. 12.16.015 Use of enclosed storm sewers, bridges, and culverts
Enclosed storm sewers, bridges and culverts, designed in accordance with the drainage criteria manual, shall be installed by the applicant throughout
the entire length of the drainage area within an urban subdivision. Plans and specifications shall be approved by the Engineering Department.
Sec. 12.16.016 Use of drainage ditches in lieu of storm sewers
Open drainage ditches may be constructed if the Engineering Department has determined that the construction of open drainage ditches does not
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Sec. 12.16.017 Plans and specifications to bear certificate of a Texas professional engineer
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/526
No plans and specifications for any proposed alteration or improvement of a bed or bank of a waterway shall be accepted, reviewed or approved by
the Engineering Department unless accompanied by a certificate bearing the seal of a Texas-registered professional engineer certifying the adequacy
of the design, hydraulically and structurally, of the proposed alteration or improvement and that the proposed alteration or improvement is in
compliance with city ordinances, the drainage criteria manual, and state law; provided, however, this section shall not apply to plans and
specifications for minor alterations and improvements which in the judgment of the Engineering Department do not require the services of a Texasregistered
professional engineer.
ARTICLE 12.17 LAKE TRAVIS WATERSHED NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION CONTROL
Sec. 12.17.001 General provisions
(a) LCRA nonpoint source pollution control technical manual adopted. There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for nonpoint source pollution control during the design, development, construction, alteration, or enlargement, of areas within the
Lake Travis Watershed located within the city extraterritorial jurisdiction and/or city limits, such jurisdiction, delineated in exhibit “A, [to Ordinance
CO42-07-07-12-3I]” the map of Lake Travis Watershed as maintained on file in the office of the City Secretary, that certain standards required by the
Lower Colorado River Authority nonpoint source pollution control technical manual, being the most current edition thereof, and the whole thereof,
as amended from time to time by LCRA, including later editions. One (1) copy of said code is now on file in the office of the City Secretary, and the
same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the same shall be controlling in the design, development, and
construction of all subdivisions within the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city located within the Lake Travis Watershed.
(b) Application of article and coordination with other sections.
(1) This article sets out special requirements for the subdivision of land located in the Lake Travis Watershed, which, for the purpose of
this article shall mean all land on the map adopted hereby as exhibit “A” [to Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I] and on file with the City
Secretary which is both:
(A) Within the extraterritorial jurisdiction or city limits of the city; and
(B) Not included within one of the other watershed areas delineated thereon.
(2) A person wishing to subdivide land in the Lake Travis Watershed must comply both with these special requirements and with the
applicable requirements of other provisions of this code of ordinances. When the land being subdivided is located partially within and
partially beyond the Lake Travis Watershed, this section shall apply only to that portion of the land within the Lake Travis Watershed.
(3) In case of conflict between the requirements of this chapter and any other chapter, the requirements of this section govern.
Sec. 12.17.002 Scope and application
(a) Authorized activities; permit required. Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) below, no landowner or land user subject to this
article may commence or conduct development in the Lake Travis Watershed in Travis County in the city limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city without first obtaining an NPS pollution control permit from the city. Prior to commencing development, the landowner or land user controlling
or using the site and desiring to undertake development subject to this section shall pay an application fee and submit a complete application for a
permit. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the city to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the permit
application. The city shall issue a NPS pollution control permit upon the applicant's submission of a complete permit application, payment of the
application fee, and upon the city's approval of the permit application. The provisions of this article regarding permit application and issuance shall
be applied consistently, uniformly, and fairly to all applicants and permittees.
(b) Single-family residences. No permit is required for the construction of a single-family residence on a single-family lot. Landowners or land
users undertaking such construction shall, however, utilize the measures for controlling erosion and sedimentation described in the LCRA NPS
pollution control technical manual during the construction process. Such landowners or land users shall, at the time of application for a building
permit from the city, demonstrate the erosion and sedimentation control measures that will be used. A single-family residence is a detached structure
designed for occupancy by one family as a residence.
(1) Construction of a single-family residence does not include construction of infrastructure such as roadways, utilities and drainage
improvements.
(c) Existing development. No permit is required for existing development. If, however, improvements or additions are made after the effective date
of this article which substantially increase the amount of development, then the landowner or land user must obtain a permit and demonstrate that the
pollution resulting from the development will meet the performance standards set forth in sec. 12.17.003 of this article. This subsection does not
apply to single-family residences as described in subsection (b) of this section.
(d) Final plats. Landowners or land users developing sites for which final subdivision plats have been approved by the city and Travis County prior
to the effective date of this section do not need a permit and are not required to comply with subsections (1) and (2) of sec. 12.17.003 of this article.
Such landowners or land users shall, however, comply with subsection (3) of sec. 12.17.003 of this article regarding erosion and sedimentation
control. Such landowners or land users shall, at the time of application for flood control permits from Travis County, demonstrate the erosion and
sedimentation control measures that will be used.
(e) Utility lines. Landowners or land users installing utility lines must obtain a permit, but are not required to comply with subsections (1) and (2)
of sec. 12.17.003 of this article. Such landowners or land users shall, however, comply with subsection (3) of sec. 12.17.003 of this article regarding
erosion and sedimentation control. No permit is required for routine maintenance and installation of utility lines if a landowner or land user complies
with the guidelines set forth in the LCRA nonpoint source control technical manual for such activity.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/526
Sec. 12.17.003 Performance standards
Except as otherwise provided in sec. 12.17.002 of this article, all development subject to this article shall achieve the following performance
standards:
(1) Total suspended solids, total phosphorus, oil and grease.
(A) Total suspended solids. For development on slopes between zero percent (0%) and ten percent (10%), seventy percent (70%)
of the annual pollutant load in the stormwater runoff for total suspended solids shall be removed. For development on slopes greater
than ten percent (10%) but less than twenty percent (20%), eighty percent (80%) of the annual pollutant load in the stormwater
runoff of total suspended solids shall be removed. For development on slopes greater than twenty percent (20%), ninety percent
(90%) of the annual pollutant load in the stormwater runoff of total suspended solids shall be removed. All development located
within 500 feet of the 691 msl contour line (measured perpendicular to the contour line toward the shore) and on slopes between
zero percent (0%) and ten percent (10%), must have seventy-five percent (75%) of total suspended solids removed after
development is complete. All development located within 500 feet of the 691 msl contour line (measured perpendicular to the
contour line toward the shore) and on slopes over ten percent (10%), must have ninety percent (90%) of the total suspended solids
removed after development is complete.
(B) Total phosphorous. For development on slopes between zero percent (0%) and ten percent (10%), seventy percent (70%) of
the annual pollutant load in the stormwater runoff for total phosphorous shall be removed. For development on slopes greater than
ten percent (10%) but less than twenty percent (20%), seventy-five percent (75%) of the annual pollutant load in the stormwater
runoff for total phosphorous shall be removed. For development on slopes greater than twenty percent (20%), eighty-five percent
(85%) of the annual pollutant load in the stormwater runoff of total phosphorous shall be removed. All development located within
five hundred feet (500') of the 691 msl contour line (measured perpendicular to the contour line toward the shore) and on slopes
between zero percent (0%) and ten percent (10%), must have seventy-five percent (75%) of total phosphorous removed after
development is complete. All development located within five hundred feet (500') of the 691 msl contour line (measured
perpendicular to the contour line toward the shore) and on slopes over ten percent (10%), must have eighty-five percent (85%) of
total phosphorous removed after development is complete.
(C) Oil and grease. For development other than single-family residences, on slopes between zero percent (0%) and ten percent
(10%), seventy percent (70%) of the annual pollutant load for oil and grease shall be removed. For development other than singlefamily
residences, on slopes greater than ten percent (10%) but less than twenty percent (20%), seventy-five percent (75%) of the
annual pollutant load for oil and grease shall be removed. For development other than single-family residences, on slopes over
twenty percent (20%), eighty-five percent (85%) of the annual pollutant load in the stormwater runoff of oil and grease shall be
removed. All development other than single-family residences located within 500 feet of the 691 msl contour line (measured
perpendicular to the contour line toward the shore) and on slopes between zero percent (0%) and ten percent (10%), must have
seventy-five percent (75%) of oil and grease removed after development is complete. All development other than single-family
residences located within 500 feet of the 691 msl contour line (measured perpendicular to the contour line toward the shore) and on
slopes over ten percent (10%), must have eighty-five percent (85%) of oil and grease removed after development is complete.
Table 1 Summary of LCRA Performance Standards for Pollutant Removal Levels
Incremental Pollutant Removal Requirements
Flatter property (0–10% slope)
Total Suspended
Solids
Total
Phosphorus
Oil &
Grease
General 70% 70% 70%
Shoreline (within 500' of 691 MSL) 75% 75% 75%
Moderately sloped property (10–20% slope)
Total Suspended
Solids
Total
Phosphorus
Oil &
Grease
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/526
General 80% 75% 75%
Shoreline (within 500' of 691 MSL) 90% 85% 85%
(2) Streambank erosion. Streambank erosion shall be controlled by designing the drainage system so that the amount of erosion and
siltation occurring in the receiving streams is not increased. Specifically, the magnitude and frequency of the predevelopment one-year
design storm shall remain the same. The one-year design storm shall be that storm as defined in the LCRA NPS pollution control
technical manual.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control. Erosion and sedimentation shall be controlled throughout the development process in
accordance with the LCRA NPS pollution control technical manual.
(4) Alternative performance standards for single-family subdivisions. Development of single-family subdivisions that meets all of the
following criteria need not comply with subsections (1) and (2) of this section:
(A) Minimum lot size of one (1) acre; and
(B) Street and drainage network is designed without curbs or gutters, or some other suitable design, so that runoff is treated using
over-land flow methods to a vegetated buffer. The vegetated buffer must meet the slope and vegetative area cover criteria described
in the LCRA NPS pollution control technical manual.
(C) Landowners or land users developing single-family subdivisions shall, at the time of application for building permits from the
city, demonstrate the erosion and sedimentation control measures that will be used in accordance with the LCRA NPS pollution
control technical manual.
(5) Sub-basin averaging. It is the intent of this section to have a project, as a whole, meet the performance standards of this section.
Each phase of a project shall also meet the performance standard when such performance standard is averaged with phases previously
built or under construction. As such, averaging of performance standards between sub-basins is allowed under the following conditions:
(A) Performance standards shall be met or exceeded where drainage impacts an adjacent land owner or environmentally sensitive
area.
(B) No off-site sub-basin discharge shall fall below the performance standard by more than ten percent (10%).
(6) Monitoring and reporting. If a project proposes innovative BMPs, the city may require as a condition of issuing a permit, water
quality performance monitoring of certain BMPs. Water quality monitoring shall last a period of at least three (3) years. The cost of
monitoring, borne by the applicant, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the construction cost of all BMPs serving a project. During the
monitoring period, the applicant shall submit annual reports showing the results of the monitoring efforts. The pollutant parameters to be
monitored shall be determined at the time of permit issuance. The monitoring and reporting must be satisfactory prior to issuance of the
BMP Maintenance permit.
Sec. 12.17.004 Processing of permit applications
(a) Preparation of permit applications. Landowners or land users who must obtain an NPS pollution control permit from the city shall prepare the
permit application in accordance with the LCRA NPS pollution control technical manual, which is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in
full and which may be amended from time to time by LCRA in accordance with sec. 12.17.010 of this article.
(b) Initial review. After the application is accepted by the city, the city shall commence a technical review of the permit application for a period of
time not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days. The applicant shall be promptly notified of any additional information that may be necessary for a
completed staff review.
(c) Subsequent reviews. If more information is needed to complete the technical review, an applicant shall have sixty (60) calendar days to submit
additional information or revise the application. If the applicant provides the additional information within the sixty-day period, the technical review
shall be extended for no more than thirty (30) calendar days. If the applicant does not provide the additional information within the sixty-day period,
the city may return the application and all or part of the fees to the applicant.
(d) Application fees. The application fees shall be as described in the fee schedule found in article 2.000 [of appendix A] of the City of Cedar Park
code of ordinances. The fee is intended to cover the cost of processing applications, inspections, and other costs incurred by the city in the
administration of this article. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time by the City Council of the city.
(e) Duration. A NPS pollution control permit, unless terminated pursuant to subsection (f) or sec. 12.17.008(c), shall be valid for the life of a
project or until a NPS best management practice permit is issued.
(f) Termination. A city NPS pollution control permit shall be automatically terminated if the permittee has not commenced development within
three (3) years from the date of issuance of the permit. Commencement of development means clearing the site and performing initial or rough
grading of the improvements. Pursuant to Sec. 12.17.008(c), the permit may be terminated by revocation upon violation of a condition to the permit.
If the city terminates a permit for nonuse and the term of fiscal surety is still in effect, the city may call on the permittee's surety in order to provide
permanent stabilization of the site.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/526
(g) Fiscal surety. Approval of a permit application is contingent upon the provision of fiscal surety in a form acceptable to the city in the amount
specified in the permit which provides for the construction of NPS pollution controls (BMPs) in accordance with the permit and any other provision
of this section. The amount of the surety shall not be less than one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the NPS pollution controls (BMPs), as
estimated by the professional engineer who seals the permit application. The term of fiscal surety shall terminate after the final
inspection/concurrence letter has been accepted by the city.
(h) Permit amendment. Modifications to an approved master plan, NPS pollution control permit or an NPS best management practices (BMP)
maintenance permit shall require an amendment. Applications for amendments shall be made in and processed in accordance with the requirements
of this section and the LCRA NPS technical manual regarding permit applications. The application for amendment shall clearly identify the items
sought to be amended and the reasons therefore [therefor]. However, no permit amendment is required for minor field adjustments of temporary
erosion and sedimentation controls. Requests for permit amendments to permits covered by a master plan shall have the effect, if granted, of
automatically amending such master plan. A permit amendment for a master plan shall be required if there is a change in land use, or an increase in
density or impervious cover. Permit amendments or amendments to a master plan shall be processed in accordance with the performance standards in
affect [effect] on the date of the application for the area or phase covered by such amendment.
(i) Phased development/alternative application procedures. When a phased development is proposed to be constructed over an extended period of
time, the permit application shall be submitted and processed in accordance with these alternative procedures.
(1) Submittal of application and master plan. Landowners or land users whose phased development require issuance of multiple NPS
pollution control permits shall prepare an application for phased development in accordance with the technical manual, which is
incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in full and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with sec. 12.17.010(b)
of this article.
(A) The application shall include a master plan of the entire project for review by the city. The master plan shall be accompanied
by sufficient data to reasonably demonstrate that the project can be developed in compliance with the applicable provisions of this
article.
(B) The application shall include topographic maps, slope maps, drainage maps, vegetative descriptions, BMP facilities and
locations maps, soil maps, pollutant load and removal calculations, preliminary phasing schedule, and any other information deemed
necessary by the city to demonstrate compliance with this section.
(2) Initial review. After the permit application and the master plan have been determined to be administratively complete and accepted
by the city, the city shall commence a technical review of the permit application for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) calendar
days. The applicant shall be promptly notified of any additional information that may be necessary for a complete staff review. In the
event that the city does not complete the review of the application and master plan within the time provided in this article, or within the
time provided for subsequent reviews, the applicant shall be entitled to a full refund of the application fee.
(3) Subsequent reviews. If more information is needed to complete the technical review, the applicant shall have sixty (60) calendar
days to submit additional information or revise the application. If the applicant provides the information within the sixty-day period, the
technical review shall be extended no more than thirty (30) calendar days. If the applicant does not provide the additional information
within the sixty-day period, the city may return the application and all or part of the fees to the applicant.
(4) Master plan approval. Upon approval of the master plan, the applicant shall be entitled to develop the project in accordance with the
performance standards in effect on the date of the city's approval. However, LCRA's NPS technical manual may be revised from time to
time, and revisions may reflect changes or alterations in certain BMPs relative to their ability to achieve the performance standard.
Approval of a master plan does not exempt a development from compliance with revisions to LCRA's NPS technical manual so long as
the revisions do not prohibit the project from being built in reasonable conformance with the master plan.
(5) Duration.
(A) The applicant shall have one (1) year from the date of approval of the master plan to submit a completed permit application
for the first phase of the project, or the approval of the master plan shall become null and void. The first phase of the project must
represent development of at least ten percent (10%) or one hundred (100) acres, whichever is greater, of the total project or it will
not be considered a complete permit application under this provision.
(B) Should the NPS permit for the first phase of the development of the project be terminated due to lack of activity as provided
in subsection (f) or if termination occurs pursuant to sec. 12.17.008(c), the master plan approval shall become null and void.
(C) The applicant shall have five (5) years from the date of issuance of the BMP maintenance permit, or the completion of
construction, whichever occurs first, to submit a completed application for each subsequent phase of phases, or approval of the
master plan relative to such phases shall become null and void.
(D) Should a NPS permit for subsequent phases of development of the project be terminated due to lack of activity, as provided in
subsection (f), or if termination occurs pursuant to sec. 12.17.008(c), the master plan approval relative to that phase or phases shall
become null and void.
(6) Permit issuance. The city staff shall issue a NPS pollution control permit after the applicant has demonstrated compliance with the
requirements of this article. A permittee may not commence development until the permit is issued.
Sec. 12.17.005 Permits
(a) Permit conditions. All permits shall require the permittee to:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/526
(1) Comply with all applicable sections of this article and conditions of this permit;
(2) Notify the city within forty-eight (48) hours before commencing any development;
(3) Obtain a permit amendment from the city prior to modifying the approved NPS pollution controls (BMPs); however, no permit
amendment is required for minor field adjustments of temporary erosion controls;
(4) Install all NPS pollution controls (BMPs) as identified in the approved permit;
(5) Comply with the requirements of the LCRA NPS technical manual regarding formation of a property owners/maintenance
association and any associated maintenance plans;
(6) Repair any siltation or erosion damage resulting from development;
(7) Inspect all temporary erosion and sedimentation controls after each rain of 0.5 inches or more, and at least once each week, and
make needed repairs;
(8) Allow the city staff to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the permit, or for performing any work necessary
to bring the site into compliance with the permit;
(9) Designate a location on the site for the posting of notices;
(10) Keep a copy of the permit and all development plans on the site;
(11) Upon completion of development, a registered professional engineer shall certify in writing to the city that the NPS pollution
controls (BMPs) were constructed in accordance with the permit conditions and this article;
(12) Promptly notify the city in writing of any change in the name, address, or telephone number of the permittee; and
(13) Assign the NPS pollution control permit and all rights and obligations associated therewith to the landowner, maintenance, or
property owner's association as applicable, upon completion of construction of the development if the permit is not already in the name of
the person responsible for the BMPs.
(14) Pay all fees associated with the permit application in a timely manner.
(15) Perform all activities in accordance with all federal, state, or local laws or ordinances.
(16) Indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims, demands, damages, actions, costs and charges to which the city may
become subject and which the city may have to pay by reason of injury to any person or property, or loss of life, or property resulting
from, or in any way connected with the permittee's actions under this permit.
(17) No work is authorized that is not directly addressed in the permit application submitted to the city.
(18) Nothing in this permit is intended to amend or alter any legal rights or benefits previously granted to or vested in the city.
(b) NPS best management practice maintenance permit. A BMP maintenance permit shall be issued to the developer or his/her assignee upon
completion of construction of the infrastructure and BMP facilities required by the NPS development permit. In the event that the landowner,
maintenance or property owner's association does not accept the assignment, the developer shall remain subject to the terms of the NPS pollution
control permit or best management maintenance permit, as applicable, until an assignment occurs or until the maintenance, property owner's
association, or landowner accepts issuance of a BMP permit.
(c) Additional permit conditions. Additional permit conditions may be required as necessary in order to achieve compliance with the article.
Sec. 12.17.006 Right of entry and inspection
(a) Right of entry. Any person or his/her successors or assigns who has filed a permit application or received a permit under this section shall allow
entry by the city on the site for the purposes of inspection and monitoring. Employees and agents of the city are entitled to enter any public or private
property at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions related to water quality and administration of this article.
(b) Predevelopment inspection. After permit issuance, but before the installation of erosion and sedimentation controls and before development
commences, the applicant shall provide a written request to the city for an inspection of the temporary erosion controls. This predevelopment
inspection must be attended by the applicant, the city inspector, the design engineer, contractor, and field engineer. The city inspector will determine
whether the temporary erosion and sedimentation controls will be in compliance with the permit. If the city does not conduct the predevelopment
inspection within five (5) working days of receipt of the request for inspection, the applicant may proceed with development after the time for
appeals has expired.
(c) Inspections during development. During development, the city shall inspect the site to ensure that temporary and permanent erosion controls
are being maintained and that the permanent NPS pollution controls (BMPs) are being constructed in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(d) Final inspection. Upon completion of development, the city shall conduct a final inspection of the NPS pollution controls used. This final
development inspection must be attended by the permittee, the city inspector, the design engineer, contractor, and field engineer. The city inspector
will determine whether the NPS pollution controls are in compliance with the permit. If the NPS pollution controls are approved, the city shall
release the permittee's fiscal surety.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/526
(e) Annual inspections. All permanent NPS pollution controls (BMPs) will be inspected at least annually by the city. The fee for this inspection
shall be included as part of the permit application fee collected by the city.
Sec. 12.17.007 Maintenance of NPS pollution controls
(a) Maintenance plans. Prior to permit issuance, all applicants shall prepare a plan describing the measures necessary to maintain each NPS
pollution control (BMP) required by this article in accordance with the maintenance guidelines set forth in the LCRA NPS pollution control technical
manual. The maintenance plan must be submitted to and approved by the city. Upon receiving written approval of the maintenance plan from the city,
the landowner or land user must record in the county deed records that the property is subject to an NPS pollution control maintenance plan and must
also, upon transferring title to that property, place a restriction in the deed that states that the property is subject to an NPS pollution control
maintenance plan.
(b) Maintenance required. All NPS pollution control measures (BMPs) and their appurtenances shall be maintained by the applicant or subsequent
landowner(s) or land user(s) pursuant to the approved plan. Land owners and land users shall form a maintenance association (MA) in accordance
with this article prior to permit issuance. All MA's must post financial security or create a maintenance fund for the purpose of maintaining all NPS
pollution controls (BMPs) required by this article. The duties and responsibilities of an MA may be performed by a homeowners' association,
property owners' association, or like entity if it meets the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The maintenance of all BMPs shall
be in accordance with the permit and the approved maintenance plan.
(c) Requirements for maintenance associations. The applicant must submit to the city the approved articles of association for the MA, as well as a
map showing the boundaries of its jurisdiction. The MA must have the following general powers which are reflected in the articles of association:
(1) Own and convey property;
(2) Operate and maintain common property, specifically the NPS pollution controls (BMPs);
(3) Establish rules and regulations;
(4) Assess members maintenance fees and enforce said assessments;
(5) Sue and be sued;
(6) Contract for services to provide operation and maintenance;
(7) If the MA is a homeowners association, it must have as members all the homeowners, lot owners, property owners or unit owners;
(8) The MA shall exist in perpetuity; however, if the MA is dissolved, the articles of association must provide that the property
consisting of the NPS pollution controls (BMPs) shall be conveyed to an appropriate entity or similar nonprofit corporation capable of
maintaining the BMPs; and
(9) It shall be clearly stated in the articles of association of the MA that:
(A) It is the responsibility of the MA to operate and maintain the NPS pollution controls (BMPs);
(B) The NPS pollution control(s) (BMPs) is/are owned by the MA or described therein as common property;
(C) There is a method of assessing and collecting the assessment for operation and maintenance of the NPS pollution controls
(BMPs); and
(D) Any amendment that would affect the NPS pollution controls (BMPs) must be approved by the city.
(d) Phased projects. If an MA is proposed for a project which will be developed in phases and subsequent phases will utilize the NPS pollution
controls (BMPs), the MA must have the ability to accept future phases into the MA.
(e) Transfer of maintenance to political subdivisions. Upon approval by the city, the applicant, landowner, land user, or permittee may transfer
responsibility for maintenance of the NPS pollution control measures (BMPs) to a political subdivision. The political subdivision must maintain the
NPS pollution control measures in accordance with the approved maintenance plan.
Sec. 12.17.008 Enforcement
(a) Violations. It is unlawful under this article:
(1) For any landowner or land user subject to the permit requirements of this chapter to commence or undertake any development or to
cause, suffer, or allow another to commence or undertake development or redevelopment on his or her property without first obtaining a
valid NPS pollution control permit from the city;
(2) For a landowner or land user subject to this chapter, but not required to obtain a permit, to commence or undertake development or
to cause, suffer or allow another to commence or undertake development on his or her property without first complying with the
performance standards, as applicable with this chapter; or
(3) For any landowner or land user subject to this chapter to conduct development after a stop-work order has been issued; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/526
(4) For any landowner or land user subject to this article to fail to maintain the best management practices in accordance with the NPS
best management practice maintenance permit or approved maintenance plan.
(5) For any landowner or land user subject to this chapter to otherwise commence, construct or engage in development, or any other
act, that violates a provision of this article.
(b) Stop-work order. If the city determines that there has been development without compliance with this article, the landowner, land user or
permittee shall be ordered to stop work. The stop-work order shall direct that no further development shall take place until the landowner or land user
complies with this article. The stop-work order shall be in writing and, in the case of a permitted development, shall be posted at the site in the
location designated for posting such notices. If the development is occurring on an unpermitted site, the notice shall be prominently posted at the site.
Permittee may appeal the issuance of a stop-work order to the City Manager of the city by submitting in writing a concise statement of the reasons
for believing that the stop-work order should not have been issued and citing the specific performance standards that the development should be
exempt from the NPS section or the permit requirements. A request for appeal of the stop-work order must be received in the office of the City
Manager within (10) days from the date that the stop-work order is posted. The City Manager may decide the appeal based upon the reasons stated in
the appeal or may request additional information from the staff or appellant.
(c) Permit revocation. A permittee shall have ten (10) days from the date that the stop-work order is posted, or ten (10) days from the date that the
City Manager decides an appeal of the stop-work order, if an appeal has been submitted in a timely manner, to comply with the terms and conditions
of the permit. If a permittee fails to comply within this period, the city may revoke the permit.
(d) Enforcement of best management practices (BMPs) maintenance permits. If the city determines that a landowner, maintenance association
(MA), permittee, or political subdivision is not implementing the approved maintenance plan or is not in compliance with one of the other conditions
contained in the BMP maintenance permit, the MA, permittee, or political subdivision shall be notified of the deficiency. An MA, permittee, or
political subdivision shall have sixty (60) days from the date that the notice is issued to comply with the maintenance plan or BMP permit condition.
If the MA, permittee, or political subdivision fails to comply within this period, the city may perform the necessary maintenance and assess the MA,
permittee, or political subdivision for the costs associated with the work performed. The city may also seek penalties as provided in this article.
(e) Penalty. Any person violating provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each
violation. Each calendar day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) Other remedies and injunction. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced through any and all other remedies at law or
in equity including enforcement by injunction.
Sec. 12.17.009 Variances for nonpoint source pollution
(a) If a unique or site-specific problem exists with the construction plans which makes compliance with this section [article] impractical or unwise,
the applicant may submit an alternative plan to the Director of Engineering or his/her designee for consideration. The alternative plan shall provide
alternatives that are practical and that contain approximately the same standards as required by this section [article].
(b) If the alternative plan is denied by the Director of Engineering or his/her designee, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
(c) The Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from
requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or
desirable in the public interest. In making the findings herein below required, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall take into account the nature
of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, and expected type and volume of traffic.
(d) No variance shall be granted unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that all of the following are met:
(1) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application at the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; and
(2) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the applicants; and
(3) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property or
public facilities in the area; and
(4) That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly development of the applicant's land and/or land in
the vicinity in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(e) Such findings of the Planning and Zoning Commission, together with the specific facts upon which findings are based, shall be incorporated
into the official minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done.
Pecuniary hardship to the applicant, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(f) All requested variances from this chapter shall be made in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to the date on which consideration is to be given
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Submittal shall be made to the Public Works Department.
(g) Planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each application.
(1) Written notice of all public hearings on proposed waiver shall be sent to all owners of property, or to the person rendering the same
for city taxes, located within the area of application and within two hundred feet (200') of any property affected thereby, within not less
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/526
than ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the latest approved
tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail.
(2) Notice of all public hearings on proposed variances shall also appear in the local newspaper of general circulation within not less
than ten (10) days before such hearing is held.
(h) Positive action of the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council shall be recorded in the County Clerk's office.
Sec. 12.17.010 Savings clause; amendment; effective date; review
(a) Savings clause. If any word, clause, sentence, or provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held
to be invalid, the remainder of the article, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.
(b) Amendment of the article, technical manual, or fee schedule. This article may be amended by the City Council from time to time after notice
and reasonable opportunity for public review. The LCRA NPS pollution control technical manual may be amended by LCRA's general manager from
time to time after notice and reasonable opportunity for public review. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time by the City Council after
notice and reasonable opportunity for public review.
(c) Review. This article shall be reviewed for its effectiveness for protecting the quality of water in Lake Travis no later than three (3) years from
its effective date.
ARTICLE 12.18 WATER UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 12.18.001 Policy
The applicant shall be responsible for providing an approved public water supply system consistent with the preliminary plan or final plat, this
chapter and the rules and regulations of the entity providing or to provide water to the development.
(1) Where an approved public water supply or distribution main is within reasonable distance of the subdivision as determined by the
Director of Engineering or his/her designee and connection to the system is both possible and permissible, the developer shall be required
to bear the cost of connecting the development to such existing water supply and the acquisition of all necessary easements. In some
instances, the city may request that the main water connection be oversized or rerouted to suit future water system improvements in that
area. In some cases, the city will reimburse the developer the costs of oversizing such connections.
(2) The applicant shall, consistent with all existing ordinances, make a pro-rata contribution to funding of needed storage facilities,
treatment facilities, and specific distribution lines as determined necessary by the city. Under extraordinary circumstances, these
provisions may be varied with the approval of the council and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(3) When platting or development occurs on a tract that is currently served by a water line less than eight (8) inches in diameter, the
applicant/developer shall be responsible for either upsizing the water line prior to recordation of any final plat or posting fiscal surety for
the construction of the water line across the entire length of the tract.
Sec. 12.18.002 Design
The design and construction of a public water system shall:
(1) Comply with regulations covering extension of public water systems adopted by the state commission on environmental quality.
(2) Be of sufficient size to furnish adequate domestic water supply and fire protection services to all lots, and to conform with the
master utility plan for the city;
(3) Be located where maintenance can be accomplished with the least interference with traffic, structures and other utilities;
(4) Be designed in an effort to eliminate the need for booster pumps or other similar devices;
(5) Not propose water mains less than eight (8) inches in diameter, with consideration for six-inch pipe in cul-de-sacs;
(6) Be acceptable, without penalty, to the state fire insurance commission.
(7) Include fire hydrants:
(A) At a minimum spacing of five hundred (500) feet for residential developments;
(B) Within three hundred (300) feet of all sides of a nonresidential development.
(C) At the end of all cul-de-sac streets, or similar dead-end water distribution lines; and
(D) For fire flows calculated with twenty (20) pound residual pressure.
(8) Include valves on each fire hydrant lead, at each intersection of two (2) or more mains, and valve spacing so that no more than 30
customers will be without water during a shutoff;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/526
(9) Include automatic flushing valves at the end of all dead-end waterlines;
(10) Be designed and constructed in accordance with city standard details and specifications;
(11) Be designed and constructed to comply with all applicable rules, regulations and policies of the entity that will provide water
service to the development;
(12) The design of private water systems shall include backflow prevention assemblies for domestic and fire protection systems that are
directly or indirectly connected to the city's potable water distribution system; and
(13) The water system shall be constructed by the applicant/developer across the entire frontage of the tract so as to allow future
extensions of the water system by adjacent tracts. A waiver to this requirement shall be in writing from the Director of Engineering or
his/her designee.
ARTICLE 12.19 WASTEWATER UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 12.19.001 Policy
The applicant shall be responsible for providing an approved wastewater system, consistent with the preliminary plan, this chapter and the rules and
regulations of the entity providing or to provide wastewater service to the development, throughout the development, such that all lots, parcels, or
tracts of land will be capable of connecting to the wastewater system except as otherwise provided herein.
(1) Where an approved public wastewater collection main is within reasonable distance of the subdivision as determined by the
Director of Engineering or his/her designee and connection to the system is both possible and permissible, the developer shall be required
to bear the cost of connecting his development to such existing wastewater system and the acquisition of all necessary easements. In some
instances, the city may request that the main wastewater connection be oversized or rerouted to suit future wastewater system
improvements in that area. In some cases, the city will reimburse the applicant the costs of oversizing or rerouting such connections.
(2) The applicant shall, consistent with all existing ordinances, make a pro-rata contribution to funding of needed lift station facilities,
treatment facilities, and specific collection lines as determined necessary by the city. Under extraordinary circumstances, these provisions
may be varied with the approval of the council and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Sec. 12.19.002 Design
(a) The design and construction of wastewater collection systems, lift stations, inverted siphons and septic systems shall comply with regulations
covering extension of public wastewater systems, and other applicable regulations, adopted by the state commission on environmental quality and the
state department of health. Under extraordinary circumstances, these provisions may be varied with the approval of the council and the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
(b) All new public wastewater systems shall be designed and constructed to operate on a gravity flow basis by taking advantage of natural
topographic conditions and thereby reducing the need for lift stations and force mains.
(c) Flow determinations should include generally accepted criteria for average daily flow, inflow and infiltration, peaking factors, minimum slopes
and minimum flow velocities.
(d) The minimum size of any public wastewater line will be six (6) inches in diameter.
(e) Public wastewater lines shall be located where maintenance can be accomplished with the least interference with traffic, structures and other
utilities. Minimum separation distance from water utilities shall be in accordance with the rules adopted by the state commission on environmental
quality.
(f) Manholes shall be located so as to facilitate inspection and maintenance, including intersections, horizontal alignment changes, vertical grade
changes, change in pipe size or material, and force main discharge points.
(g) All wastewater appurtenances shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standard details and specifications.
(h) All wastewater systems shall be designed and constructed to comply with all applicable rules, regulations and policies of the entity that will
provide wastewater service to the development.
(i) The wastewater system shall be constructed across the entire frontage of the tract or to the edge of the tract so as to allow future extensions of
the wastewater system by adjacent tracts. A waiver to this requirement shall be in writing from the Director of Engineering or his/her designee.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
ARTICLE 12.20 PARKLAND DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 12.20.001 Purpose
(a) All residential developments shall be required to comply with this Article. It is the intention of this Article to provide for quality parkland and
improvements to those parklands through either parkland property dedication or parkland cash contributions in lieu of property dedication and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/526
parkland improvement cash contributions.
(b) The City desires to provide sizable, high quality parkland sites for the use and enjoyment of its citizens. It is intended that such sites be easily
accessible to all citizens of Cedar Park and easily maintained by City work forces.
(c) The Director of Parks and Recreation (“Director”) may recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission that a proposed parkland site
dedication is unacceptable and may require parkland cash contributions in lieu of parkland property dedication.
Sec. 12.20.002 Criteria for land dedication
(a) The developer of any subdivision classified as a minor subdivision or residential developments requiring a site development permit shall not be
required to dedicate parkland. The developer of minor subdivisions shall pay cash contribution in lieu of parkland dedication. However, if the
developer feels he has parkland area that would be advantageous to the City, he may submit a request for dedicating parkland to the City and the City
shall have the option of accepting parkland property dedication or the cash contribution.
(b) The developer of any subdivision classified as a major subdivision, except for those residential developments requiring a site development
permit, may be required to dedicate parkland. During the preliminary plan approval process, the developer shall designate a location for the proposed
park (see parkland dedication requirements). To meet the intent of this Chapter, one larger park rather than several small ones spread over the
subdivision may be required. At this time the Director will decide whether or not the proposed property dedication would be consistent with the
desires of the City in terms of quality and location of its parklands. Should the City decide that the parkland is not desirable, the developer shall pay
cash contribution in lieu of parkland dedication.
(c) When an area of less than five (5) acres is required to be dedicated, the City may elect to accept the land offered for dedication, or refuse the
same and require the payment of fees in lieu thereof.
Sec. 12.20.003 Parkland dedication requirements
(a) The amount of land required to be dedicated for parkland will be calculated at a rate of not less than eight (8) acres of parkland per 1,000
ultimate residents or an equivalent ratio thereof. The area of the park to be dedicated shall be measured and calculated to the centerline of any street
within the subdivision bounding said park. The following formula shall be used to determine the amount of parkland to be dedicated:
8.0 X ((Number of units X Persons per Unit)/1000) = Acres to be dedicated
(b) The number of persons per unit shall be based on data compiled by the City and shall be reviewed and adjusted as necessary. The following
figures represent the average number of persons per unit by current density categories, and shall be used to calculate parkland dedication:
Gross Density per Residential Development
(dwelling units per acre)
Persons per Unit
Under 6 3.0
From 6 to 20 2.5
Over 20 2.0
(c) No parkland shall be submitted for approval by the City that falls within the one-hundred-year floodplain or is a portion of any drainage or
detention systems unless the Planning and Zoning Commission determines, after receiving a recommendation from the Director, that the floodplain is
desirable for recreation and the floodplain is left in its native condition with the exception of allowing vegetation to be pruned or maintained in a way
consistent with the recreational uses and allowing installation of recreational improvements consistent with floodplain uses such as trails, picnic
areas, etc. If it is determined that the native floodplain areas are useful for recreational purposes, up to fifty (50%) percent of the land required for
dedication based on the parkland dedication calculation may be counted toward the parkland requirements with the condition that the parkland is at
least one hundred (100) feet in width and that none of the parkland is utilized for stormwater detention.
(d) All land intended for park purposes shall be inspected both on the plat and in the field by the Director or his/her designee, who shall make a
recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission as to the desirability of the parkland. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make the
final decision.
(e) Parkland to be conveyed as part of a subdivision application shall be designated on both the preliminary plan and the final plat and shown as
“Parkland Dedicated to the City of Cedar Park” with the acreage of the parkland also shown. The applicant shall show the area designated as
parkland in the narrative portion of the plat where the applicant or developer dedicates all easements, rights-of-way, etc. to the City and designate it
as a lot. At the time the applicant requests the City to accept the subdivision improvements, the applicant shall deliver to the Parks and Recreation
Department the warranty deed conveying fee simple title of all parkland shown on the final plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Any violation shall result in delay of City acceptance of the subdivision until restoration is made or until a restoration fee calculated at a rate of 1-1/2
the total value of the damage is paid to the City. The Director shall determine the value of damages.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/526
(f) Following preliminary platting of the parkland by the applicant or developer, the applicant or developer shall not cause or allow any fill
material or construction debris to be dumped on the land (park site), excavate the soil, grade the site, remove or damage vegetation or otherwise
physically disturb the site without written permission from the Director The applicant may not convey any easements, dedication or property rights to
the property proposed for parkland dedication. The Director may allow the applicant or developer to dump fill material and take other respective
actions specified in this section when, at the discretion of the Director, such action would be beneficial to the parkland. In all such cases the City shall
provide a letter of permission to the respective applicant or developer prior to the action in question. The property shall be considered and treated as
parkland.
(g) The developer shall be obligated to place survey corner markers at all corners of the parkland, which has been located by a licensed and
professional surveyor. The markers will be four (4) inch diameter PVC pipe recessed twelve (12) inches in the ground. They will contain a 1/2-inch
iron pipe or rebar and be filled with concrete flush with ground.
(h) The developer shall be responsible for providing a six (6) inch sewer stub ten (10) feet behind the curb at a location acceptable to the Director
of Engineering or his/her designee. The Director of Engineering or his/her designee will be required to approve such location in writing prior to final
approval and release of fiscal requirements of said subdivision.
(i) The developer shall be responsible for providing a three-quarter-inch metered water supply located twelve (12) feet behind the curb at a location
acceptable to the Director of Engineering or his/her designee. The Director of Engineering or his/her designee will be required to approve such
location in writing prior to final approval and release of fiscal requirements of said subdivision.
Sec. 12.20.004 Standards for Parkland Dedication
(a) General requirements. Parks should be easy to access and open to public view so as to benefit area development, enhance the visual character
of the City, protect public safety and minimize conflict with adjacent land uses. The following guidelines should be used in designing parks:
(1) Where physically feasible, parks should be bounded by streets or by other public uses (e.g. school, library, recreation center,
amenity center, detention area).
(2) Where residential lots must directly abut a park, lots should be oriented so as to side and not back to the park. In this instance, culde-
sac and looped streets should be used to access the lots and park. Residential lots should back to a park only when the site's physical
character (e.g. shape, topography, drainage) does not reasonably permit an alternative design or the layout of the subdivision complements
the use of the park (e.g. lots backing to a golf course).
(3) A proposed subdivision adjacent to a park may not be designed to restrict reasonable access to the park from other area
subdivisions. Street connections to existing or future adjoining subdivisions may be required to provide reasonable access to parks.
(4) Where a nonresidential use must directly abut a park, the use must be separated by a screening wall or fence and landscaping
approved by the Director. Access points to the park may be permitted by the City if a public benefit is established.
(5) Public access to a park shall not be less than twenty (20) feet at the curb and shall not be part of a residential lot.
(b) Streets abutting a park. The City may require any proposed residential street built adjacent to a park to be constructed to collector street width
to ensure access and prevent traffic congestion.
(c) Park location. The City shall specify the location of the proposed land requirements, and the landowner shall accommodate the dedication or
offer to dedicate an alternative site, which reasonably meets the same needs of the City. The Director shall make the final determination of site
location and configuration reserved for future dedication on the approved preliminary plan and/or final plat.
(d) Site criteria. Park sites shall be of a suitable size, dimension, topography, and general character to meet the design criteria specified in the Parks
and Open Space Master Plan, as it exists or may be amended.
(e) Minimum park improvements. Unless waived by the Director, neighborhood and linear parks shall be improved by the developer prior to
acceptance by the City. Minimum park improvements, as determined by the City, shall include:
(1) Grading and clearance of unwanted vegetation;
(2) Installation of drainage and stream erosion controls;
(3) Establishment of turf and planting of trees;
(4) Installation of perimeter streets and street lights; and
(5) Provision of water and sewer service.
(6) Two (2) acres or more.
(f) Additional improvements. The developer may request permission to construct additional park improvements. The Director may approve
additional improvements if the proposed improvements are consistent with the design criteria and objectives of the Parks and Open Space Master
Plan, as it exists or may be amended.
(g) Improvement plan and development agreement. No additional improvements may be made to a proposed park site without prior written
approval from the City. The plan shall illustrate all proposed improvements and estimated costs of each improvement (including unit costs where
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/526
appropriate). Prior to improving the site, the developer and the City must execute a development agreement defining, among other things, the work to
be performed, construction schedules, improvement costs, performance surety, the amount to be reimbursed and the timing of such reimbursement.
(h) Completion of land dedication and improvements. Parkland shall be dedicated to the City concurrently with the filing of an approved final plat
or replat. All improvements specified in the park improvement plan and development agreement must be completed prior to approval of the final
plat, except where future performance is provided for in a development agreement.
(i) The City may accept or reject voluntary dedications of land and/or improvements for public park purposes.
Sec. 12.20.005 Cash contribution in lieu of land dedication
(a) Properties subject to cash contribution in lieu of land dedication. All residential properties that are to be subdivided or platted and that are not
required to have parkland dedicated to the City are subject to cash in lieu donation.
(b) Properties not subject to cash contribution in lieu of land dedication.
(1) All residential properties that have dedicated parkland during the platting process.
(2) Plats and replats for single-family use within the City limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) with not more than three (3) new
lots each with a minimum area of one (1) acre shall not be required to contribute cash in lieu of parkland dedication.
(c) Payment schedules for cash contributions in lieu of parkland dedication.
(1) The rate shall be set at a rate of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200) per dwelling unit for residential developments with a
gross density of less than six (6) dwelling units per acre; one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per dwelling unit for residential developments
with a gross density of six (6) to twenty (20) dwelling units per acre; and eight hundred dollars ($800.00) per dwelling unit for residential
developments with a gross density of more than twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.
(2) The City's calculation of the required fee in lieu of parkland dedication is based on an acre of land being valued at $50,000.00. If the
developer or subdivider objects to the City's determination of fee in lieu of parkland, the developer or subdivider, at his own expense, may
obtain an appraisal of the property by a state certified real estate appraiser, mutually agreed upon by the City and the developer or
subdivider. The appraisal will be considered by the Director in determining the fee in lieu of parkland dedication.
(d) Time schedules regarding the payment of cash contributions in lieu of parkland dedication and the expenditure of cash contributions by the
City toward parkland or parkland improvements.
(1) Cash contributions for single-family developments shall be paid at or prior to the time of final plat approval. Cash contributions for
residential developments requiring a site development permit shall be paid prior to issuance of the site development permit.
(2) The City shall expend the cash contributions for parkland dedication or parkland improvements within five (5) years after the day
any such cash contribution is made.
Sec. 12.20.006 Park improvement fee
In addition to the required dedication of land or fees in lieu of land dedication as set forth above, the developer shall also pay a park improvement fee
to the City prior to approval of a final plat or short form plat, or, in the case of residential developments requiring a site development permit, prior to
site development permit approval. Such park improvement fees shall be sufficient to provide for the development of amenities and improvements on
the dedicated land to meet the standards for a neighborhood park to serve the area in which the subdivision is located. The park improvement fee
shall be calculated at a rate of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per dwelling unit for residential developments with a gross density of less than six
(6) dwelling units per acre; three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) per dwelling unit for residential developments with a gross density of six (6)
to 20 dwelling units per acre; and three hundred dollars ($300.00) per dwelling unit for residential developments with a gross density of more than 20
dwelling units per acre.
Sec. 12.20.007 Hike and bike trail requirements
When hike and bike trails, as identified in the hike and bike trails master plan, are proposed within a private development, the developer shall
dedicate a public access easement to accommodate the trail and construct the trail in conjunction with the subdivision improvements or site
development.
Sec. 12.20.008 Constructing improvements in lieu of parkland dedication or fee requirements
(a) If an applicant proposes public park improvements to fulfill some or all of the parkland dedication requirements, the applicant shall provide a
park plan with the submission of the subdivision plat. The park plan shall consist of a scaled plan drawing showing the entire park site, topographic
contours and all proposed improvements including specifications for proposed equipment. Park improvements will be considered for compliance
with this Article only if it is the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, after considering a recommendation from the Director, that the
park improvements are more desirable than additional parkland dedication. Any playground equipment and all other site improvements are required
to be approved by the Director prior to approval of the park plan. All playground equipment and its installation must meet the safety standards set by
the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and the National Playground Safety Institute.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/526
(b) Where private recreation facilities are built for the residents of the subdivision or development, a credit may be granted for the park
improvement fee with a recommendation from the Director and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The value of these private
recreation facilities shall be determined by the Director, but shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) credit of the park improvement fee.
(Ordinance CO34-18-07-12-E1 adopted 7/12/18)
ARTICLE 12.21 UNIFORM CITY SERVICE ADDRESS SYSTEM
Sec. 12.21.001 General
The term “city service address” shall refer to the house number and street name assigned to a property by the City Manager or a designee within the
corporate limits of the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. A lot which contains multiple buildings or multiple units or suites within a single
building will also be assigned building numbers and unit/suite numbers, which will be part of the city service address.
Sec. 12.21.002 Location of city service address
(a) Assigned city service addresses must be permanently affixed to all structures in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street, road or access point of the property indicated in the city service address. To the extent that the city service address includes a street name, the
street name is not required to be permanently affixed, so long as the house number is plainly visible and legible from that street. A building number
contained in a city service address must be plainly visible and legible from any common entrance into the property or, in the event that multiple
buildings are not visible from a common entrance, a building directory shall be erected so as to be visible from any common entrance.
(b) Those structures sited in such a manner or distance from the street, road, or access point of the property thereby rendering the affixed assigned
city service address invisible and/or illegible from the street, road, or access point on the property will not be required to comply with subsection (a)
above. In lieu of the affixation to the structure, a monument or sign of appropriate size and tasteful construction will be placed on the property
displaying the assigned city service address in a visible and legible manner.
(c) During construction of any structure, the city service address must be posted on a sign in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible
from the street indicated in the city service address.
Sec. 12.21.003 Assignment of street names
(a) New streets in subdivisions shall be named so as to provide continuity of the name with existing streets and so as to prevent conflict with
identical or similar names in other parts of the city, the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, or other contiguous jurisdictions. A proposed new street
name will be considered in conflict if:
(1) It duplicates a street name already in use within the city's jurisdiction without being a continuation of that street;
(2) It duplicates the stating [starting] word of a street name already in use by three (3) or more existing streets;
(3) It implies an offshoot of an existing street without attachment to that street, such as cul-de-sac with the same name as another street,
but not located off that street; or
(4) It extends an existing street from a neighboring jurisdiction into Cedar Park's jurisdiction without continuing the street name.
(b) Existing street names which are currently in use and required to be changed due to a realignment of the street, new street dedication, vacation
or incorporation into a new roadway or arterial, may be changed at the discretion of the City Council upon a recommendation by city staff and
submission of a formal request as outlined in section 12.21.004 of this article. After a street realignment or vacation, if any existing city service
addresses require renumbering, each lot will be assigned a new city service address as outlined in subsection (e).
(c) A “legal lot” shall be described as an entire lot in approved, recorded subdivision.
(d) A “legal tract” shall be described as a parcel of land not created in that configuration by a subdivision plat, but established prior to the effective
date hereof and remaining unchanged through current ownership.
(e) Each lot in a subdivision shall be assigned a city service address as described in section 12.21.001 of this article. No lot will be assigned more
than one (1) number as a part of the city service address for that lot. The origin of the numbering system shall be the center of Highway 183 and East
and West Park Streets and shall extend as described below, following the centerlines of streets or their prolongation's except where otherwise
prescribed:
(1) North axis. Northerly on Highway 183 to the north city limits.
(2) South axis. Southerly on Highway 183 to the south city limits.
(3) East axis. Easterly on East Park Street to the city limits, and eastward across undeveloped land to the eastern extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
(4) West axis. Westerly on West Park Street to the city limits, and westward across undeveloped land to the western extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/526
(f) City service address house numbers are assigned according to location within a rectangular grid, oriented to align with the axis of the
numbering system. House numbers are assigned so that their numerical sequence increases along a street in a direction away from the center of the
grid pattern. Even numbers are used on the south side of east-west streets, and the east side of north-south streets.
(g) Unplatted properties designated as “legal tracts” shall be assigned to a single city service address which will apply to the entire parcel of land.
(h) A parcel of land within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, but not receiving city services, will be assigned a single address for the parcel.
(i) Property zoned commercial will require a site plan of development before assignment of address and will receive one city service address for
each “legal lot” as described in subsection (c) of this section.
(j) Exceptions to these rules governing house numbering may be:
(1) Water meters in medians of streets.
(2) Permanent sign structures.
Sec. 12.21.004 Street name change
(a) An application (request) for a permanent street name change may be filed with the City Manager or a designee in the form of a petition signed
by:
(1) Not less than fifty (50) percent of all owners abutting the subject city street. Owners of such abutting property shall be determined
by the city from the then current city's real property ad valorem tax roll; or
(2) A duly authorized officer or attorney representing a governmental agency or department.
(b) The application shall state:
(1) The present official city name of the street;
(2) The proposed new name;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of one (1) person with authority to represent binding commitments and take official action
relative to such street name change on behalf of each unincorporated association, group or entity, if any, applying;
(4) The name of each person, group, agency, or entity requesting the street name change; and
(5) Statement of each reason, from among those hereinafter listed, claimed for such street name change.
(c) The application must be accompanied by the application processing fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code,
payable, unconditionally and without right of any refund, to the city and in the form of cash, cashier's or certified check. The application must also be
accompanied by payment or be paid prior to any owner notification by the city, to the city, an amount for the manufacture and installation of new
street name signs, calculated as hereinafter prescribed, payable in like form except as to refunds; provided, however, no department of the city shall
be required to pay such monies in such forms.
(d) The City Manager or a designee shall review each application for street name change for compliance with this article.
(e) The City Manager or a designee shall be responsible for sending notification personally, by mail, by telephone, or by any one or combination
thereof, to the said abutting owners and/or affected governmental agencies and utilities.
(f) Applications for street name changes may be considered for any one (1) or more of the following reasons, which must be specified in each
application:
(1) Technical.
(A) To establish continuity of street's name, i.e, to assure one (1) name of a public way commonly traveled as a single
thoroughfare, although the centerlines of segments thereof do not match, as the City Council may determine;
(B) To eliminate same spelling duplication, phonetic duplication or misspelling;
(C) To enhance ease of location otherwise;
(D) To bring coherence to the street numbering system designation (east, west, north, south); or
(E) To provide necessary roadway designation (street, road, lane, circle, drive, boulevard, and similar designations).
(2) Recognition. To honor a person, place, institution, group, entity, event and similar subjects.
(3) Neighborhood enhancement. To enhance a neighborhood through association of the street name with its locations, area
characteristics, history and the like.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/526
(g) The new street name sign charge shall be determined by the City Manager or a designee and shall be based upon an average cost per sign,
calculated at the beginning of each fiscal year (considering prevailing and projected market cost, or prior bid cost, or combination thereof in any part,
to cover estimated labor and material for installing the standard city street signs) applied to the number of signs the said designee determines to be
required for the new street name.
(h) All applications found to be consistent upon review, with a stated reason or reasons and meeting or exceeding the other requirements thereof,
will be submitted, along with city staff comments, to the City Council for action without public hearing, or for such action after a public hearing if
any abutting property owner opposes the proposed street name change. City staff requests for street name changes made necessary by realignment for
a major roadway shall not require a public hearing prior to action by the City Council. The City Council may dispose of any application before it as it
deems fit.
(i) Notification will be sent to all interested governmental agencies, utility and service providers, city departments, and the applicant's duly
authorized representative or representatives upon approval of the application by the City Council.
(j) In the event an application is denied by the City Council, the new street sign manufacture and installation charge shall be refunded to the
applicant's duly authorized representative or representatives to be payable on unconditional endorsement only, and, if more than one named applicant,
payable jointly.
(k) No defect or omission by the city in processing an application or in implementing this section or privilege shall stop, bar, prejudice or impair
the free exercise by the city of its powers and duties or materially affect or impair the validity of a city street name change.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07)
ARTICLE 12.22 PROVISION OF WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICES IN THE ETJ
Sec. 12.22.001 Applicability
This Article applies to the extension of water and wastewater services to property within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City (“ETJ”). The use
of term “services” in this Article shall mean City water and/or wastewater services on a retail or wholesale basis. Those properties that currently
receive services shall be allowed to continue receiving services at the level that the property is receiving services on the effective date of this Article,
as amended.
Sec. 12.22.002 Annexation required
No property in the ETJ shall receive services until it is first annexed into the City limits, except as pursuant to section 12.22.003, herein. A property
owner requesting the extension of services to a property located in the ETJ shall first request in writing that the City annex the area proposed to be
serviced and shall comply with any and all requirements for annexation under the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, to authorize the City
to annex the property. If the City Council agrees to initiate proceedings on the requested annexation, such annexation shall be completed prior to the
extension of City services to the property.
Sec. 12.22.003 Conditions under which services may be provided in the ETJ prior to annexation
The City Council may determine, in its sole discretion, to provide services in the ETJ without first annexing the property upon: (i) compliance with
the conditions set forth below; and (ii) a determination by the City Council that the provision of services is in the best interest of the City.
(1) Adequate capacity exists. There is adequate capacity of City services available for the purpose of servicing residential and
commercial users outside the City without impairing services within the City's service area. Whether such adequate capacity exists shall
be determined solely by the Director of Public Works, and the determination of the director shall be final.
(2) Protection of resources. The extension of services shall not lead to significant degradation of water quality or other environmental
resources, or cause or have the potential to cause the City's non-compliance with any local, State, or federal regulations or statutes.
(3) Owners outside City limits to bear costs of service facilities and furnish easements. The property owner requesting service shall be
responsible for all costs relating to the design and construction of service facilities. The property owner shall also furnish suitable
construction and permanent easements and rights-of-way for utility lines.
(4) Construction to conform to City standards. All design and construction of service facilities shall be in accordance with City
standards and specifications.
(5) New subdivisions to comply with City subdivision regulations. New subdivisions recorded after the date of passage of this section
desiring services shall comply with the subdivision regulations of the City of Cedar Park, Texas, in effect at the time such new subdivision
is approved.
(6) City to have right of review. The City shall have the right to review and approve all plats and plans where service is to be provided.
The property owner requesting the service shall pay for all reviews in accordance with the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances Appendix A
Fee Schedule, as amended.
(7) Water and sewer facility requirements. Water service will not be provided to residential and commercial users who utilize private
sewage facilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/526
(8) Service lines to meet ultimate requirements of the City. All service lines shall be sized to serve the ultimate requirements of the
City.
(9) City may reimburse owner for oversized service lines. Where the service lines required to meet the ultimate requirements for the
City are larger than the total capacity required to serve the tract of land to be developed, the City may enter into a contract with the
property owner constructing the service lines for reimbursement for the excess capacity[.]
(10) Extended service lines to be inspected by the City. All service lines and facilities extending from existing City facilities to any
tract of land outside the City limits requesting service shall be inspected by the City's Engineering Department. The property owner
requesting the service shall pay for inspections in accordance with the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Appendix A, Fee Schedule, as
amended.
(11) Wholesale service to another retail public utility. Any provision of City services on a wholesale basis to another retail public utility
in the City's ETJ will be governed by a separate wholesale service agreement approved by the City Council incorporating terms and
conditions determined by the City Council to be in the best interest of the City. Expenses incurred by the City in the negotiation and
execution of a wholesale service agreement shall be reimbursed by the property owner or retail public utility requesting the wholesale
service.
(12) Development agreement. The property owner shall enter into a development agreement with the City identifying specific design
standards, use restrictions, connection of public infrastructure as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works, commitment to allow
annexation of the property and to comply with any and all requirements to facilitate the annexation under the Texas Local Government
Code, and any other terms determined by the City Council to be in the best interest of the City.
Sec. 12.22.004 Rates
The rates paid by residential and commercial users located in the ETJ for services shall be in accordance with Cedar Park Code of Ordinances,
Appendix A, Article 8.000 Utility Related Fees.
(Ordinance CO10-19-02-07-E1 adopted 2/7/19)
ARTICLE 12.23 DEFINITIONS
Sec. 12.23.001 Purpose
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Affected person. Any person whose legal rights, duties or privileges may be adversely affected by NPS pollution from any proposed development for
which a permit is sought.
Agricultural activities. All activities associated with the pasturing of livestock or use of the land for planting, growing, cultivating, and harvesting
crops for human or animal consumption.
Alley. A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
Annual pollutant load. The amount of pollution in stormwater runoff that is discharged from a developed site over the course of one year; usually
measured in pounds and based on an average year of rainfall. (The average annual rainfall in Travis County in the Lake Travis Watershed is 32.5
inches/year.) The annual pollutant load is estimated by multiplying the pollutant concentration by the volume of runoff and does not include the
background pollutant load.
Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, the developer or the owner's representative who shall have express written authority by the
owner to act on behalf of the owner.
Background pollutant load. The amount of pollution in stormwater runoff that is discharged from a site before development. The background
pollutant load is calculated according to the following formula:
(Area of site) x (Annual runoff coefficient) x (Background stormwater pollution concentrations)
The annual runoff coefficient is 0.10. The background stormwater pollution concentrations for total suspended solids, total phosphorous, and oil and
grease are 48 mg/l, .08 mg/l, and 0.0 mg/l, respectively.
Best management practices (BMPs). Those practices, including but not limited to those described in LCRA's technical manual, that prevent or
control nonpoint source pollution. Innovative BMPs are those practices designed by the applicant's engineer to meet or exceed LCRA's performance
standards but which are not described in LCRA's technical manual.
Block. A parcel of land within a subdivision that is bounded by streets or bounded by streets and the exterior boundary of the subdivision. For this
definition, an alley or cul-de-sac is not considered a street, but part of the block.
Board. The board of directors of LCRA.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/526
Buffer. A barrier constructed of wood, masonry, vegetation, and/or other landscape material in such a manner that adjacent uses will be separated to
such a degree that objectionable noise, heat, glare, visual clutter, dust, loss of privacy, air circulation, and other negative externalities shall be abated.
Building official. The director of planning or his/her designee.
Building or setback line. A line or lines designating the interior limit of the area of a lot between said line and the corresponding line within which
area structures may not be erected. The building lines typically provide the boundaries of the buildable area of any given lot.
Caliper. The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk measurement for nursery stock trees and existing trees. Caliper of the trunk
shall be taken six (6) inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size, and twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes
for nursery stock or 4.5 feet above the ground for existing trees (also see DBH).
Cash contribution. An equivalent cash value contribution to the city for parkland property acquisition or parkland improvement costs in lieu of
dedication of actual parkland property[.]
City. The City of Cedar Park.
City council or council. The City Council of the City of Cedar Park.
City staff. The officers, employees and agents of the city assigned and designated from time to time by the City Administrator and/or council to
review and/or comment and report on development plans.
Collector street. A street moving traffic between local streets and thoroughfares or serving development other than single-family residential.
Commencement of development. The commencement of significant physical site preparation, including clearing, grading, or leveling.
Commercial development. All development other than open space, single-family residential development.
Commission or Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Cedar Park.
Condominium. A building unit available for sale in fee simple contained in a multioccupancy project with common undivided interest in the land and
subject to covenants and restrictions placing control over the common facilities in an elected board.
Construction plans. The maps, drawings, plans and specifications indicating the proposed location and design of improvements to be installed as part
of a development.
Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more streets.
Creek. A channel or bed conveying a body of running water in wet weather conditions.
Development. All land modification activity, including the construction of buildings, roads, paved storage areas, and parking lots. “Development”
also includes any land disturbing construction activities or human-made change of the land surface, including clearing of vegetative cover,
excavating, dredging and filling, grading, contouring, mining and the deposit of refuse, waste, or fill. Care and maintenance of lawns, gardens, and
trees, minimal clearing (10 feet wide) for surveying and testing, and agricultural activities are excluded from this definition.
Development plat. A plat required prior to development (i.e. new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure
or improvement), in accordance with Local Government Code Chapter 212, subchapter B.
District. LCRA's ten-county statutory district, which includes San Saba, Llano, Burnet, Blanco, Travis, Bastrop, Fayette, Colorado, Wharton, and
Matagorda Counties[.]
Double frontage lot. Any lot with frontage on two (2) streets that are parallel to each other. For purposes of these regulations related to building
setback lines, both opposing frontages of a double frontage lot are treated as the “front”. The building setback for the rear frontage (that is opposite of
the front of the principle structure), or to which access is prohibited, shall only regulate the setback for the principle structure and shall not regulate
the setback for covered porches or decks, swimming pools, accessory structures, etc. which, if within city limits, shall instead be regulated by the
normal rear yard setback of the zoning ordinance.
Easement. Easement shall mean a right granted for the purpose of limited public or semipublic use across, over or under private land.
Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by wind, water, ice, or gravity.
Existing development. For the purposes of this chapter, includes completed development, or any development that is not complete, but which has
obtained final plat approval from a governmental entity, prior to February 1, 1990.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Shall mean that area of land lying outside and adjacent to the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Park over
which the City of Cedar Park has legal control as set forth in chapter 42 of Local Government Code.
Final plat. The map of a subdivision with appropriate recording, dedication, approval and acknowledgement notes to be recorded after approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and any accompanying material as described in these regulations.
Flag lot. Lot configurations where the perimeter lot geometry reflects the shape of a ‘flag' where the narrow or elongated part of the lot abuts a public
or private street and widens at the building setback line to accommodate a buildable development site.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/526
Frontage. That side of a lot abutting on a street or way. For lots that have two or more lot frontages, the lot frontage with the narrowest dimension is
considered the front of the lot for purposes of building setback. (Also see definition for “double frontage lot”.)
Heritage tree. Any of the following:
(1) Trees that have a 26 caliper inch trunk when measured at 4.5 feet abovegrade.
(2) A multitrunk tree having a total trunk caliper inch adding to forty-five (45) inches or more (not counting trunks less than six (6)
caliper inches).
Impervious cover. A surface that reduces the amount of penetration of water into the earth. (ex. structures, asphalt, concrete)
Increased pollutant load. The annual pollutant load minus the background pollutant load.
Industrial street. A collector street that serves as principal access to industrial development.
Jurisdictional area. This article shall be applied within the portion of the Lake Travis Watershed in Travis County located within the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction and/or city limits.
Lake. The area within the normal conservation pool elevation of Lake Travis (681 foot contour).
Lake Travis Watershed. All land draining into Lake Travis. The Lake Travis Watershed in Travis County is depicted on Exhibit “A” to this article
[attached to Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I], which is incorporated by reference herein.
Land user. Any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes use of
his or her land.
Landowner. Any person holding title to or having an interest in land.
Large or significant development. A development that LCRA believes may have a direct water quality impact to an adjacent property owner or to an
area.
LCRA. Lower Colorado River Authority.
Legal lot. Either a lot recorded in the official county records pursuant to and in compliance with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time of its
creation, or a tract of land having existed in its present configuration prior to December 9, 1974[.]
Local street. A street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting single-family homes and to provide right-of-way beneath it for sewer,
water, and storm drainage facilities.
Major residential subdivisions. Subdivisions with fifty (50) or more proposed dwelling units.
Master plan. Document submitted as a portion of the NPS permit application which describes development intended to be conducted in phases.
Submittal and approval of a master plan shall occur prior to approval of a city NPS pollution control permit. Applications submitted for projects that
are intended to be developed in phases shall be approved in a two step process. Upon approval of the master plan, the applicant shall complete the
permit application for the first phase and each subsequent phase of the project.
Minor residential subdivisions. Subdivisions with fewer than fifty (50) proposed dwelling units.
Multifamily development. Any building that contains three (3) or more attached units designed for residential use (e.g. apartments, town homes, etc.).
Nonpoint source (NPS) pollution. Pollution that is caused by or attributable to diffuse sources. Such pollution results in the human-made or humaninduced
alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. Typically, NPS pollution results from land runoff,
precipitation, atmospheric deposition, or percolation.
NPS best management practice (BMP) maintenance permit. A permit for the maintenance of best management practices (BMPs) or other NPS
pollution control measures. This permit may be issued upon satisfactory completion of development and after issuance of a NPS pollution control
permit. The NPS best management practice (BMP) maintenance permit may be issued to a person other than the original permit applicant if the
person is the landowner or property owner's association, as applicable.
NPS development permit. A permit for development of land within the jurisdictional area specifically identifying best management practices for
control of nonpoint source pollution resulting from development. Private land owners/land users that install utility infrastructures are also required to
obtain a NPS development permit.
NPS pollution control permit. A permit issued by the city upon an approval of an applicant's permit application. The permit includes the approved
NPS pollution controls (BMPs).
NPS pollution control technical manual. The manual developed by LCRA that explains various BMPs that, when implemented, should achieve the
performance standards and other requirements set forth in this article.
NPS pollution controls. Those best management practices (BMPs), including but not limited to those described in LCRA's technical manual, that
prevent or control nonpoint source pollution.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/526
Parkland. The actual property on which the public park will be situated. It is also referred to as the property to be dedicated by the property owner to
the city pursuant to city parkland dedication requirements.
Parkland contribution. The actual dedication of parkland property to the city by way of plat note, dedication shown on plat and general warranty
deed.
Parkland improvements. Improvements to the city-owned parkland that allow the parkland to be utilized as public parks.
Permit amendment. A revision to an NPS pollution control permit issued by the LCRA after an application for such amendment has been received
and reviewed, and the expansion, redevelopment, or modification plans have been found to be in compliance with this article and the technical
manual. Permit amendment procedures are described in the technical manual.
Permittee. A landowner or land user who is undertaking land development activities pursuant to a permit granted according to the provisions of this
article.
Person. Any individual, organization, trust, partnership, firm, association, public or private corporation, political subdivision, or any other legal
entity.
Phased development. Development of land in excess of two hundred fifty (250) acres according to a master plan which occurs in stages and over an
extended period of time.
Pollution. Alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water
harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, property, or public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the
public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Preliminary plan. A preliminary drawing or drawings, shall be any plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land that is not to be recorded of record, but is
only a proposed division of land for review and study by the city and used by the applicant in development of final plat and construction plans for the
property. Preliminary plans are to be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.
Protected tree. Any of the following:
(1) A tree having a trunk of eight (8) caliper inchs or more, measured 4.5 feet above ground level;
(2) A multitrunk tree having a total trunk caliper inch adding to thirty (30) inches or more (not counting trunks less than six (6) caliper
inches); or
(3) A cluster of trees within a ten (10) foot radius circle having total caliper inch of forty (40) inches or more (not counting trunks less
than six (6) caliper inches).
Public parks. Large tracts of land usually with grass and trees improved for public use and recreation.
Public utility. A person or entity that owns or operates for compensation facilities or equipment for producing, generating, transmitting, selling or
furnishing electricity, water, sewer service, cable or telephone services.
Public Works Department. Engineering and field operations departments of the city.
Rear yard. A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the
building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
Resubdivision. The division of an existing subdivision or of any or part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot
or tract.
Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, or oil or gas pipe
line, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for other similar purpose or use. The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes
shall mean that every right-of-way hereinafter established and shown on the final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Right-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
wastewater lines, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to the public by the maker of the plat
where such right-of-way is established.
Rural subdivision. A subdivision located in the ETJ, having lot sizes larger than two (2) acres.
Scoping meeting. Meeting in which to determine the project description (location, size, number and location of driveways), trip generation rates, trip
distribution, study area, and any other relevant data that may impact the traffic study.
Sedimentation. Pollution resulting from the deposit of detached soil particles.
Side yard. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the setback line and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side
lot line to the closest point of the setback line.
Single-family development. One- and two-family dwelling units.
Site. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on which development is proposed in the permit application.
Storm sewer system. Conveyance of stormwater through a manmade structure such as pipe, culvert, etc.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/526
Street width. The shortest distance between the lines that delineate the right-of-way of a street.
Subdivider. The property owner or assign legally authorized to process a subdivision as described within this chapter.
Subdivision. Is the division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or sites for the purpose of sale or of building development
whether immediate or future. Said term also includes the resubdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land. Subdivision shall also include the
development within the corporate limits of the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Suburban subdivision. A subdivision within the city's ETJ utilizing wells and/or individual septic systems for each lot.
Thoroughfare. A minor or major arterial, more or less continuous across the city, which is intended to connect parts of the city or areas adjacent
thereto and to act as a principal connecting street with state and federal highways.
Townhouse lot. Is a parcel of land designed to be developed with a townhouse defined as a single-family dwelling unit structure having a common
wall with one (1) or more adjoining dwelling unit structures.
Ultimate residents. The number of residents projected to live in a subdivision at the time of completion.
Unnecessary hardship. An unfairly burdensome hardship that does not permit any reasonable use of the subject property and flows from a uniform
application of the city's subdivision ordinance. It does not include property that cannot be used for its highest and best use, financial or economic
hardship, self-created or self-imposed hardship or the development objectives of the property owner are or will be frustrated.
Urban subdivision. A subdivision within the city limits or the ETJ of the city that will utilize city utilities or other centralized water and wastewater
system.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
(Ordinance CO42-07-07-12-3I adopted 7/12/07; Ordinance CO30-12-01-26-C1 adopted 1/26/12; Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18;
Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
CHAPTER 13
SIGN REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 13.01 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY
Sec. 13.01.001 Purposes
The purposes of this chapter are to provide uniform sign standards that:
(1) Promote community pride and a positive image of the City;
(2) Protect the rights of persons and businesses to freedom of speech under State of Texas [Texas Constitution Article I, Section 8] and
federal [United States Constitution, First Amendment] law;
(3) Ensure consistency with State statutes relating to sign regulation;
(4) Facilitate economic development;
(5) Reduce the confusion and traffic hazards that result from excessive and prolific use of sign displays;
(6) Promote public safety and protect persons and property by ensuring that signs do not create a hazard by:
(A) Collapsing, catching fire, or otherwise deteriorating or decaying;
(B) Confusing or distracting motorists; or
(C) Impairing drivers' ability by obstructing the awareness or visibility of pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles, or to read
traffic-control devices or signs.
(7) Control the number, size, height, location, lighting, and design characteristics of signs to avoid visual clutter which leads to decline
in the community's appearance and property values, and reduces the effectiveness of the signs;
(8) Clearly identify various sign types by their physical and structural characteristics in order to make the regulations easy to use, while
promoting the City's goals and objectives relating to the design, appearance, and economic effectiveness of signs;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/526
(9) Address the latest and emerging technologies in the sign industry, such as electronic message centers and other types of illuminated
signs, in a way that allows persons and businesses to convey and communicate while also:
(A) Protecting the use and character of neighborhoods;
(B) Enhancing the function and appearance of the City's commercial corridors; and
(C) Promoting the City's character and design objectives;
(10) Implement the City's Comprehensive Plan, Bell Boulevard Master Plan, and other related plans and vision statements; and
(11) Coordinate the City's sign regulations with the applicable zoning districts in order to protect and promote the purpose and character
of those districts.
Sec. 13.01.002 Authority
(a) Authority to regulate signs. This Chapter is authorized by Article XI § 5 of the Texas Constitution, Home Rule Authority inherent under the
City Charter, and the Texas Local Government Code including, but not limited to Chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority, and Chapter 216,
Regulation of Signs by Municipalities.
(b) Authority of Sign Administrator. The Sign Administrator or his/her designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter,
including without limitation:
(1) Permits and fees. Issuing permits and collecting the fees required by this chapter;
(2) Inspections. Conducting appropriate inspections to insure compliance with this chapter;
(3) Appeals. Receiving and processing appeals for the Planning and Zoning Commission;
(4) Requiring compliance. Instituting legal proceedings, including suits for injunctive relief when necessary, to ensure compliance with
this article; and
(5) Violations. Investigating complaints of alleged violations of this chapter.
Sec. 13.01.003 Applicability
(a) Generally. As of the effective date of this chapter, all erection, construction, modification, relocation, repair, maintenance, or conversion of
signs within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) shall conform to the standards and requirements of this chapter, all State and Federal
regulations concerning signs and advertising, and all applicable Building Codes. Generally, signs are approved by issuance of a sign permit, as
provided in section 13.05.001, permitting. However, there are some signs that do not require a permit, which are provided in section 13.05.001(g), no
sign permit required.
(b) No restriction on content. This chapter regulates only the sign location, structure, and copy design, and not sign content. No provision of this
chapter shall be construed to regulate or restrict sign content or message. Any sign authorized in this chapter may contain any noncommercial copy in
lieu of any other copy.
(c) Exemptions.
(1) Exclusion from sign area calculation. Because address signs further the compelling governmental interest of assisting emergency
service personnel, law enforcement, fire protection, and other public safety officials in identifying locations needing emergency
assistance, numbers and letters for addressing are not included in the calculation of sign area if they are less than 14 inches in height in
residential zoning districts and 24 inches in height in nonresidential zoning districts.
(2) Addressing. The City finds that posting of the addresses on buildings in locations that are visible from the street is necessary for the
effective delivery of public safety services. The efficient and timely delivery of emergency services is a compelling governmental interest.
Accordingly, the City requires that street addresses shall be posted as per the adopted Fire Code.
(3) Subordination. Cedar Park is subordinate to the laws of the Federal Government and State of Texas. This Chapter does not prohibit
signs, require sign permits, or regulate sign locations or sign characteristics to the extent that they are required to be permitted by State or
Federal law or allow signs that are prohibited by State or Federal law.
(4) Government signs. In order to promote the compelling interests of the City, State, and Federal Governments in managing traffic,
protecting against public hazards and nuisances, and announcing government programs and the location of facilities, infrastructure, rightsof-
way, and other public areas, government signs are exempt from this chapter.
ARTICLE 13.02 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE
Sec. 13.02.001 Design standards
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/526
A sign described in this chapter shall comply with the restrictions provided in article 13.03, sign standards, and all applicable restrictions of this
chapter, other requirements of the Code of Ordinances, and applicable State or Federal law. In the case of any conflicts between this and other sign
regulations, the most restrictive regulation applies unless the City's authority is preempted by a higher order of government.
Sec. 13.02.002 Illumination of signs
(a) Where permitted. The standards for individual sign types in article 13.03, sign standards, indicate whether illumination is allowed, and the type
of illumination allowed (internal illumination, external illumination, or halo lit).
(b) Generally. The following illumination requirements apply to all new signs:
(1) Compliance with Electrical Code. Illuminated signs shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Electrical Code of the City.
All electrical connections to the sign shall be placed underground. Electrical transformer boxes and raceways shall be concealed from
public view. If a raceway cannot be mounted internally behind the finished exterior wall, the exposed metal surfaces of the raceway shall
be finished to match the background wall or integrated into the overall sign design. If raceways are necessary, they shall never extend in
width or height beyond the area of the sign's lettering or graphics.
(2) Hazards. Artificial light used in conjunction with the lighting of any sign shall not be directed or reflected onto any structure or
constitute a hazard to the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon a street or highway.
(3) Rotating or flashing lights. No rotating beam or flashing beacon light shall be used on any sign or sign structure.
(4) Shield the light source. The light source, whether internal or external, shall be shielded from view or directed so that the light
intensity or brightness is directed away from the public right-of-way or boundary of any residential zoning district or residentially used
property. Ground-mounted external flood lighting shall be shielded and properly placed and directed to avoid direct visibility of the
directed light to passing motorists.
(5) Light trespass. No sign or associated luminaire shall create light spillover of more than 0.1 footcandles at any property line within or
bounding a residential use or district.
(6) Types of lighting. Exposed neon tubing may be used in conjunction with other types of materials to attractively emphasize the sign
copy. Fluorescent and incandescent lighting shall be diffused by translucent glass or plastic.
(7) Use a projected light source. Illumination by a projected light shall be an indirect spotlight or gooseneck down light. External
lighting fixtures shall not cast light or glare in any direction other than on the elements of the sign. Such lighting shall be placed so as to
provide even illumination to the signage and to avoid hot spots or dark areas on the signage.
(c) Timing. Illuminated signs within a residentially zoned area shall shut off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The sign shall include
an automatic shut-off mechanism to ensure that the signs are not illuminated during the time provided above.
(d) Brightness. Illuminated signs shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.3 footcandles above ambient light conditions at the property
line, as measured using a footcandle meter. Illumination levels shall be measured in footcandles with a meter sensor in a horizontal position at an
approximate height of three (3) feet above grade. Maximum illumination readings are to be taken directly beneath the luminaire. The point at which
readings shall be taken is dependent upon the area classification and fixture arrangements. (See also division 11.05.02 [sic], performance standards.)
(e) Prohibited illumination. An illuminated sign shall not:
(1) Be illuminated by flashing, intermittent, or moving lights;
(2) Include audio, pyrotechnic, or bluecasting (bluetooth advertising) components; or
(3) Consist of a static image projected upon a stationary object.
Sec. 13.02.003 Electronic message centers (EMCs) and changeable copy
(a) Generally.
(1) Electronic message centers (EMCs) and manual changeable copy may be used as part of monument signs and canopy signs where
indicated in article 13.03, sign standards, pursuant to the standards of this section.
(2) No sign structure that includes a changeable copy sign may also include an EMC.
(3) All EMC and manual changeable copy regulations are also subject to all general illumination standards as set forth in Section
13.02.002, illumination of signs.
(b) Electronic message centers (EMCs).
(1) Generally. Size calculation is based on the total sign face dimensions, whereby the EMC reader panel area is counted against the
total allowable sign area, as provided in section 13.03.002, attached signs, and section 13.03.003, freestanding signs.
(2) Illumination.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/526
(A) Light trespass. All message center signs that are directly illuminated shall include a sensor or other device that automatically
determines the ambient illumination and is programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be
adjusted to comply with the footcandle requirement. In areas zoned for any type of residential district or use, a trespass limit of 0.1
footcandles shall be enforced at the property line.
(B) Technology. The technology currently being deployed for EMCs is LED (light emitting diode), but there may be alternate,
preferred and/or superior technology available in the future. Any other technology that complies with the illumination standards is
permitted.
(3) Spacing. EMCs shall have a minimum spacing of:
(A) At least 50 feet between the EMC and the property line of any residential use or district and shall shut off between the hours
of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. The distance is calculated as the shortest measurable distance between the nearest point of the sign to
the edge of the residential property line or district, or to the property line of an institutional use.
(B) At least 50 feet between any two (2) EMCs on separate properties.
(4) Design requirements.
(A) Percentage of sign area. EMCs, including their frames, shall comprise no more than 50 percent of the sign area of a
monument sign and a maximum of 12 square feet of a canopy sign. The balance of the sign area shall use permanent, dimensional
letters or symbols.
Figure 13.02.03.01
Electronic Message Center Maximum Face Area for Monument/Canopy Signs
(B) Minimum display time. Each static message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds duration. Message
changes shall be completed within one (1) second.
(C) Digital copy. EMCs shall contain static messages only, and shall not have movement or the appearance or optical illusion of
movement during the static display period of any part of the sign. Each static message shall not include any flashing or the varying
of light intensity, and the message shall not scroll.
(D) Safety. An EMC must:
(i) Include systems and monitoring to either turn the display off or show “full black” on the display and freeze the sign in
one (1) position at the maximum illumination provided in this section, electronic message centers (EMCs) in the event of a
malfunction;
(ii) Be designed so that if a catastrophic power surge occurs, the sign will go dark or will have maximum brightness
limitations in place; and
(iii) Contain a default mechanism that freezes the sign in one (1) position if a malfunction occurs.
Figure 13.02.03.02
Electronic Message Center Design Requirements
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/526
(c) Manual changeable copy.
(1) Illumination. Manual changeable copy signs shall not be internally illuminated unless:
(A) They use opaque inserts with translucent letters, numbers, or symbols;
(B) Blank or dark opaque inserts that are the same color as the opaque portions of the letters, numbers, and symbols are used over
all areas of the sign where copy is not present; and
(C) The opaque portion of the letters, numbers, and symbols is the same color.
(2) Lettering. Lettering of changeable copy signs shall be of a single style and shall be of uniform color and size.
(3) Size. Manual changeable copy signs, including their frames, may comprise up to fifty (50) percent of the sign area of a monument
sign or up to twelve (12) square feet of a canopy sign. The balance of the sign area shall use permanently affixed letters or symbols.
(4) Integral element. Manual changeable copy signs are only permitted as an integral element of a monument or canopy sign, which
encloses the changeable copy area on all sides with a finish of brick, stone, stucco, powder coated (or comparably finished) metal, or the
surface of the sign face.
(5) Enclosure. The enclosure shall extend at least six (6) inches from the changeable copy area in all directions. Gaps between the
changeable copy area and the surround are permitted to accommodate locks and hinges for a cover for the changeable copy area, but only
to the extent necessary for such locks and hinges to operate.
Figure 13.02.03.03
Manual Changeable Copy Sign
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/526
Sec. 13.02.004 Construction standards
(a) General regulations.
(1) All signs and their locations shall comply with the provisions of the City's adopted Building and Electrical Codes as applicable and
any additional standards stated in this chapter and other ordinances of the City.
(2) Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design. Angle irons, chains, or wires used for supports or braces shall be
hidden from public view to the extent technically feasible.
(3) Any permanent sign faces erected or maintained on any freestanding sign structure other than the principle sign for which the
structure was designed must be compatible with the original design and meet all other requirements of this chapter.
(4) Freestanding signs shall be self-supporting structures and be permanently attached to sufficient foundations.
(5) Attached signs must derive their principle and total support from the building to which they are attached.
(b) Electrical standards.
(1) Electrical service to illuminated signs shall be concealed to the maximum extent practicable.
(2) Electrical signs shall be marked with input amperes at full load.
(3) Each illuminated and/or electrical sign shall bear a label or certification visible from the ground, from the Underwriter's
Laboratories, Inc. (UL), or any other approved independent electrical inspection agency qualified to make that certification.
Sec. 13.02.005 Sign maintenance
All signs in the City and ETJ shall be maintained in good repair and working order at all times. The Sign Administrator may order the painting,
repair, or removal of a sign and accompanying landscaping which constitute a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment.
ARTICLE 13.03 SIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 13.03.001 Individual sign type standards
This chapter establishes standards for individual sign types, including:
(1) Whether the sign type is permitted in the designated zoning district(s) or the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/526
(2) Whether a sign permit is required.
(3) The maximum number of signs that may be permitted, such as:
(A) Number per street frontage;
(B) Number per each business or institution (occupying a multi-tenant building) that has its own ground floor entryway or
storefront;
(C) Number per single-tenant building or multi-tenant building with a single entry; or
(D) Total number of that sign type on a single lot or parcel.
(4) Maximum sign dimensions, including:
(A) Area; and
(B) Height.
(5) Property line setbacks.
(6) Spacing between signs.
(7) Design characteristics, including whether the following design features are allowed or required:
(A) Electronic message centers (EMC);
(B) Internal illumination;
(C) External illumination;
(D) Halo lit illumination;
(E) Channel letters; or
(F) Manual changeable copy.
Sec. 13.03.002 Attached signs
(a) Applicability. This section applies to attached signs.
(b) Generally. Attached signs shall not substantially obscure or cover an architectural feature, such as a window, door, entryway, cornice, sill, or
fire escape.
(c) Canopy signs.
(1) Standards.
(A) Right-of-way encroachment prohibited. Canopy signs shall not extend into any portion of the street right-of-way.
(B) Vertical clearance. The minimum required vertical clearance is at least 10 feet above the finished grade.
Figure 13.03.02.01
Canopy Sign Standards
Table 13.03.02.01
Canopy Sign Standards
Zoning Districts
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/526
Requirements RA, ES, SR,
SU, OR,
OG, or ETJ
UR, MF NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Number per street frontage NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Maximum number per each business
or institution (occupying a multitenant
building) with its own ground
floor entryway or storefront
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Maximum total number per singletenant
building or multi-tenant
building with a single entry
1 1 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
Maximum total number NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Dimensions
Maximum cumulative sign area
(square feet)1 45 45 90 90 90 90 90 90 90
Maximum height (feet-per sign) 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
Location
Minimum property line setback (feet) ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD
Minimum spacing between other
signs (feet)
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Design characteristics
EMC1 No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Internal illumination No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
External illumination No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Halo lit illumination Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Channel letters Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/526
Changeable copy No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NA. The standard is not applicable.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
ZD. As established for the principal building by the applicable zoning district.
1. Maximum cumulative area of EMCs or a manual changeable copy sign is 12 sf.
(d) Awning signs.
(1) Vertical clearance. The minimum required vertical clearance is at least ten (10) feet above the finished grade.
(2) Limitation. Awning signs are permitted only when there is no wall sign.
Figure 13.03.02.02
Awning Sign Standards
Table 13.03.02.02
Awning Sign Standards
Zoning Districts
Requirements
RA, ES, SR,
SU, OR, OG,
or ETJ
UR, MF
NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Number per street frontage NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Maximum number per each
business or institution (occupying a
multi-tenant building) with its own
ground floor entryway or storefront
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Maximum total number per singletenant
building or multi-tenant
building with a single entry
1 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/526
Maximum total number NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Dimensions
Maximum sign area (square feet-per
sign)
45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45
Maximum height (feet-per sign) 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
Location
Minimum property line setback
(feet)
ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD
Minimum spacing between other
signs (feet)
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Design characteristics
EMC No No No No No No No No No
Internal illumination No No No No No No No No No
External illumination No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Halo lit illumination No No No No No No No No No
Channel letters No No No No No No No No No
Changeable copy No No No No No No No No No
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NA. The standard is not applicable.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
ZD. As established for the principal building by the applicable zoning district.
(e) Projecting Signs.
(1) Standards. (See figure 13.03.02.03, projecting sign).
(A) Size.
(i) No projecting sign shall extend more than five (5) feet from the face of the building.
(ii) A projecting sign may not extend into any portion of the street right-of-way.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/526
(B) Vertical clearance. The minimum required vertical clearance is at least 9 feet above any sidewalk.
(C) Location. The upper edge of a projecting sign shall not extend vertically above the eave line of a structure.
(D) Attachment. All projecting signs shall be attached at right angles to the supporting structure in a manner consistent with the
applicable Building Code.
Figure 13.03.02.03
Projecting Sign
Table 13.03.02.03
Projecting Sign Standards
Zoning Districts
Requirements
RA, ES, SR,
SU, OR, OG,
or ETJ
UR, MF
NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes NR
Permit required Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Maximum number per street
frontage
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Maximum number per each
business or institution (occupying a
multi-tenant building) with its own
ground floor entryway or storefront
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Maximum total number per singletenant
building or a multi-tenant
building with a single entry
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Maximum total number NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Dimensions and location
Maximum sign area (square feetper
sign)
12 12 12 16 16 16 16 16 16
Maximum height (feet) 6 6 6 8 8 8 8 8 8
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/526
Minimum spacing between other
signs (feet)
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Design characteristics
EMC No No No No No No No No No
Internal illumination Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
External illumination No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Halo lit illumination Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Channel letters Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Changeable copy No No No No No No No No No
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NA. The standard is not applicable.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
ZD. As established for the principal building by the applicable zoning district.
(f) Wall signs (including murals).
(1) Standards. See figure 13.03.02.04, illustrative wall signs.
(2) Wall signs for nonresidential uses, or in a NB, LB, PO, GB, HC, LI, MU, TC, H, PS, HI, or PA district, shall not face a residential
use on an adjoining lot.
Figure 13.03.02.04
Illustrative Wall Signs
Table 13.03.02.04
Wall Sign Standards
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/526
Zoning Districts
Requirements
RA, ES, SR,
SU, OR,
OG, or ETJ
UR, MF
NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Maximum number per street
frontage
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Maximum number per each business
or institution (occupying a multitenant
building) with its own ground
floor entryway or storefront
(primary/secondary)1
1/1 1/1 1/1 1/1 1/1 1/1 1/1 1/1 1/1
Maximum total number per singletenant
building or multi-tenant
building with a single entry
(primary/secondary)1
3/1 3/1 3/1 3/2 3/2 3/2 3/2 3/2 3/2
Dimensions
Maximum height (feet)(based on
distance from grade to top of sign)2
4' (building < 20')
6' (building 20'-30')
8' (building over 30')
4' (building < 20')
6' (building 20'-30')
8' (building over 30')
10' (building over 50')
Maximum width percentage (%)
(based on length of tenant space in
multi- tenant building or single
tenant in single tenant building)
60% 60% 60% 60% 60% 60% 60% 60% 60%
Design characteristics
EMC No No No No No No No No No
Internal illumination Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
External illumination No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Halo lit illumination Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Channel letters Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/526
Changeable copy No No No No No No No No No
Table Notes:
1. The applicant shall designate the wall that includes the primary entrance to the building as the primary wall, and remaining walls
as secondary walls. The number to the left of the forward slash is the maximum number of signs allowed on the primary wall, while
the number to the right of the slash is the maximum number of total signs allowed on all secondary walls (example: 3/2 indicates that
3 signs are allowed on the primary and 2 total on the secondary walls; 1/1 (NR) means that 1 sign is allowed on the primary wall, and
that nonresidential uses permitted in the district are allowed 1 sign on a secondary wall).
2. If the wall sign is over a pedestrian walkway or vehicular drive, a minimum vertical clearance of 9' shall be provided between the grade
and the lowest portion of the sign.
General Notes:
I. For all vertical wall signs, the maximum width regulation noted above shall become the maximum height and the maximum
height regulation noted above shall become the maximum width.
II. A wall sign may include neon tubing attached directly to a wall surface when forming a border, letters, logo, or preform designs.
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
NA. The standard is not applicable.
ZD. As established for the principal building by the applicable zoning district.
(g) Window signs.
Figure 13.03.02.05
Illustrative Window Sign
Table 13.03.02.05
Window Sign Standards
Zoning Districts
Requirements
RA, ES, SR,
SU, OR, OG,
or ETJ
UR, MF
NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required No No No No No No No No No
Maximum number per street
frontage
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/526
Maximum total number NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Dimensions
Maximum sign area
(percent of total window
area per tenant space)
25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25%
Maximum height (feet) NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Location
Minimum spacing between
other signs (feet)
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Design characteristics
EMC No No No No No No No No No
Internal illumination No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
External illumination No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Halo lit illumination No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Channel letters No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Changeable copy No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
NA. The standard is not applicable.
ZD. As established for the principal building by the applicable zoning district.
Sec. 13.03.003 Freestanding signs
(a) Applicability. This section applies to freestanding signs allowed by this chapter.
(b) Setback. No portion of a freestanding sign shall be permitted to extend into the public right-of-way. A sign installed in compliance with this
chapter is not required to meet building setback requirements established elsewhere in the City's Code of Ordinances, specifically chapter 11, Zoning
Ordinance.
(c) Flags.
(1) Flags shall comply with table 13.03.03.01, flag standards, below (see figure 13.03.03.01, illustrative flag).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/526
(2) No flag should be allowed to encroach from one (1) parcel of property to another parcel of property.
Figure 13.03.03.01
Illustrative Flag
Table 13.03.03.01
Flag Standards
Zoning Districts
Requirements
RA, ES, SR,
SU, OR, OG,
or ETJ
UR, MF
NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required No No No No No No No No No
Maximum number per lot
(each flag may be mounted
on a separate flagpole, and
more than one (1) flag may
be mounted on an individual
flagpole.)
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
Maximum pole height (feet) 20 20 35 35 35 35 35 35 35
Maximum area of each flag
(square feet)
40 40 60 60 60 60 60 60 60
Design characteristics
EMC No No No No No No No No No
Internal illumination No No No No No No No No No
External illumination Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Halo lit illumination No No No No No No No No No
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/526
Channel letters No No No No No No No No No
Changeable copy No No No No No No No No No
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
General Notes:
1. As to the American flag, readers are encouraged to consult the protocols established in 4 U.S.C. §§ 1–10. Violation of these
protocols is not a violation of this Chapter.
2. Minimum property line setback shall be equal to the height of the flagpole.
(d) Monument signs. Monument signs shall comply with the standards in table 13.03.03.03, monument sign standards and table 13.03.03.04,
monument sign dimensions by roadway classification.
Figure 13.03.03.02
Illustrative Monument Sign
Table 13.03.03.03
Monument Sign Standards
Zoning Districts
Requirements
RA, ES,
SR, SU,
OR, OG or
ETJ
UR, MF
NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Maximum number per lot or
parcel - OR - Maximum number
per linear feet of street frontage
1 per 1,000
feet*
1 per
1,000
feet*
1 per
1,000
feet*
1 per
1,000
feet*
1 per
1,000
feet*
1 per
1,000
feet*
1 per
1,000
feet*
1 per
1,000
feet*
1 per
1,000
feet*
Location
Minimum setback (feet) (rightof-
way/edge of curb or pavement
2/10 2/10 2/10 2/10 2/10 2/10 2/10 2/10 2/10
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/526
if there is no curb, whichever is
greater)
Minimum spacing between other
detached signs (feet)
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Design characteristics
EMC NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Internal illumination NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
External illumination NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Halo lit illumination NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Channel letters NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Changeable copy NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
* In lieu of this standard, 2 monument signs are permitted if the lot has 2 frontages. If the lot has 3 or more frontages, 3 monument signs
are permitted.
Table 13.03.03.04
Monument Sign Dimensions by Roadway Classification
Standard
Maximum
Sign Width
(feet)
Maximum Sign
Face Area
(percentage of
total sign area)
Maximum
Height at
minimum
setback (feet)
Maximum
Height at
greater setback
(feet)4
Maximum
Height with Sign
Area Bonus (see
sec. 13.04.002)
Minimum
Letter or
Number Size
(inches)
Collectors
Local street,
residential/neighborhood
collector
10 70 8 8 8 6
Primary/industrial/
commercial collector
10 70 8 8 8 6
Arterials
Minor arterial5 15 65 8 8 10 8
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/526
Major arterial6 15 60 12 16 20 10
Tollway 15 55 16 24 30 12
Table Notes:
1. Sign Base. The sign base shall not exceed a maximum of 40% of the total sign height above the grade plane.
2. Required Materials. The materials of the sign base shall be masonry. The cabinet of a monument sign shall be finished with either brick,
stone, architectural concrete block, or decorative architectural feature that matches the primary building materials of the principal building, and
shall extend the full width of the sign base and perimeter of the cabinet. Monument signs constructed completely of masonry material shall be in
compliance with the masonry perimeter requirement.
3. Electronic Message Centers (EMCs). As stated in Sec. 13.02.003, Electronic Message Centers (EMCs), electronic message centers are
permitted as part of monument signs. If more than one (1) monument sign is permitted on a lot or parcel, only one (1) EMC is permitted on the
lot or parcel.
4. The height may increase one (1) foot for each additional two (2) feet of setback, up to the maximum height established in the Maximum
Height at Greater Setback column.
5. Roadways include those minor arterials identified on the Roadway Plan as well as Lakeline Boulevard, Anderson Mill Road, Cypress Creek
Road, Brushy Creek Road, Little Elm Trail (from Lakeline Blvd. to 183A), New Hope Drive and Bagdad Road.
6. Major Arterials are RM 1431/Whitestone Blvd, Parmer Lane/Ronald Reagan Blvd, Hwy 183/Bell Blvd, and RR 620.
(e) Sandwich/“A” frame Signs. Sandwich/“A” frame signs are allowed on private property, subject to the standards in table 13.03.03.05,
sandwich/“a” frame sign standards.
Figure 13.03.03.03
Illustrative Sandwich/“A” Frame Sign
Table 13.03.03.05
Sandwich/“A” Frame Sign Standards
Zoning Districts
Requirements
RA, ES, SR, SU,
OR, OG, or ETJ
UR, MF
NB, LB,
PO
GB MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required No No No No No No No No
Number per street frontage NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/526
Maximum number per each business or
institution (occupying a multi-tenant
building) with its own ground floor
entryway or storefront
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Maximum total number per singletenant
building or multi-tenant building
with a single entry
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Maximum total number NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Dimensions (per sign)
Maximum sign area (square feet) 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12
Maximum height (feet) 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
Location
Minimum setback from property line
(feet)
20 20 20 20 0 20 20 0
Minimum sidewalk clearance (feet) 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
Minimum spacing between signs (feet) 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
Design characteristics
EMC No No No No No No No No
Internal illumination No No No No No No No No
External illumination No No No No No No No No
Halo lit illumination No No No No No No No No
Channel letters No No No No No No No No
Changeable copy No No No No No No No No
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
NA. The standard is not applicable.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/526
General Note: Sign shall not be located in the right-of-way and may only be displayed during business hours.
Sec. 13.03.004 Incidental signs
(a) Generally. Incidental signs and light pole signs shall comply with the standards provided in table 13.03.04.01, incidental sign standards, and
table 13.03.04.02, light pole banner standards, and the provisions of this section.
(b) Incidental signs. Incidental signs are allowed on private property, subject to the standards in table 13.03.04.01, incidental sign standards.
Figure 13.03.04.01
Illustrative Incidental Signs
Table 13.03.04.01
Incidental Sign Standards
Zoning Districts
Requirements
RA, ES, SR,
SU, OR, OG,
or ETJ
UR, MF
NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required? Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Maximum total number (per
lot, parcel or site)
16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16
Dimensions
Maximum cumulative sign
area (square feet, measured
as the sum of the area of
each sign, whether
freestanding or attached)
160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160
Maximum height (feet) 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
Location
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/526
Minimum property line
setback (feet)
ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD ZD
Minimum spacing between
other incidental signs (feet)
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Design characteristics
EMC No No No No No No No No No
Internal illumination No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
External illumination No No No No No No No No No
Halo lit illumination No No No No No No No No No
Channel letters No No No No No No No No No
Changeable copy No No No No No No No No No
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
NA. The standard is not applicable.
ZD. As established for the principal building by the applicable zoning district.
1. Incidental signs may be vinyl or plastic. Wood is prohibited.
(c) Light pole banners. In addition to the incidental signs listed above, light pole signs are permitted as follows:
Figure 13.03.04.02
Illustrative Light Pole Banners
Table 13.03.04.02
Light Pole Banner Standards
Zoning Districts
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/526
Requirements RA, ES,
SR, SU,
OR, OG,
or ETJ
UR, MF NB, LB,
PO
GB HC, LI MU, TC H, PS HI PA
Allowed NR NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Permit required? Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Maximum total number
(per pole/percentage of total
poles on lot, parcel or site)
2 per light
pole/50%
2 per light
pole/50%
2 per light
pole/50%
2 per light
pole/50%
2 per light
pole/50%
2 per light
pole/50%
2 per light
pole/50%
2 per light
pole/50%
2 per light
pole/50%
Dimensions
Maximum sign area (square
feet, per banner)
18 18 18 18 18 18 18 18 18
Maximum vertical
dimension (feet)
6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
Maximum horizontal
dimension (feet)
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
Design characteristics
EMC No No No No No No No No No
Internal illumination No No No No No No No No No
External illumination Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Halo lit illumination No No No No No No No No No
Channel letters No No No No No No No No No
Changeable copy No No No No No No No No No
Table Notes:
Yes. The sign type or characteristic is permitted.
No. The sign type or characteristic is not permitted.
NR. The sign type is permitted for nonresidential uses only.
NA. The standard is not applicable.
Sec. 13.03.005 Subdivision entry signs
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/526
(a) Generally.
(1) Applicability. This section applies to residential subdivisions in the RA, ES, SR, SU and UR districts, including all sections and
phases of the subdivision collectively. The number and area of signs established in this section apply to the overall subdivision, and the
allowance for secondary and tertiary signs does not apply separately to each individual subdivision.
(2) Permit required. A permit is required for all residential subdivision entry signs.
(3) Number. Freestanding signs are allowed along an entrance roadway into a major project entry into a legal, recorded, multi-lot,
multi-sectioned, or master-planned residential subdivision, as provided below.
(4) Types. There are three (3) types of subdivision entry signs:
(A) Primary;
(B) Secondary; and
(C) Tertiary.
(5) Sign type. Subdivision entry signs must be monument signs constructed of stone, brick, or other approved masonry materials that
are compatible with surrounding development, and may be located on a hardscape feature at the subdivision entrance.
(6) Sign face. The maximum allowable sign face size limitations apply separately to each side of the street, where applicable.
(7) Sign height. The maximum sign height for all subdivision entry signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet.
(8) Illumination. External or internal illumination is permitted.
(b) Primary subdivision entry signs.
(1) Primary entrance signs are located at the primary entrance into the subdivision.
(2) Only one (1) primary entrance sign is permitted for the subdivision, except that a maximum of two (2) primary entrance signs is
permitted if two (2) entrances to the subdivision are located on two (2) different major arterial roadways, as designated in the City
Roadway Plan. In that case, one (1) primary entrance sign may be placed on each of the major arterial roadways.
(3) Sign area. The maximum sign area of the sign is 32 square feet for subdivisions containing 100 units or less. For every 100 units in
the subdivision in addition to the first 100 units, the size can increase an additional 10 square feet to a maximum size of 64 square feet of
total sign face area. If the sign face is incorporated into landscape features, a wall, or architectural feature, the size of the sign face is
determined by the area of the smallest rectangle within which the face of the sign can be enclosed.
(4) License agreement. The City may enter into a license agreement to permit the sign to be located on public right-of-way. The license
agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the City.
(c) Secondary subdivision entry signs. Secondary subdivision entry signs:
(1) Are to be located at entrances into the subdivision other than at the primary entrance;
(2) Are to be placed on private property within the subdivision and not on public right-of-way; and
(3) Shall have a sign face that is a maximum of 16 square feet in size.
(d) Tertiary subdivision entry signs.
(1) Tertiary subdivision entry signs:
(A) Are to be located at the entryway into sections within the subdivision and outside of the public right-of-way;
(B) Are permitted only in subdivisions that exceed 50 acres;
(C) Shall be comprised entirely of stone or masonry, with engraved lettering set within the stone;
(D) Shall be monument signs only; and
(E) Shall be limited to a total area of 10 square feet.
(2) The developer shall represent in writing to the City its plan for perpetual maintenance of such signs by the homeowner's association
or similar entity before a permit will be issued for such signs.
(Ordinance CO27-17-03-09-H5 adopted 3/9/17)
Sec. 13.03.006 Future development signs
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/526
Future development signs (temporary construction, or development sign) may be displayed no earlier than thirty (30) days before the commencement
of the activity and shall be removed no later than thirty (30) days after the completion of the activity, or the installation of a permanent sign,
whichever occurs first. A sign described by this subsection shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) One sign shall be permitted per lot; except that one sign per major access to the development shall be authorized if a lot is used
together with one or more contiguous lots for a single use or a unified development (for example, a shopping center).
(2) The maximum sign area of a freestanding sign shall be forty (40) square feet.
(3) The maximum sign area of a wall sign is equal to ten (10) percent of the building facade of the wall to which it is attached.
(4) Signs shall not be located in the street right-of-way, shall be placed at least twenty-five feet (25') from an intersection and a
minimum of ten feet (10') from the curbline.
Sec. 13.03.007 Temporary signs
(a) Temporary signs advertising the sale or lease of the commercial property (including multifamily) upon which the sign is located. No more than
one (1) sign per three hundred (300) linear feet of street frontage may be placed on such property, unless otherwise provided for in this section. For
single-family or duplex residential uses, the maximum size of the total sign face is six (6) square feet, and for multifamily, commercial or
institutional uses, the maximum size is thirty-two (32) square feet. Signs must be removed from the premises forty-eight (48) hours after the property
is leased or the sale has been closed. Signs shall be placed at least twenty-five feet (25') from an intersection and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
curbline
(b) Temporary signs advertising the opening or relocation of a business; provided, that such signs shall only be permitted for a maximum period of
thirty (30) days before and sixty (60) days after such opening or relocation. Signs shall be placed at least twenty-five feet (25') from an intersection
and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the curbline
(c) Banners and other temporary signs not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet, attached and parallel to a wall of the structure for a period not to
exceed 30 calendar days and with a period of not less than thirty (30) days between displays.
(d) A political sign is a sign that contains a primarily political message, has an area of thirty-six (36) square feet or less, is eight (8) feet high or
less, is not illuminated, and has no moving elements. A political sign may be placed on private real property with the consent of the property owner.
Private real property does not include real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows the city to use the real property for a
public purpose. A political sign may not be placed on public property, except at a polling station on election day or during early voting. A political
sign may not be placed in a public right-of-way. All political signs relating to an election or referendum shall be removed no later than ten (10) days
after the election or referendum to which the sign applies. This subsection is intended to conform to section 216.903 of the Local Government Code.
(e) Civic/nonprofit signs require a permit with no fee, shall not exceed four (4) square feet. Signs shall be allowed for a maximum of fourteen (14)
calendar days per event. Signs shall be placed at least twenty-five feet (25') from an intersection and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the curbline.
Signs shall not be placed anywhere in the center median of a public or private street
(f) Garage sale signs do not require a permit, shall not exceed four (4) square feet. Signs shall be allowed for a maximum of seventy-two (72)
consecutive hours no more than two (2) times per calendar year. Signs shall be placed at least twenty-five feet (25') from an intersection and a
minimum of ten feet (10') from the curbline. Signs shall not be placed anywhere in the center median of a public or private street
(g) Open house signs do not require a permit, shall not exceed four (4) square feet. Signs shall be allowed for a maximum of four (4) hours the day
of the open house. Signs shall be placed at least twenty-five feet (25') from an intersection and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the curbline. Signs
shall not be placed anywhere in the center median of a public or private street.
(Ordinance CO36-08-06-05-6A adopted 6/5/08)
ARTICLE 13.04 MASTER SIGN PROGRAM
Sec. 13.04.001 General provisions
(a) Generally.
(1) Purpose. The requirements of this section ensure that signs that meet certain standards and are consistent with the character and
quality of development in Cedar Park may be promptly approved and displayed. Approval of a master sign program pursuant to the
standards of this article: (A) allows for a unified presentation of signage throughout parcels proposed for development; (B) allows
flexibility to provide for unique environments; and (C) gives pre-approval of designs and design elements that will make subsequent
applications for sign permits more efficient. To this end, a master sign program alternative is created.
(2) Approval criteria. The Sign Administrator may approve a master sign program for a multi-tenant or mixed use development if (as
proposed) it will result in a substantially improved, comprehensive, and unified proposal, as provided in subsections (A) through (H)
below, compared to what is allowed through strict compliance with all other provisions of this chapter. The Sign Administrator shall
review all sign types (e.g., attached, freestanding, or incidental, etc.) for the parcel or parcels proposed for development, to determine the
degree of compliance with this article as a supplement to, or in lieu of, the sign standards otherwise applicable. Any deviations to the
number, dimensions, locations, or design characteristics of attached or freestanding signs that are sought by an applicant shall be justified
in writing, and shall clearly demonstrate a standard of design and quality that exceeds those provided in this chapter. Such demonstration
may include any or all of the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/526
(A) Construction of brick or natural stone;
(B) Consistent sizes, styles, and colors across the development;
(C) Use of landscaping around the sign base;
(D) Use of channel lettering;
(E) Fewer incidental signs;
(F) Greater spacing between signs along street frontages;
(G) Fewer total number of signs; and/or
(H) Signs of reduced heights and area.
(b) Applicability. The master sign program alternative is applicable to a single-use development that exceeds 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area or a multi-tenant development that exceeds 50,000 square feet of gross floor area in the following locations:
(1) Nonresidential districts, including the GB, PO, HC, LI, HI, H, and PS districts;
(2) Mixed use (MU) district; and
(3) Special districts, including the PA and PD districts.
(c) Standards for all master sign programs. Standards and permissions of master sign programs are as follows:
(1) Generally. Subject to compliance with a master sign program that is approved according to the flexibility criteria provided in this
Article, signs that are proposed as part of a master sign program may deviate from the standards of this chapter in terms of the:
(A) Maximum sign height; and
(B) Maximum sign area.
(2) Prohibited signs and sign elements. Prohibited signs and sign elements are not eligible for inclusion in a master sign program unless
specifically indicated in this chapter.
(3) Architectural theme. All signs shall be architecturally integrated into or complimentary to the design of the buildings and character
of the site, and shall use similar and coordinated design features, materials, and colors. The master sign program shall establish an
integrated architectural vocabulary and cohesive theme for the parcel(s) proposed for development.
(4) Uniform signs in multi-use developments. Wall signs displayed by two (2) or more businesses using common parking facilities shall
be uniform in construction (i.e. channel letters, plaques) and lighting (i.e. direct, indirect).
(d) Conditions of approval. The Sign Administrator or City Council, as applicable, may impose reasonable conditions on the master sign program
relating to the design, materials, locations, placements, or orientations, and sign specifications that are not related to the content of the signs or the
viewpoints of the sign users, in order to ensure continuing compliance with the standards of this Article and the approved master sign program.
(e) Contents of master sign program.
(1) A master sign program shall provide a master plan for signage for an entire parcel or parcels proposed for development. For
example, shopping center master sign programs shall include all tenants and out parcels; and office or industrial parks shall include all
types of signs for way-finding and tenants or uses within the development.
(2) Master sign programs shall include:
(A) A depiction of all proposed signs that will deviate from the underlying sign regulations;
(B) Size, location, and number of all signs, including area, letter height, and height;
(C) Materials, styles (letter colors, background colors, text, fonts, etc.), and colors for all signs subject to the master sign plan,
including context of where signs are to be placed on any given façade;
(D) Proposed illumination (external, internal, etc.), including illumination levels;
(E) A design theme with illustrative examples of each sign type and the proposed general locations of each sign type;
(F) A demonstration that the master sign program will improve the aesthetics of the development and will not have an adverse
impact on the use, enjoyment, or value of property in adjacent or nearby residential uses or districts; and
(G) Landscaping and/or ornamental structures including fences, fountains, public art, ground cover, and other landscaping
elements that are intended to complement those proposed signs that would deviate from the underlying sign regulations.
(f) Duration. An approved master sign program shall expire two (2) years from the date of such approval if no progress has been made towards
completion of the project, pursuant to section 245.005, Dormant Projects of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/526
(g) Amendment. Prior to expiration of the master sign program, the applicant may apply for an amendment that alters the design, materials,
locations, placements, orientations, and specifications of the signs. The Sign Administrator may approve the amended master sign program if it is
consistent with this Section, and does not increase the area or height of any freestanding or wall sign subject to the original master sign program by
more than 10 percent.
Sec. 13.04.002 Administrative approval
(a) Generally. The Sign Administrator may approve a master sign program if it complies with the requirements of this article, and does not exceed
the sign type or requirements provided in section 13.04.001, general provisions.
(b) Approval process.
(1) The sign Administrator shall review and approve the master sign program concurrent with the approval of a sign permit as provided
in article 13.06, rules of construction.
(2) An application for a sign permit shall include a draft master sign program with the contents required by section 13.04.001(e),
contents of master sign program.
(c) Bonus/flexibility criteria. The following sign types, dimensions, and design features are permitted as part of a master sign plan approval. To the
extent that the standards or a condition of master site plan approval conflicts with article 13.03, sign standards, the standards in the master sign plan
conditions apply. All other standards of article 13.03, sign standards, apply to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this section or a condition
of master sign plan approval.
(1) Projecting Signs (see table 13.03.02.03, projecting sign standards) and wall signs (see table 13.03.02.04, wall sign standards). The
maximum sign area may be increased by 20 percent.
(2) Monument signs. The maximum height may be increased per table 13.03.03.04, monument sign dimensions by roadway
classification.
(d) Elimination of nonconforming signs. If there are existing signs within the parcel proposed for development, they shall be brought into
conformance with the standards of the approved master sign program.
ARTICLE 13.05 SIGN ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 13.05.001 Permitting
(a) Applicability.
(1) Permit and fee required. It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, modify, relocate, repair, or convert any sign within the City
or its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) without first obtaining a sign permit from, and paying a permit fee to, the Sign Administrator
unless specifically noted otherwise in this chapter.
(2) Required conformance. No person may install a sign or structurally alter an existing sign except in conformity with this chapter and
all other applicable City ordinances.
(b) Sign Administrator.
(1) The Sign Administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, including without limitation:
(A) Issuing permits and collecting the fees required by this chapter;
(B) Conducting appropriate inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter;
(C) Instituting legal proceedings, including suits for injunctive relief when necessary, to ensure compliance with this chapter; and
(D) Investigating complaints of alleged violations of this chapter.
(2) The Sign Administrator is hereby authorized to delegate their authority, responsibilities, and obligations under this chapter as may
be appropriate for the proper administration and enforcement of its provisions. All references herein this chapter to the Sign Administrator
shall be deemed to include their appointed designees.
(c) Review and decision. After a complete application is filed, the Sign Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions as needed to ensure
compliance with this chapter, or deny the sign permit.
(d) Final inspection. After any sign requiring a permit is constructed or erected, the sign contractor performing the work or service shall request
that the Sign Administrator conduct a final inspection of the sign.
(e) Fees. Fees for sign permits shall be as specified in Appendix A to the Code of Ordinances, section 3.500, sign permit fees, and shall be paid
prior to issuance of the sign permit.
(f) Expiration of sign permits. A sign permit shall expire two (2) years from the date such permit was approved if no progress has been made
towards completion of the project, pursuant to section 245.005, Dormant Projects, of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/526
(g) No sign permit required. The following signs do not require a sign permit:
(1) Integral signs. Integral signs are those that are etched into stone, concrete, or another building material, or made of bronze,
aluminum, or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure to which they are attached, if the sign does
not exceed a cumulative area of six (6) square feet.
(2) Interior signs. Interior signs are those that are located within the interior of a building. Signs that are within five (5) feet of a
window count towards the window sign allowance stated in section 13.03.002, attached signs.
(3) Official signs or legal notices. Official signs and legal notices that are issued by any court, public body, official, or officer in
performance of a public duty, or in giving any legal notice, including signs that are required to be posted to give notice of pending action
pursuant to City ordinances. The dimensions and designs of these signs shall comply with the most recent version of the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices published by the Texas Department of Transportation, which document is incorporated by reference and
made a part of this Section.
(4) Signs de Minimus. Signs that are securely affixed to a building or structure (even if wall signs are not permitted in the district or for
the use), which do not exceed one (1) square foot in sign area, provided that only one (1) such sign is present on each building elevation
that is visible from public street rights-of-way or abutting property. Signs de minimus shall not be grouped to create a larger sign.
(5) Human signs. Human signs, except as prohibited in section 13.05.002(8), prohibited signs.
(6) Flags. Flags, as permitted in section 13.03.003, freestanding signs.
(7) Change of copy. No sign permit is required for a change of copy on any sign, or for the repainting, cleaning, and other normal
maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not
modified.
(8) Subject to other permits. The above sign types may require a building permit or other related permits subject to applicable Building
or Electrical Codes.
Sec. 13.05.002 Prohibited signs
The following signs are not permitted anywhere within the City or ETJ:
(1) Signs not allowed in the applicable zoning district, or that exceed the height, area, or other dimensional regulations in this chapter.
(2) Billboards.
(3) Articles, objects, or materials other than a sign as defined by this chapter.
(4) The following elements of a sign or sign structure, whether temporary or permanent, including:
(A) Sound, smoke, or odor emitters;
(B) Stacked products along roadway frontage; or
(C) Unfinished wood support structures, except that temporary signs may use unfinished stakes.
(5) Feather signs.
(6) Festoons.
(7) Graffiti.
(8) Human signs that:
(A) Are located in or within 10 feet of the public right-of-way;
(B) Carry or operate flashing or illuminated objects; or
(C) Operate between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(9) Inflatable signs.
(10) Off-premises signs, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter.
(11) Pole signs.
(12) Portable signs, except for sandwich boards, in accordance with section 13.03.003, freestanding signs.
(13) Pylon signs.
(14) Roof signs.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/526
(15) Signs with flashing lights, revolving beacon lights, fluttering, undulating, swinging, or otherwise moving parts. For purposes of
this Article, an electronically controlled changeable-copy sign is not considered a flashing sign unless it directly falls under the definition
of “flashing” as defined in this chapter.
(16) Signs installed, used, or maintained on any utility pole, traffic-signal pole, traffic-signal controller box, tree, public bench,
streetlight, or any other structure located on or over any public property or public right-of-way, except for subdivision entry signs, in
accordance with section 13.03.005, subdivision entry signs.
(17) Signs that substantially obstruct the lighting of public right-of-way or other public property, or interferes with a public utility or
traffic-control device.
(18) Signs that are illuminated so as to create a safety hazard by obstructing the view of pedestrians, bicycles, or vehicular traffic.
(19) Signs that are a traffic hazard because they simulate or imitate (in size, color, lettering, or design) any traffic sign, signal, or device,
or in any manner interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
(20) Signs that obstruct any fire escape or required exitway.
(21) Signs placed on a vehicle or trailer that is parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying a sign. Signs on vehicles or
trailers are prohibited unless:
(A) The vehicles are functional, used as motor vehicles, and have current registration and tags;
(B) The display of signs is incidental to the motor vehicle use (see figure 13.05.02.01, vehicle signs);
(C) The signs are used only as on-premises signs; and
(D) The vehicle is legally parked within a parking space.
Figure 13.05.02.01
Vehicle Signs
(22) Signs placed on semi-trailers, pull-behind trailers, shipping containers, or portable storage units, unless:
(A) The trailers, containers, or portable storage units are functional, used for their primary storage purpose, and, if subject to
registration, have current registration and tags;
(B) The signs are subordinate to the use for temporary storage, pick-up, or delivery; and
(C) The semi-trailer is parked in a designated loading area or on a construction site at which it is being used for deliveries or
storage.
(23) Signs placed on mannequins, costumed characters, or similar objects, except in the interior of a building or a window display.
(24) Signs that interfere with a ventilation opening, except that a sign may cover a transom window if otherwise in compliance with the
applicable Building and Fire Codes.
(25) Signs located within the visibility triangle at an intersection that results in impaired sight distance of users of the intersection.
Sec. 13.05.003 Nonconforming and nuisance signs
(a) Nonconforming signs. Any sign that is constructed, installed, used, operated, or maintained in violation of this chapter is “nonconforming”;
provided, a nonconforming sign is “legal nonconforming” if: (1) the nonconforming sign was approved by a sign permit before the effective date of
the ordinance adopting this chapter, if a permit was required under applicable law; (2) if no sign permit was required under applicable law, the
nonconforming sign was in all respects in conformity with the applicable law or conditions of approval immediately prior to the effective date of the
ordinance adopting this chapter; (3) the sign had legal nonconforming status on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter; or (4) the
nonconforming sign existed on the date the property on which the sign is located was annexed into the City.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/526
(1) Continuation of legal nonconforming sign. A legal nonconforming sign shall be allowed to remain and be maintained subject to the
limitations of this section, but no alteration shall be made that would increase the degree of nonconformity.
(2) Replacement, relocation, or alteration of nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced, relocated, or altered,
except in compliance with this chapter.
(3) Replacement of nonconforming element. If an element of a sign that causes the sign to be nonconforming is removed, it shall not be
replaced, except with a conforming element.
(4) Removal of nonconforming sign structure. If a nonconforming sign structure is removed, it shall not be replaced or altered, except
in compliance with this chapter.
(b) Nuisance signs.
(1) Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code sec. 217.042, the Sign Administrator may declare a sign to be obsolete or substandard
under any applicable ordinances of the City to the extent that the sign becomes a hazard to the health and safety of the public. For the
purposes of this subsection, a sign is considered obsolete or substandard under any of the following conditions:
(A) When structural components of the sign are visibly bent, broken, missing, or visibly damaged in a manner that would render
the structure unsafe under the terms of the applicable Building Code;
(B) When a sign or any of its structural components are twisted, leaning, or at angles other than those at which it was originally
installed, to the extent that the sign becomes a hazard to the health and safety of the public;
(C) Electrical conditions exist which are in violation of the City's adopted Electrical Code and which the Sign Administrator
deems it to be a hazard to the health and safety of the public;
(D) A nonconforming sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown down or otherwise damaged to 60 percent or less of the cost of
installing a new sign of the same type at the same location for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the
letters, symbols, or other matters on the sign;
(E) The business, person, or activity that the sign or sign structure identifies or advertises ceases to operate on the premises on
which the sign or sign structure is located; or
(F) A nonconforming sign does not display any message for 90 consecutive days.
(2) Except as limited by subsection (a) above, repairs of a nuisance sign are permissible if it has been determined that the sign has been
damaged to 60 percent or less of the cost of installing a new sign of the same type at the same location, or if 60 percent or less of the sign
surfaces have been damaged. Repairs shall be completed no later than 90 days from the date of the damage.
(3) Abatement of hazardous condition. If the Sign Administrator determines that a nuisance sign presents an imminent and substantial
risk to public health, safety, and welfare, the Sign Administrator may enter the premises and abate the hazardous condition. The
reasonable cost of abating the hazardous sign, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the prevailing judgment interest rate, shall be
recorded as a lien against the record owner of the property on which the sign is located. A sign removed under this provision shall be held
for a period of no less than 60 days after its removal before disposal of the removed sign, and the Sign Administrator shall return the sign
to its owner upon payment of the incurred removal expenses and storage fees.
(4) Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code sec. 216.003(e), as amended, an on-premises sign or sign structure shall be removed on
the first anniversary of the date the business, person, or activity that the sign or sign structure identifies or advertises ceases to operate on
the premises on which the sign or sign structure is located; and if the premises are leased, an on-premises sign or sign structure shall be
removed on the second anniversary of the date the most recent tenant ceases to operate on the premises on which the sign or sign structure
is located
Sec. 13.05.004 Enforcement
(a) Beneficiary presumed. The primary beneficiary of any sign installed, used, or maintained in violation of this chapter is presumed to have
authorized or caused, either directly or indirectly, the installation, use, or maintenance of the sign in violation of this chapter.
(b) Notice of violation. If the Sign Administrator determines that any sign is installed, used, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the Sign Administrator shall provide written notice to the owner or primary beneficiary of such sign stating the basis of their determination
and a reasonable period of time to remove the nonconforming or nuisance sign, or, to the extent authorized by this Article, to remedy all
nonconforming or nuisance elements of the sign. This notice shall be provided to the owner or primary beneficiary of the sign by certified and first
class mail, by personal delivery, or, if the Sign Administrator is unable to deliver by mail or personal delivery, by publication in the City's official
newspaper.
(c) Appeal. The Sign Administrator's determination may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. An appeal shall be delivered to the
Sign Administrator within 10 days of receipt or publication of the notice of violation. The Sign Administrator's receipt of a timely appeal shall stay
further enforcement until the Commission's determination. Upon consideration of the appeal, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall uphold the
Sign Administrator's determination and order remedy of the alleged violation(s), or overturn the Sign Administrator's determination and dismiss the
notice of violation. The Commission's order shall be in writing and forwarded to the Sign Administrator and noticed primary beneficiary. If the
Commission's order is not complied with, the Sign Administrator may order the sign removed at the noticed primary beneficiary's expense.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/526
(d) Failure to comply.
(1) Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009, general penalty for violations of
Code, of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, as amended.
(2) Civil remedies. In addition and without prejudice to the penalties and remedies stated herein, the City may also enforce these
provisions and pursue any and all available legal remedies, including but not limited to injunctive relief and recovery of damages and/or
civil penalties under chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
(3) Removal by Sign Administrator. If the person fails to alter or remove the sign to comply with this chapter within a the period
prescribed by the notice of violation or, if appealed, the Commission's order, the Sign Administrator may enter the property and cause the
sign to be altered or removed to effect compliance with this Chapter at the expense of the primary beneficiary, and shall, upon the
determination of the expenses, certify them to the City. A sign removed under this provision shall be held for a period of no less than 60
days after its removal before disposal of the removed sign, and the Sign Administrator shall return the sign to its owner upon payment of
the incurred removal expenses and storage fees.
(4) Notice of expenses incurred. The Sign Administrator shall notify the owner or person entitled to possession of the sign or property
of the total actual expenses incurred for the alteration or removal of the sign. If that person fails within 30 days after the date of
notification to pay the entire expenses of the repair, alteration, or removal, then the expenses may be recorded as a lien against the
property. These expenses shall include:
(A) The actual cost of repair or removal of the sign plus administrative costs;
(B) An amount representing penalty and interest at the prevailing judgment rate for the cost of collection; and
(C) Reasonable attorney's fees.
(5) Permits to be withheld. If expenses are incurred for the alteration or removal of a sign pursuant to this subsection, no permit shall be
renewed or issued for the property upon which any such sign exists or existed unless and until such expenses authorized by this subsection
are paid in full.
(e) Amortization. The City may authorize amortization and removal of a nonconforming sign in accordance with the procedural and compensation
requirements specified in chapter 216, regulation of signs by municipalities, of the Local Government Code.
Sec. 13.05.005 Variances
(a) Generally. A sign permit applicant may request a variance from the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding the provisions of this chapter
pursuant to this section when the requested relief is necessary to approve the application.
(b) Applicability.
(1) Matters subject to variance. The Commission may consider and grant variances concerning the:
(A) Height and setback of signs;
(B) Maximum sign area;
(C) Maximum number of signs; and
(D) Variances specifically provided for in this Section, provided only if the following determinations have been made that:
(i) Appeal falls within the jurisdiction of the Commission;
(ii) All parties directly in interest have been notified of the proceedings;
(iii) The granting of the variance would not have the effect of applying sign standards from a less restrictive district;
(iv) The property cannot be reasonably used in conformity with the provisions of this chapter;
(v) The difficulty complained of is unique to the property in question and is not common to all properties similarly situated;
and
(vi) Balancing the interest of the City in preserving the purpose of this Section or the interest of nearby properties against
the interest of the applicant in using this property as proposed to be used, and the granting of the variance is required by
considerations of justice and equity.
(2) Procedures.
(A) Application. Applications for a sign variance shall be submitted to the Sign Administrator. A nonrefundable application fee,
as established by the City Council and stated in the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances, Appendix A, Fee Schedule, shall accompany
the application. The application shall be in such form and contain such information and documentation as shall be prescribed by the
Sign Administrator.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/526
(B) Action by the Sign Administrator. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Sign Administrator shall refer it to the
Commission for hearing and decision.
(C) Public hearing.
(i) A public hearing on the application shall be set and conducted by the Commission.
(ii) Before the tenth (10th) calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing conducted by the Commission, written notice
of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to each owner, as indicated by the most recently certified municipal tax
roll, of property within 300 feet of the property on which the variance is proposed. The notice shall include a description of the
time and place of such hearing, a description of the location of the subject property and a description of the requested variance.
In addition, the notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the City stating the time and place of such hearing, a
minimum of ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(3) Approval criteria. The Commission may grant a variance only when it is demonstrated that at least four (4) of the following five (5)
criteria are met:
(A) The literal enforcement of the sign regulations creates an unnecessary hardship on the applicant;
(B) The proposed sign shall not have a substantial adverse impact the adjacent property (visibility, size and the like);
(C) The proposed sign shall be of a unique design or configuration;
(D) The variance is needed due to restricted area, shape, topography, or physical features that are unique to the property or
structure on which the proposed sign would be erected; or
(E) The variance will substantially improve the public convenience and welfare and does not violate the intent of this Chapter.
(4) Decision. The Commission shall render its decision granting or denying the sign variance after closing the public hearing.
(A) The Commission shall decide the merits of the variance based on the approval criteria and their findings of fact and
deliberations, and the Commission's decision shall be preserved by written order signed by the Chairperson.
(B) The Commission may impose specific conditions and safeguards relating to construction, character, location, landscaping,
screening, and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this chapter as considered necessary to prevent injurious
effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity or upon public facilities and services. Such conditions shall be
expressly stated in the written order granting the variance and in the notice informing the applicant thereof and in any permit based
thereon. Violation of such conditions and safeguards shall be a violation of this chapter.
(C) A variance less or different than that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to some relief
but not to the relief requested.
(D) The Commission's decision is final.
(5) Effect of variance.
(A) The issuance of a variance shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any sign nor the development, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any sign or sign structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing
of an application for any permits or approvals which may be required by the City, including, but not limited to, a building permit,
certificate of occupancy, and subdivision approval.
(B) No variance of the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than 2 years unless a sign permit has been
issued and construction has actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or unless a
certificate of occupancy is issued and a use commenced within such period.
Sec. 13.05.006 Economic or community development agreements
Through an Economic or Community Development Agreement executed pursuant to Texas Local Government Code (TLGC), chapters 501–505, the
City may establish unique sign standards if the proposed standards:
(1) Promote consistency among signs within a development thus creating visual harmony between signs, buildings, and other
components of the property;
(2) Promote economic or community development by allowing flexibility in sign design, size, and characteristics to meet the needs of
master planned development, uses that create jobs or meet the policies of the Comprehensive Plan, or that require special consideration;
(3) Enhance the compatibility of signs with the architectural and site design features within a development; and
(4) Encourage signs that are in character with planned and existing uses thus creating a unique sense of place.
ARTICLE 13.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/526
Sec. 13.06.001 Measurements
(a) Generally. The regulations of this chapter shall be applied using the measurements provided in this section.
(b) Setbacks. All setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the nearest edge of the sign or sign element.
(c) Sign height. For freestanding signs (temporary and permanent), sign height is calculated as follows:
(1) The distance from the top of the sign structure to the lowest grade level at the base of the sign.
(2) The height of any monument base structure erected to support the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height.
(3) When the grade difference between the sign base and street centerline is 30 inches or less, sign height is measured from the ground
level at the base to the top of the sign face or sign structure, whichever is higher.
(4) Where the natural grade of the ground around the base of where a sign is to be located is 30 inches or more below the grade of the
street centerline, the vertical distance to the top of the sign face or sign structure, whichever is higher, is measured from the elevation of
the centerline of the adjacent street frontage (see figure 13.06.01.01, measurement of sign height).
(5) Where the natural grade of the ground where the sign is to be located is higher than the street centerline, the vertical distance to the
top of the sign face or sign structure, whichever is higher, is measured from the elevation of the average grade around the base of the sign.
Figure 13.06.01.01
Measurement of Sign Height
(d) Sign clearance. Sign clearance is the distance between the bottom of a sign face or structural element that is not affixed to the ground and the
nearest point on the surface under it.
Sec. 13.06.002 Calculations
(a) Generally. The calculations required by the regulations of this article shall be according to the methodologies provided in this section.
(b) Maximum sign size. This chapter establishes maximum sign size in two (2) different ways:
(1) First, the district regulations establish a maximum size based on the frontage of a lot or parcel. This metric is designed to provide
flexibility by calibrating sign size to the size of a property, and protects aesthetics by avoiding excessively sized signs on small properties
with smaller buildings.
(2) Second, the regulations establish a maximum size based on the maximum absolute area of an individual sign. Where a maximum
size is established for both the property frontage and an individual sign, the smaller size applies unless otherwise provided.
(c) Sign area.
(1) Single-faced. For a sign composed of one sign face, the sign area shall be determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame
surrounding the sign face, but excluding the sign structure supporting the sign unless it is part of the communication of the sign or used to
differentiate it. In the case of a freestanding sign that includes blank spaces with the intention of adding wording in the future, the blank
spaces shall be included in measuring the sign area (see figure 13.06.02.01, calculating sign area).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/526
(2) Double-faced. For a sign composed of two (2) sign faces that are constructed back to back, or at less than a 60º angle to each other,
the sign area shall be determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame of the larger of the two (2) sides, but excluding the structure
supporting the sign unless it is part of the communication of the sign or used to differentiate it.
(3) Double-faced, V-shaped sign. For a sign composed of two (2) sign faces that are constructed at more than a 60º angle to each other,
the sign area shall be determined based on the total area of the outer dimensions of both frames surrounding both sign faces together, but
excluding the structure supporting the sign unless it is part of the communication of the sign or used to differentiate it.
Figure 13.06.02.01
Calculating Sign Area
ARTICLE 13.07 DEFINITIONS
Abandoned sign. Any sign that does not display any advertisement, copy or message or any sign which identifies or advertises a business, lessor,
service, owner, product, or activity, which is no longer available at the indicated location or no longer available on the premises or for which no legal
owner can be found.
Accessory sign. A sign inscribed onto a fence, archway, earthen berm, or similar permitted accessory structure that is not erected for the sole purpose
of mounting a sign.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/526
Actively being built. The project or subdivision has continuous construction efforts underway to complete the project.
Amortization. The process through which nonconformities are required to come into compliance with applicable regulations over a prescribed period
of time.
Attached sign. A sign that is affixed to a building (including a building component, such as a column, marquee or canopy) and that uses the building
as its primary support.
Average finished grade. The “grade plane” as established in the applicable Building Code.
Awning. A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building to shield a doorway, walkway, or window from inclement weather or the sun, and
that is not supported by posts or columns. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame and may be retracted into
the face of the building.
Awning sign. A sign that is painted, stenciled or attached to the surface of an awning.
Banner. Any strip of cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar lightweight material, attached to the wall of a building. This definition does not include
flags, pennants or streamers.
Billboard. See off-premises sign.
Cabinet. A box-like frame or external structure that encloses the various functional elements of the sign design, whether electrical or dimensional
components.
Canopy. A permanent roof-like shelter extending at least 12 inches from part or all of a building face and constructed of a durable material such as
masonry, metal, or glass.
Canopy sign. A sign attached to, embossed, inscribed, painted, or constructed on the surface of or hanging beneath a canopy.
Changeable copy. Characters, letters, numbers, or illustrations that can be manually replaced or altered through the placement of letters or symbols
on a panel mounted or track system.
Changeable copy sign. See “manual changeable copy sign.”
Channel letter. A fabricated or formed three-dimensional letter.
Clearance (of a sign). The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street curb and the lowest point of any sign, including
framework and embellishments, but excluding sign supports.
Commercial. Locations where the principle use of the property is not classified as residential or multifamily.
Copy. Any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign.
Curbline. An imaginary line drawn along the outermost part of back of the curb and gutter on either side of a public street, or, if there is no curb and
gutter, along the outermost portion of the paved roadway, or if there is no paved roadway, along the edge of the traveled portion of the roadway.
Directional signs, traffic. An on-premises sign that protects traffic flow and promotes traffic safety by giving directions or instructions relating to
traffic movements - e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs.
Eave line. The overhang at the lower edge of a roof or the line formed by the intersection of the planes of the roof and wall.
Effective area. See “sign area.”
Electrical sign. A sign containing electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures, or utilizing electric current, but not including a sign illuminated by an
exterior light source.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/526
Electronic message center (EMC). A display, or device that changes its message or copy by programmable electronic or mechanical processes.
Facade. All building wall elevations, including any vertical extension of the building wall (parapet), but not including any part of the building roof.
Feather sign. A banner in the shape of a feather, quill, sail, blade, or teardrop, and mounted on a solid or flexible pole or cord. These are sometimes
referred to as “quill signs” or “sail banners.” A feather sign is considered a “sign” regardless of whether it contains text or logos.
Festoons. A chain, string, or wire of banners, flags, ribbons, lights, or other materials hung as a decoration.
Flag. A piece of fabric or other flexible material customarily mounted on a pole or similar freestanding structure.
Flashing. To change colors intermittently in order to achieve a flashing, fluttering, scrolling, undulating, or rolling affect (i.e. LED displays).
Scrolling of text in a single color is not considered to be flashing.
Footcandle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are 1 foot from a uniform point source of 1 candle.
Freestanding sign. Any sign placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure, such as a monument sign.
Frontage. A boundary line separating public right-of-way from the lot for any lot or parcel. For a planned development district, special sign district,
or a multi-tenant site consisting of multiple lots or parcels (hereinafter “combined development”), the frontage is the combined frontage for all lots or
parcels within the combined development and that are subject to a legally binding condition of approval that subordinates the frontage allowance for
signs on each lot or parcel to the frontage assigned to the combined development.
Government sign. A sign installed, maintained, or used:
(1) By the City, County, State or its subdivisions (such as the school district or community colleges), or the federal government,
required or specifically authorized for the public purpose pursuant to regulations promulgated by the State or Federal Government;
(2) By the City for a public purpose; or
(3) By any government agency for regulation of traffic within public right-of-way.
Grade plane. The “grade plane” as defined in the applicable Building Code.
Graffiti. A sign painted, drawn, etched, stenciled, marked (with ink, chalk, dye or similar substances), or scratched onto or into the surface of any
building, structure, fixture, improvement or the ground without the express consent of the owner or occupant of that building, fixture, improvement
or parcel. Graffiti is not considered a wall sign or a mural.
Halo lit. A sign illuminated by concealing the light source behind three-dimensional opaque letters, numbers, or other characters of a sign, resulting
in the night time perception of a halo around the silhouette of each sign character. This is also referred to as “reverse channel” or “reverse lit”
illumination. A halo lit sign is not considered an internally illuminated sign.
Height (of a sign). The vertical distance between the finished grade before the sign or grade of the adjacent street curb, whichever is greater,
measured to the highest point of the sign.
Human sign. A sign as defined by this section which is held or attached to a human for the purpose of advertising any goods, services, functions or
specific business locations.
Illumination or illuminated. Any source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly from a source of light incorporated in or indirectly from an
artificial source.
Illumination, external. Lighting projected onto a sign from a source external to, or attached to the exterior of, the sign structure. External illumination
consists of lights mounted on the ground attached to the top of the sign focused downward directly on the sign.
Illumination, internal. Illumination by light sources enclosed entirely within the sign cabinet and not directly visible from outside the sign. Includes
“internally illuminated.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/526
Incidental sign. A sign with copy located on a panel and mounted on a pole or a wall or similar structure, with or without a structural frame that is
normally incidental to the allowed use of the property, but can contain any message or content. Examples of incidental signs include directional
signs, menu boards, property or tenant identification names or numbers, names of occupants, , signs posted on private property relating to private
parking, or signs warning the public against trespassing or danger from animals.
Inflatable sign. Any balloon or other device which is inflated by air or other gas and displayed outdoors. Inflatable structures primarily designed for
recreational use shall not be considered to be a sign as, for example: slides, swimming pools or space walks.
Installer. The person or company who constructs or places a sign on behalf of an applicant.
Legal nonconforming sign. A sign that violates the provisions of this chapter but may remain and be maintained in its existing location subject to
certain restrictions, as defined in section 13.05.003(a), nonconforming and nuisance signs.
Light pole banner. A banner mounted onto a functional and operational light pole, and attached with the longest vertical dimension adjoining or
directly attached to the light pole.
Light pollution. Brightening of the night sky caused by street lights and other man-made sources, which has a disruptive effect on natural cycles and
inhibits the observation of stars and planets.
Lot. See division 11.10.02 [sic], general definitions.
Manual changeable copy sign. A sign in which at least 25% of the sign face consists of changeable copy. Typical uses include notices of meetings,
activities, and other notices of interest to neighborhood association, government entities (typically in government buildings), churches (limited to
places of worship only), advertising by businesses for short-term sales or events (such as movie theaters, restaurants with daily specials, etc.), and
neighborhood associations that facilitate communication within the community served by those entities.
Monument sign. A sign where the frame of the sign face is set at grade with the ground as a monument or in an earthen berm. There is no clearance
between the ground and the sign face.
Multifamily. Locations that contain three (3) or more attached units designed for residential use including town homes and condominiums.
Multitenant building. A building with two (2) or more retail, wholesale, business, industrial, nonprofit or professional tenants or occupants (not
necessarily under single ownership).
Multitenant center sign. A sign located on the same lot or parcel with two (2) or more retail, wholesale, business, industrial, or professional uses (not
necessarily under single ownership), and using common facilities including off-street parking, access, or landscaping. The sign is used by at least two
(2) tenants or occupants of the lot or parcel.
Mural. A hand produced or machined graphic applied or affixed to the exterior of a building wall through the application of paint, canvas, tile, metal
panels, applied sheet graphic or other medium generally so that the wall becomes the background surface or platform for the graphic, generally for
the purpose of decoration or artistic expression, including but not limited to, painting, fresco or mosaic. A mural is a type of wall sign that requires a
permit. Graffiti is not considered a Mural. A message sprayed onto the side of a building without a permit is a violation of the chapter and can be
abated.
Neighborhood association. For purposes of this article, one neighborhood association shall develop and maintain bylaws and be governed by a board
of representatives that shall represent the entire subdivision or recorded section or village, consisting of 50 homes or more. It shall contain members
that consist of at least 30 percent of the residential households within the subdivision. Representatives of the neighborhood association shall be
chosen through a majority election by its members and any dues, bylaws, etc. must be decided by popular vote of the membership. Membership must
be open to all residents. Member restriction must be in accordance with the bylaws of the association.
Nonconforming sign. A sign that violates the provisions of this chapter, as defined in section 13.05.003(a), nonconforming and nuisance signs.
Nuisance sign. A sign that is declared to be obsolete or substandard as a hazard to the public health and safety pursuant to section 13.05.003(b),
nuisance abatement.
Off-premises sign. A sign located on property other than where the business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product that it
identifies or advertises is located.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/526
On-premises sign. A sign located on the same property where the business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product that it
identifies or advertises is located.
Parapet. The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line.
Parcel. An area of land that does not meet the definition of a “lot,” and that is defined by a legal description and recorded or registered with the
County Clerk.
Pole sign. A sign that is mounted on one or more freestanding poles or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is not in direct contact
with a solid base or the ground.
Portable signs. Signs not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported by wheels including,
but not limited to signs which are mounted on skids, trailers, wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for
advertising.
Premises. An area of land occupied by the buildings or other physical uses which are an integral part of the activity conducted upon the land.
Primary beneficiary. The owner of the property on which a sign is located and/or the owner, operator, or manager of the business, person,
organization, activity, event, place, service, or product the sign identifies or advertises.
Private traffic-control signs. Small traffic directional signs indicating interior circulation of parking areas on site, warn of obstacles or overhead
clearance, or designate permissible parking.
Projecting sign. A sign supported by and extending at least 18 inches from a building wall.
Proximate. A sign located within 25 feet of the edge of the street right-of-way abutting the driveway entrance.
Pylon signs. Freestanding signs that are supported by a structure extending from and permanently attached to the ground by a foundation or footing,
with a clearance between the ground and the sign face. Pylon signs are not considered monument signs. Pylon signs differ from pole signs in that
they are supported by a structure with internal clearance rather than a pole.
Reader panel. Any and all portions of an electronically controlled changeable-copy sign containing light emitting diodes (LED) or other electronic
lighting device intended to generate text, graphics, numerals or background lighting.
Residential. Locations where the principal use of the property is for one- and two-family dwelling units.
Roof sign. Any sign installed over or on the roof of a building.
Sandwich board. A portable sign that is ordinarily in the shape of an “A” with back to back sign faces, an easel, or a similar configuration.
Shopping center. A group of retail stores planned and designed for the site on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with off-street parking,
landscaped areas, and pedestrian malls or plazas provided on the property as an integral part of the unit. A shopping center differs from a multitenant
building in that it is limited to retail uses, and includes a series of pedestrian malls or plazas connecting those uses and common areas such as parking
facilities.
Sign. Any structure, display, light device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing that is designated, intended, or
used to advertise or inform. The term “sign” includes the supporting structure of the sign.
Sign Administrator. The individual responsible for administering the provisions of this Chapter 13, Sign Regulations, who is the Director of
Development Services, or a designee, or as appointed by the City Manager.
Sign area. Includes all lettering, wording, logos, design, symbols, framing, roofing, and cabinets, or modules, calculated according to the provisions
established in this article.
Sign de Minimus. Signs that are securely affixed to a building or structure (even if wall signs are not permitted in the district or for the use), which do
not exceed one square foot in sign area. See section 13.05.001(g)(4).
Sign face. The part of the sign that contains sign copy and is distinguished from other parts of the sign, including another sign face, by borders or
decorative trim. The term does not include a lighting fixture, apron, or catwalk unless it displays a part of the advertising or information contents of
the sign.
Sky glow. Lighting deriving from an artificial source that is visible from outside of a lot, parcel or site in the night sky.
Stake sign. A temporary sign that does not exceed six (6) square feet in area with a base/stake commonly made of metal, wood or other similar
material with an end for driving into the ground.
Subdivision. For purposes of this article, the subdivision in its entirety, including all phases, sections, villages, or units under a common development
plan.
Temporary sign. A sign typically made of lightweight or insubstantial material that can be easily or quickly mounted or removed (such as cloth,
canvas, vinyl, cardboard, wallboard, or other light temporary materials), with or without a structural frame, intended for a temporary period of
display. Common examples include inflatable signs, real estate signs, political signs, opinion signs, placards, construction signs, or signs that
advertise a grand opening or special event. This paragraph is provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit the content of temporary signs.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/526
Tollway. The 183A Toll Road.
Unnecessary hardship. One or more unique conditions related to the restricted area, shape, topography or other physical feature of a property that
will prevent any reasonable opportunity to provide adequate on-site signage provided that the conditions creating the hardship have not been created
by the applicant's or property owner's own actions, are not a matter of convenience and are not solely based on financial considerations.
Wall sign. A sign attached to the facade of a building and that:
(1) Is placed directly on and contained totally within the dimensions of the outside wall; and
(2) Does not extend more than 18 inches from a building surface.
Window sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, etched, engraved, or affixed to a window and inside a building or integral to the windowpane, but
clearly visible from outside the building. Signs placed on the exterior of a window are not permitted.
Wood frame sign. A temporary sign made of wood, metal or a similar material.
(Ordinance CO27-17-03-09-H5 adopted 3/9/17)
CHAPTER 14
SITE DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 14.01 APPLICABILITY
Sec. 14.01.001 Title and enacting clause
References in this Chapter shall be known and may be cited as “the Chapter” or “this Chapter” and shall be references to the site development
regulations. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.01.002 General
Within the City corporate limits, the use of property shall not be changed, no development shall take place and no building permit shall be issued
until a site development permit has been issued in accordance with this Chapter except for the following:
(1) Construction, alteration or addition to a single-family residential structure, or an accessory use to any such structure.
(2) Alteration or finish-out of an existing building when the alteration or finish-out does not increase the square footage of the building
or change the building footprint as long as the following apply:
(A) The use does not change, or if the use changes, the new use does not require more parking than is currently existing and no
additional parking spaces, aisles or driveways are proposed;
(B) The alteration, finish-out or change of use is in compliance with all Codes and regulations of the City; and
(C) The addition does not increase the degree of any existing noncompliance.
(3) Construction of a fence not within the boundary of a major corridor, but no exception is granted by this subsection for construction
of a retaining wall or for a fence that may obstruct the flow of water.
(4) Brush clearing in compliance with the landscape and tree regulations of the City.
(5) Substantial restoration within a period of two (2) years of a building damaged by fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the
public enemy, or accident of any kind in accordance with Chapter 11, Article 11.07.
(6) A canopy or carport placed over existing parking spaces or other paved areas.
(7) A rough grading permit may be issued by the Engineering Department after review by the Engineering Department (engineer) and
the Development Services Department (Director of Development Services, or their designee).
(8) Any other minor site activity similar to those listed above and approved by the Development Sevice Department (Development
Services Director).
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
Sec. 14.01.003 Repeal
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/526
Ordinances and parts of ordinances in effect prior to the effective date of this chapter as amended and/or are in conflict are repealed.
Sec. 14.01.004 Discrepancies
Where a discrepancy exists between the prescriptions established in this chapter and the requirements of the building codes, fire codes, zoning
ordinance or any other applicable code or ordinance of the city, or any state law, then the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
ARTICLE 14.02 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 14.02.001 Scope and purpose
This Chapter establishes the submittal requirements by which residential building plans (single-family detached, single-family attached, and patio
homes) will be reviewed by the City. The purpose is to ensure the technical, nonconflicting compliance with all of the laws and ordinances of the
City so as to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens. All residential building plans shall be reviewed by the building inspections
division; however, the building official reserves the right to require a residential building plan to go before the Development Services Committee (see
section 14.03.002 and section 14.12.001) for review. All applications for condominiums, townhouses, amenity centers, and multifamily residential
plans will be reviewed by the Development Services Committee and shall follow the requirements outlined in nonresidential developments.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.02.002 Form and content
All residential building permit submittals must be in accordance with the most current residential application and guidelines.
ARTICLE 14.03 NONRESIDENTIAL AND MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT*
Sec. 14.03.001 Scope and purpose
This article establishes the process by which site development applications will be reviewed by the Development Services Committee. It defines the
submittal and content requirements for all nonresidential applications and all applications for condominiums, townhouses, amenity centers and
multifamily residential site plans. The purpose is to ensure the technical, nonconflicting compliance with all of the laws and ordinances of the city so
as to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.03.002 Administration and review
(a) Development Services Committee–Purpose. The Development Services Committee shall be organized to generally ensure compliance by site
owners with all applicable codes, regulations, laws, ordinances and plans and to coordinate examination of development proposals to ensure that all
City requirements, established by ordinance, resolution or policy, have been met without conflict. The Development Services Committee shall have
all the power and duties specifically provided for herein.
(b) Same–Organization and membership. The Development Services Committee shall consist of City staff members including, but not limited to
representatives from:
(1) Development Services Department.
(2) Engineering.
(3) Industrial pretreatment.
(4) Fire prevention.
(5) Utilities.
(6) Parks and recreation.
(7) Building inspections.
(c) Same–Powers and duties.
(1) The Development Services Committee shall determine from information submitted whether or not the site development plans meet
the requirements of codes, regulations, and ordinances.
(2) The Development Services Committee, after review of the site development plans, shall inform the owner in writing of any
technical compliance problems in the plans. Compliance and enforcement shall be as provided in the particular code, regulation or
ordinance violated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/526
(3) The Development Services Committee will hear requests for administrative exceptions to provisions of this Article.
(A) An administrative exception may be granted if, by unanimous vote, the committee finds the following:
(i) The exception will provide an alternate means of achieving the same or higher level of technical performance specified
by this Article; and
(ii) The exception is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Article so that public health, safety and welfare
may be secured.
(B) All requested exceptions from this Article shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date on which
consideration is to be given by the Development Services Committee. Submittal shall be made to the Development Services
Department.
(C) The applicant shall have the burden of proving that an exception, if granted, will provide the same level of technical
performance specified by this Article.
(D) Findings of the Development Services Committee, together with the specific facts upon which findings are based, shall be
kept in the case files for the site development permit.
(E) If the applicant is dissatisfied with the determination of the Development Services Committee, the applicant may file a request
for a variance to be heard by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the same rules, procedures, and fees set forth for variances
in section 12.12.023 of the City's subdivision ordinance and in section 2.400(e)(2) of Appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.03.003 Site development permit required
Site development plans to be reviewed by the Development Services Committee will apply to all types of nonresidential applications and all
applications for condominiums, townhouses, amenity centers and multifamily residential prior to site development permit issuance. (Ordinance
CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.03.004 Predevelopment meeting
The applicant is encouraged to request a predevelopment meeting with City staff to help familiarize the applicant with applicable codes and
regulations and to expedite the site development permit approval process. Site plans shall be submitted to the Development Services Department in
conformance with all information and materials required by the most recent site development permit application/checklist. An incomplete site
development permit application shall not be accepted for review and processing. As coordinator of the site development permit, the Development
Services Department shall distribute copies of the site plan to all reviewing departments.
Sec. 14.03.005 Administrative authority for modification of application requirements
The Development Services Director, or designee, is authorized to develop the content and review process for applications and associated documents
required by this Chapter.
Sec. 14.03.006 Application and processing
(a) The applicant shall submit a complete site development permit application to the Development Services Department. Incomplete applications
shall not be accepted.
(b) An application for a site development permit shall expire on or after the 45th day after the date the application is filed, pursuant to section
245.002(e) of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, if:
(1) The applicant fails to provide documents of other information necessary to comply with the City's technical requirements relating to
the form and content of the permit application;
(2) The City provides to the applicant not later than the 10th business day after the date the application is filed written notice of the
failure that specifies the necessary documents or other information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other
information is not provided; and
(3) The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the time provided in the notice.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.03.007 Site development application expiration
A complete site development permit application shall expire two (2) years from the date such application was submitted if no progress has been made
towards completion of the project, pursuant to section 245.005 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. (Ordinance CO10-15-01-08-C1
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/526
adopted 1/8/15)
Sec. 14.03.008 Site development permit issuance
Once all revisions have been made and there are no outstanding comments from the Development Services Committee, a final black-line set of the
site development plans with the final changes shall be submitted for the purpose of staff sign-off. This black-line set will be given back to the
applicant when all reviewers of the Development Services Committee have signed the set. Once the black-line set is picked up, six complete sets of
drawings will then need to be copied from the signed black-line set and brought back to City Hall where the applicant will then be issued the site
development permit. The original black-line set is to be kept by the applicant for distribution to contractors, subcontractors, etc. The City's
construction inspectors will perform periodic field inspections to make sure that the approved site development plan set is being utilized for
construction. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.03.009 Site development permit expiration
(a) A site development permit shall expire two (2) years from the date such permit was approved if no progress has been made towards completion
of the project, pursuant to section 245.005 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
(b) Any project, as defined under chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, shall expire on the fifth anniversary of the date
the first permit application was filed for the project, pursuant to section 245.005 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
(Ordinance CO10-15-01-08-C1 adopted 1/8/15)
Sec. 14.03.010 Construction not to begin prior to permit issuance and preconstruction meeting
(a) Except for development permitted by an approved rough grading permit, site construction shall not begin until the Development Services
Committee has issued a site development permit. A stop-work order may be issued and a penalty of two times the normal permit fee shall be required
on any site where construction has begun prior to the issuance of a site development permit. If a stop-work order is issued as a result of construction
beginning prior to issuance of site development permit, construction activities shall cease until proper approval is obtained.
(b) Each site development permit requires a preconstruction meeting with an engineering Inspector prior to any construction on site. A
preconstruction meeting provides an opportunity to begin communication and problem solving between the city staff and the design/construction
team prior to the start of a construction project. At this meeting, the approved site development plans and any documents relevant to the site will be
reviewed and the participants will discuss any major items, answer questions the sub-contractors may have, and explain the inspection procedure. By
pointing out the special features and requirements of each project, the possibility of delays in construction is reduced. Typically the engineer of
record will arrange the meeting with the Engineering Department. The city encourages owner representative, project architect, project engineer,
project manager, project superintendent, and subcontractor to attend this meeting as well as applicable city staff. A preconstruction meeting must be
held at the job site or in City Hall.
(c) Construction shall begin within ninety (90) days after the preconstruction meeting, if construction has not started within the ninety-day time
period then another preconstruction meeting will be required prior to construction.
Sec. 14.03.011 As-built plans
As-builts shall include the full set of construction plans with the improvements shown as it was actually constructed. Normally the as-builts are the
original site development plans modified to reflect the actual construction. The plans shall include grading, entrance locations, pavement layout,
striping, curb and gutter, storm sewers in plan and profile, building location(s), etc. Detention facilities grading and outlet works shall be shown with
a certification that the pond complies with the original design. A digital copy of the as-built plans shall also be submitted in a format and coordinate
system compatible with the city's geographic information system. As-built plans shall be submitted along with an engineer's concurrence letter prior
to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of occupancy.
Sec. 14.03.012 Inspections/certificate of occupancy
(a) Inspections during the installation of the site improvements shall be made periodically by staff members within the Development Services
Committee to insure conformity with the approved site development plans.
(b) It is the responsibility of the permittee to request inspections when construction is complete or nearing completion to ensure that all work is in
accordance with the approved site development plans. If construction is deemed not ready for inspection from a Development Services Committee
member reinspection fees shall be assessed prior to issuance of the temporary certificate of completion or the certificate of completion.
(c) The Development Services Committee will notify the building official once it has been determined that all work is in accordance with the
approved site development plans.
(d) All site improvements shall be complete and in conformance with the site development permit prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by
the building official.
(e) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official only if fiscal [surety] has been posted for any revegetation or
landscaping that has not been installed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/526
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
ARTICLE 14.04 NONRESIDENTIAL AND MULTIFAMILY SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 14.04.001 Approval requirements
(a) The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements and regulations.
(b) Site development plans may not be approved on unplatted property except if the unplatted property meets the definition of a legal lot.
(c) All improvements shown on an approved set of site development plans must be completed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(d) If site development is proposed to be constructed in phases, the applicant shall clearly identify all phases on the site plan and all other
applicable materials that accompany site plan. A certificate of occupancy may be granted for a partial development if the partial development is
consistent with the phasing shown on an approved site plan.
(e) The site development plans must conform to any recorded plat or filed master plan or master preliminary plan for that same property or
subdivision of which it is a part.
(f) Fees for site development applications shall be as set by the City Council by separate resolution hereto. Said resolution is incorporated herein
by reference as though reproduced herein verbatim. Fees are due and payable at time of application and are nonrefundable.
(g) Any person or persons seeking to appeal findings of noncompliance by the Development Services Director and/or the Development Services
Committee may be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Application for appeal shall be made in writing with the Development Services
Department no less than thirty (30) working days after the date the Development Services Committee sends comments to the applicant regarding
his/her site.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
(h) All residential developments requiring a site development permit shall pay the fee in lieu of parkland dedication and park improvements fees
per sections 12.20.005 and 12.20.006 of the Subdivision Ordinance prior to issuance of the site development permit. The property owner at the time
of the issuance of a site development permit shall be the party responsible for the payment of the fee regardless of who subdivided the property.
(Ordinance CO34-18-07-12-E1 adopted 7/12/18)
Sec. 14.04.002 Form and content
Site development plans submitted must show the following items. All drawings should be to an engineering scale, clear and complete to obtain site
plan approval.
(1) Site development plans shall be 22" x 34". The site development plans shall be drafted at an appropriate engineering scale.
(2) The cover sheet shall include the following City staff signature block.
Reviewed for code compliance ___________ Signature required from all departments
Planning ____________________________ Date ____________
Engineering services ___________________ Date ____________
Industrial pretreatment _________________ Date ____________
Fire prevention _______________________ Date ____________
Landscape planner ____________________ Date ____________
Addressing __________________________ Date ____________
Site development permit number _______________________________
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/526
(3) A copy of the plat showing property lines of the subject site and all adjoining parcels, platted or unplatted. Platted and unplatted
parcels shall be identified with the legal description and the owner's name.
(4) Boundaries of the property with dimensions and building setback lines on all sides.
(5) Existing and proposed streets, alleys, lots, reservations, public and private easements and areas dedicated to public use. Easements
should be labeled as to type and volume and page as applicable. In addition, the site plan shall show all driveways, rights-of-way, and
street intersections that are adjacent to and/or directly across from the subject site.
(6) Location and design of all means of vehicular access to and from the site onto public rights-of-way, indicating the location and size
of all driveways (including those on the adjacent property and the opposite side of the street), curb return radii, curb cuts and location and
size of sidewalks and ambulatory ramps when and where required. For any development abutting frontage roads, all entrance and exit
ramps shall be shown on the vicinity map.
(7) Location of existing and proposed buildings with number of stories; gross square footage of building; solid line indicating slab
location and dashed lines indicating line of roof overhangs; AC-unit pads and covered entries; retaining walls, fences, culverts, bridges,
roadways, etc. The structures to be removed or abandoned shall be shown with dotted lines.
(8) Location of existing and proposed storm drainage structures, storm sewers, grates, in lets, detention ponds, etc., with pipe sizes,
grades and direction of flow and associated drainage easements, if any.
(9) Limits of existing flood hazard areas within and adjacent to the property, accurately showing the limits of building encroachments
and earth fill within this area, with 100-year water surface elevations and proposed finished floor elevations denoted. For any
encroachment of buildings or fill in the flood hazard area, the applicant must have previously met the requirements set forth in the
drainage criteria manual and the subdivision ordinance.
(10) Location of existing and proposed utilities (water, sanitary sewer, cable television, gas, electric and telephone) with service sizes,
tap and meter locations, service types, grades, direction of flow and crossings. Also, related easements that will accommodate more than
one utility shall be shown and described. See also Chapter 18 utilities, Article 18.06 regulating discharge of wastes into sanitary sewers
and Article 18.09 cross-connection control. If a street cut permit is required see Chapter 16 transportation regulations.
(11) Location of power poles, guy wires, pad-mount transformers, and other major electrical equipment.
(12) Location of existing and proposed fire hydrants and all fire lane markings.
(13) Location of existing and proposed contour lines with spot elevations for proposed top-of-curb and parking lot slabs.
(14) Location and screening or other description to indicate control and handling of solid waste. Indicate location and size of dumpster
pad when dumpster is to be used.
(15) The planned use or uses of the site.
(16) The location and design of any off-street parking areas, including ADA-accessible parking and loading areas, showing size and
location of spaces, bays, isles, ramps and barriers in compliance with City standards and state accessibility standards. All customer
parking areas must be clearly defined on the site plan and must be separate from areas to be used for display.
(17) Name of development, legal description of property, north arrow, scale, acreage name and address of record owner and engineer,
draftsperson, architect and land planner.
(18) Vicinity map. Both vicinity map and site plan shall be oriented with parallel north arrows. North arrow shall be oriented generally
upward.
(19) Zoning designation as determined by the official zoning map.
(20) Landscaping plan as required by Article 14.07 of this Chapter.
(21) Address of property as assigned by the Development Services Department.
(22) Location and pavement type for temporary access for vehicles during construction. See section 14.05.004 access standards.
(23) Location of all wastewater pretreatment devices and sampling well, as applicable.
(24) Additional information or engineering data, in such form and content as necessary, to determine that the site plan meets the
standards of the City.
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
Sec. 14.04.003 Revision of site development plans after permit issuance
No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to any civil sheet after approval has been given by the Development Services
Committee, unless said changes, erasures, modifications or revisions are first submitted to and approved by the Development Services Committee.
Minor changes correcting an error of measurements, acreage, dimensions or other similar situation may be approved by the Development Services
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/526
Director or his/her designee. All changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be shown on the as-built plans. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2
adopted 8/9/18)
ARTICLE 14.05 ACCESS AND OFF-STREET PARKING
Sec. 14.05.001 General
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the city's residents and motorists. These regulations are
designed in accordance with the Transportation Criteria Manual (TCM) to promote safe access to city streets, to reduce road accidents, to protect
public investment in streets, to establish a safe and reasonable balance between street access and traffic mobility, and to assure safe and convenient
access to and circulation of emergency and service vehicles within developments. Further, it establishes minimum design standards for access and
parking lots and minimum requirements for off-street parking. Some sections in the article have been adopted through local amendments.
Sec. 14.05.002 State department of transportation (TxDOT) permit required
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter or repair, remove or replace any sidewalk, drive approach or any concrete work on
any TxDOT right-of-way within the city without first obtaining an approved TxDOT permit. A copy of the approved TxDOT permit is required for
any lot taking access to a state roadway before the site development permit is issued.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.05.003 Compliance
(a) Compliance with ordinances, regulations and plans. Any person seeking access to lands abutting the public street right-of-way shall comply
with the regulations of this Chapter and:
(1) The City's subdivision ordinance;
(2) The City's transportation ordinance;
(3) The City's zoning ordinance;
(4) Other applicable City regulations, codes or ordinances;
(5) Comprehensive plans or plan components;
(6) Transportation criteria manual;
(7) State manual of uniform traffic-control devices.
(b) Downtown district. See the downtown district urban code for additional requirements.
(c) Sidewalk requirement. Any site plan requiring a full review by the Development Services Committee will require the design and construction
of typical concrete sidewalks in accordance with the Transportation Criteria Manual and the transportation master plan on all existing and proposed
streets adjacent to or included in the proposed site plan.
(d) Major corridor sidewalk requirement.
(1) All roadways designated as major corridors shall have a six-foot concrete sidewalk installed parallel to the designated roadway
(unless sidewalks already exist);
(2) Sidewalks shall be coordinated with landscape design to provide substantial landscaping on both sides of the sidewalk. Pedestrian
connections shall be provided at street crossings as well as to businesses within the corridor development;
(3) Sidewalks shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the right-of-way and from parking areas;
(4) Sidewalks shall meander within the twenty-five-foot front building setback and landscape buffer in a manner that will create a
desirable pedestrian environment. Exceptions to this requirement are as follows:
(A) On roadways maintained by the state department of transportation, sidewalks may encroach into the right-of-way with written
approval from TxDOT and the Director of Engineering; or
(B) On roadways maintained by the City, sidewalks may encroach into the right-of-way with approval from the Director of
Engineering and the Director of Development Services, but shall be set back from the back of curb a minimum of five (5) feet and
shall be required to enter into a license agreement with the City that shall require the landowner to maintain and pay for any
landscaping, sidewalks, landscape lighting, irrigation and electric meters for irrigation within the right-of-way.
Sec. 14.05.004 Access standards
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/526
(a) General principles. In addition to the regulations below, development shall also comply with section 12.12.015(c)(1) of the Subdivision
Chapter, as amended.
(1) Parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the Transportation Criteria Manual (TCM).
(2) Access to TxDOT roadways shall also comply with all TxDOT standards. TxDOT standards may exceed City standards.
(3) A commercial site contiguous with another commercial site shall provide parking aisle connections to the boundary of the site for
connection to such contiguous commercial site unless such connection is inappropriate because of one or more of the following
constraints: topographic constraints, environmental constraints, and/or adjacent uses that are incompatible for the purposes of mixing
traffic, at which time the director of planning or his/her designee may, after considering all relevant factors, exempt the development from
this requirement.
(4) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, any developer who proposes a street, driveway or pedestrian pathway that includes an atgrade
rail crossing shall provide the City with written approval from Capital Metro stating that the at-grade rail crossing improvements
were designed and installed with adequate supplemental safety measures as required by the Federal Railroad Administration to establish a
quiet zone.
(5) Dead-end parking aisles/modules restricted.
(A) Circulation for each row of parking spaces within nonresidential parking lots shall provide at least two points of ingress or
egress so as to prevent the creation of dead-end parking aisles or modules.
(B) The Director of Development Services or his/her designee may exempt the development from this requirement if the Director
of Development Services or his/her designee finds that:
(i) There are special conditions unique to the property, such as lot size, shape, orientation, topography, or other physical
features that are not generally characteristic of other properties in the area; and
(ii) The undue hardship is not self-induced or created by the applicant, nor is it strictly pecuniary/financial.
In granting the exemption, the Director of Development Services of his/her designee may impose such additional conditions if
necessary and desirable in the public interest.
(b) Driveway types. Development shall comply with section 12.12.015(c)(2) of the Subdivision Chapter.
(c) Driveway design. Development shall comply with section 12.12.015(c)(3) of the Subdivision Chapter.
Sec. 14.05.005 Parking and circulation
(a) General principles.
(1) In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the
specific parking space requirements for each class of use included in the building for development. The minimum parking requirements
herein specified are considered minimum requirements and should be exceeded where usage, experience or design information makes
such increase appropriate.
(2) Required off-street parking areas shall not be used for the commercial sale, repair, dismantling, servicing, storage or display of
vehicles, equipment, materials, supplies or merchandise.
(3) Where open land is used for manufacturing, storage, or other operations in a manner similar to indoor operations, such open land
shall be added to floor space in determining the number of parking spaces required.
(4) All off-street parking spaces shall be accompanied by adequate automobile maneuvering area permitting full and direct ingress and
egress to such parking spaces. The maneuvering area thereto shall be located entirely upon private property.
(5) All off-street parking spaces, accompanying maneuvering areas and driveways specifically designed for licensed vehicles shall be
asphalt or concrete. The asphalt or concrete surface shall be designed in accordance with the Transportation Criteria Manual.
(6) All off-street parking areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area, and shall
be so arranged and marked as to provide the orderly and safe loading or unloading, parking and storage of vehicles in accordance with
stormwater, detention and water quality requirements.
(7) No requirement set forth in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent collective utilization of any off-street parking facility for two
(2) or more buildings or uses, providing, however, that the total number of off-street parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the
requirements for the particular individual uses computed separately in accordance with the applicable regulations for off-street parking
spaces.
(8) All required off-street parking spaces shall be located entirely on the same lot as the principal structure.
(9) Compact spaces. A maximum of ten (10) percent of the required number of parking spaces may be a compact size, measuring eight
(8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in depth. Such compact parking spaces shall be located in groups of at least five (5) spaces per
group, and shall be conspicuously identified by black painted curbs with white lettering labeling each space as “compact.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/526
(10) Major corridor parking requirements. The following standards apply to all roadways identified as major corridors.
(A) Parking locations. Parking is prohibited within the required twenty-five-foot setback from the designated roadway.
(b) Parking area design. All parking facilities shall be designed and constructed as prescribed in the TCM:
PARKING LOT CRITERIA
A B C D E F
Angle of
Parking
(Degrees)
Width of
Stall
Depth of
Stall 90° to
Aisle
Width of Aisle Width of
Stall
Parallel to
Aisle
Module Width
One Way Two Way One Way Two Way
Standard Parking Spaces
30 8.5 16.9 12.5 28 17.0 47 62
30 9.0 17.3 12.5 26 18.0 47 61
30 9.5 17.8 12.5 25 19.0 48 61
30 10.0 18.3 12.5 25 20.0 49 62
45 8.5 17.5 13.0 28 12.0 48 63
45 9.0 17.5 12.5 26 12.7 48 61
45 9.5 17.5 12.5 25 13.4 48 60
45 10.0 17.5 12.5 25 14.1 48 60
60 8.5 19.0 18.0 - 9.8 56 -
60 9.0 19.0 16.0 - 10.4 54 -
60 9.5 19.0 15.0 - 11.0 53 -
60 10.0 19.0 15.0 - 11.6 53 -
75 8.5 19.5 25.0 - 8.8 64 -
75 9.0 19.5 23.0 - 9.3 62 -
75 9.5 19.5 22.0 - 9.8 61 -
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/526
75 10.0 19.5 22.0 - 10.3 61 -
90 8.5 18.5 - 28 8.5 - 65
90 9.0 18.5 - 26 9.0 - 63
90 9.5 18.5 - 25 9.5 - 62
90 10.0 18.5 - 25 10.0 - 62
Compact Parking
30 7.5 14.0 12.5 18.0 15.0 41 46
45 7.5 15.9 13.0 18.0 10.6 45 50
60 7.5 16.7 18.0 - 8.7 52 -
75 7.5 16.4 18.0 - 7.8 51 -
90 8 16 - 18.0 8 - 48
Parallel Parking Spaces
0 8.5 8.5 (Width) 12.5 25 22.0
(Length) 30 42
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07; Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
(c) Queuing and vehicle stacking areas.
(1) Queue spaces or queuing areas may not interfere with parking spaces, parking aisles, loading areas, internal circulation or driveway
access.
(2) Each queue space shall consist of a rectangular area not less than ten (10) feet wide and eighteen-and-a-half (18-1/2) feet long.
Queue spaces are not interchangeable with parking spaces unless specifically provided for in this chapter.
(3) A minimum twelve-foot bypass shall be required adjacent to queue lines to allow vehicles an opportunity to circumvent the drivethrough
activity and exit the site.
(4) Although drive-through activities are not required to be completely separated from other activities on site, the queuing areas should
be designed to enable the driver to readily identify and distinguish queuing areas from other activities on site. It is strongly recommended
to locate queue line and service areas towards remote areas of a site to avoid conflicts with parking and circulation areas. Queue areas and
drive-through activities shall be clearly identified with appropriate signage and marking.
(5) Spaces within an automobile washing facility or drive-through lubrication service may be counted toward the queuing requirement.
(d) Off-street stacking spaces shall be provided as indicated in the following table.
Minimum Off-Street Stacking Spaces
Activity Type Minimum Spaces Measured From
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/526
Bank teller lane 4 Teller or window
Automated teller machine 3 Teller
Restaurant drive-through 6 Order box
Restaurant drive-through 4 Order box to pick-up window
Auto service facility stalls; vehicle repair
and body shop stalls
2 Entrance to stall
Car wash stall, automatic 4 Entrance to wash bay
Car wash stall, self service 3 Entrance to wash bay
Gasoline pump island 2 Pump island
Other Determined by the development services committee
(e) Striping and marking. All striping for parking stalls shall be a minimum of four (4) inches wide of white safety traffic paint designated for such
use. All other markings required to designate crosswalks, directional arrows, fire lanes, ADA accessible spaces, or service areas shall be in
compliance with the state manual of uniform traffic-control devices and/or the International Fire Code.
(f) ADA accessible parking and access. All ADA accessible parking spaces and access shall be in accordance with the state accessibility standards.
(g) End islands (terminal islands). End islands shall be required at the end of each parking row. See the TCM for design requirements. See also
section 14.07.006(b)(5).
(h) Traffic-control signs. All traffic-control signs required for the site shall meet the standards established in the state manual on uniform trafficcontrol
devices.
(i) Off-site parking. All parking spaces required by this chapter shall be located on the same property as the structure they serve, except where an
enlargement or change in use increases the required number of spaces. In such cases, off-site parking may be allowed and must conform to the
following standards:
(1) The off-site parking area must be on adjacent property to the property served or within one hundred (100) feet of the structure they
serve if not located on the property adjacent to the site.
(2) Access to off-site parking shall not interfere with the normal movement of traffic along adjacent arterials or collectors, as specified
in the transportation master plan, nor as to endanger pedestrians moving between the parking area and the structure served. Off-site
parking is not allowed in any area that would require a pedestrian to cross an arterial street.
(3) To discourage the use of thoroughfares by circulating vehicles, provisions for circulation between adjacent parcels should be
provided through coordinated or joint parking systems.
(4) The off-site parking area shall remain in use as long as the parking requirement exists or until such time that adequate on-site
parking is provided.
(5) In any case where required parking spaces are not located on the same property with the activity or establishment, or where such
spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes shall be
properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, filed with Williamson and/or Travis
County and submitted with the application for site plan approval.
(6) Not more than fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, night clubs, restaurants or
similar uses may be provided and used jointly by uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours; provided, however that
a written agreement thereto is properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, filed with
Williamson and/or Travis County and submitted with the application for site plan approval.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/526
(7) Not more than eighty (80) percent of the off-street parking spaces required for a church, school auditorium or similar uses may be
provided and used jointly by uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours; provided, however that a written agreement
thereto is properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the City Attorney filed with Williamson and/or
Travis County and submitted with the application for site plan approval.
(j) Amount of parking required.
(1) Rules for computing the parking requirement.
(A) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next largest whole number.
(B) If a use not specifically listed in the off-street parking table, the development services committee shall have the authority to
apply the off-street parking standard specified for the list use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or require a parking
study.
(C) A parking analysis shall be required for each development and shall be a part of the site development submittal. It shall
include the number of employees, number of parking spaces provided, number of spaces required with proper calculations, square
footage of each structure and the use of each structure. When deemed necessary, by the development services committee, an
additional traffic impact analysis may be required to determine the impacts of a development on the off-site public street system. See
chapter 16, transportation regulations for traffic impact analysis (TIA) requirements.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
(2) Minimum parking requirements.
Residential
Single-family dwelling 2 off-street per dwelling unit, having a width of no less than
10 ft. and a depth no less than 20 ft.
Apartments 1-1/2 for the first bedroom plus 1/2 parking space for each
additional bedroom
Condominium
1-1/2 for the first bedroom plus 1/2 parking space for each
additional bedroom, having a width of no less than 10 ft. and a
depth no less than 20 ft., guest parking shall be provided at a
ratio of 20 percent of the total number of units.
Townhouse
2 off-street per dwelling unit, having a width of no less than
10 ft. and a depth no less than 20 ft., guest parking shall be
provided at a ratio of 20 percent of the total number of units.
Amenity center 1.5 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Hotel or motel 1 per guest room, 1 for every 400 sf. of public meeting space
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Institutional and Special Uses
Church or place of worship 1 space per 100 sf. for sanctuary + school, etc.
College or university 1 per faculty and staff, plus 1 per every 5 residents & 1 per
every 5 commuter students
Public community, health, or welfare
center
1 per 250 sf. of gfa
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/526
Day camp, kindergarten, or childcare
facility (public or private)
1 per 6 pupils, plus 1 per 2 staff members
Fraternity or sorority house 1 per residence, plus 1 for every 2 additional active members
Hospital, extended care facility,
intermediate care facility, long-term
care facility
2 for each bed, plus 1 for each 2 employees on the largest shift
at full design capacity.
Ambulance service 2 for each ambulance vehicle
Doctors', nurses' & allied health staff
quarters
1 per unit
Medical educational institution 1 per each faculty member, plus 1 for each 3 students
Institution, religious, charitable, or
philanthropic organization
1 per 200 sf. of gfa
Trade schools 1 per 200 sf. of gfa
Nursing or convalescent homes 1 per 5 beds, plus 1 for each day staff member
Institutional home for the elderly 1 per 5 residence units, plus 1 per each day staff member
Residence home for the elderly 1 per dwelling unit
Place of public assembly 1 per 50 sf. of gfa
School, elementary 1 space per 300 sf. classroom and office
School, middle 1 space per 300 sf. classroom and office
School, high 1 space per 200 sf. classroom and office
Lodge or fraternal organization 1 per 100 sf. of gfa
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Food and Beverage Services
Drive-in, fast food, or take-out
(service to auto)
1 per 100 sf. of gfa
General restaurant or cafeteria 1 per 100 sf. of gfa
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/526
Take out only 1 per 100 sf. of gfa
Mobile food establishment court 3 per mobile food establishment plus 1 per 100 sf. of seating
area
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07; Ordinance CO04-14-11-20-C2 adopted 11/20/14; CO25-15-05-07-C2 adopted 5/7/15)
Office, Professional, or Financial Uses
Bank or savings and loan office 1 per 300 sf. of gfa
Clinic or doctor's office 1 per 200 sf. of gfa
General office 1 per 300 sf. of gfa
Dance, drama, or music studio 1 per 200 sf. of gfa
Personal Service and Retail Uses
Personal service establishments 1 per 200 sf. of gfa
Retails stores/shops in buildings 1 per 250 sf. of gfa
Shopping centers 1 per 200 sf. of gfa
Outdoor retail sales 1 per 400 sf. of site area
Recreation, Social, and Entertainment Uses
Commercial amusements 1 per 100 sf. of enclosed gfa
Bowling alley 6 per lane
Theater 1 per 5 seats
Night club 1 per 100 sf. of gfa up to 2,000 sf., then 1 per 50 sf. of gfa.
Pool hall 1 space per 125 sf.
Outdoor Uses
Stadium 0.2 space per seat + restaurant, etc.
Team sports (volleyball, baseball,
soccer, etc.)
9 per field or court
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/526
Driving Ranges 0.5 space per tee
Golf Course 4 spaces per green
Court (tennis, racquetball, etc.) 2 per court
Amusement Park 1 per 500 sf. of public area
Mini-golf 1 space per hole + arcade, etc
Motor Vehicle and Machinery Uses
Carwash 1 per 500 sf. of gfa
Automobile sales 1 per 400 sf. enclosed space, 1 per 2,000 sf. outside display
area
Auto repair, garage, or shop 1 per 200 sf. of gfa
Machinery sales, repair – indoor 1 per 500 sf. of gfa
Machinery sales, repair – outdoor 1 per 2,000 sf. of gfa
Storage, Wholesale, and Manufacturing Uses
Brick or lumber yard 1 per 2,000 sf. of site area
Storage of sane, gravel, petroleum .
products, etc – outdoor
1 per 2,000 sf. of site area
Wholesale or manufacturing
operation
1 per 1,000 sf. of gfa or 1 per each 2 employees on the larger
shift
Warehouse and enclosed storage 1 per 600 sf. of gfa
Mini-storage complex 1 per 30 sf. of office area
Sec. 14.05.006 Loading and unloading areas
(a) Location.
(1) Loading and unloading areas shall be located so as not to restrict or interfere with the normal movement of pedestrians and vehicles
along streets, sidewalks or in parking areas. Driveway placement should be such that loading and unloading activities will in no way
hinder vehicle ingress or egress.
(2) Areas designated for the loading and unloading of people shall be physically separate from areas designated for loading and
unloading of freight or goods not carried by people embarking/disembarking from a vehicle. Such physical separation will preclude use of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/526
a loading/unloading area by the other activity.
(b) Screening. Loading zones shall be buffered from street view and from adjacent properties. See section 14.07.006(b)(5)(A) for screening
requirements.
(c) Off-street loading requirements.
(1) Any use that receives or distributes materials or merchandise by vehicle shall provide off-street loading spaces in accordance with
the following requirements:
(A) Industrial districts. Use one (1) loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area.
(B) Office and commercial districts. Use one (1) loading space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area for the first
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor area.
(2) The following rules shall apply when computing the number of off-street loading spaces:
(A) Floor area shall mean the gross floor area of the use.
(B) Fractional spaces shall be rounded to the next highest whole space.
(C) Whenever a building or use, existing on the effective date of this article, is enlarged by more than fifty (50) percent in floor
area or area use, the entire building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the off-street loading requirements.
(3) The required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use reserved.
(4) Each off-street loading space shall consist of a rectangular area not less than twelve (12) feet wide and forty-five (45) feet long. All
off-street loading spaces shall be paved.
(d) Public/private school and child-care facilities. Child-care centers and other child-care facilities shall be required to provide on-site
loading/unloading area, separate from the parking area and as close to the main entrance as possible. The loading/unloading area shall have one-way
movement.
(e) Solid waste disposal. See section 14.07.009 for screening requirements.
(Ordinance CO41-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.05.007 Sight distance requirements
Development shall comply with section 12.12.018 of the Subdivision Chapter, as amended. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.05.008 Bicycle racks
(a) A minimum of one (1) bicycle rack shall be required for each development/building providing parking for at least three (3) bicycles. An
additional rack is required if the project exceeds fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for every additional fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of
building area or fraction thereof. Each bicycle rack shall be anchored so that they cannot be easily removed.
(b) Bike racks shall be shown on the site plan.
Sec. 14.05.009 Redevelopment
In the event a site undergoes a voluntary improvement, change of use, partial replacement, expansion, or abandonment, the Development Services
Committee may require any or all sections of this Chapter to apply, dependent upon the circumstances of the site.
(Ordinance CO41-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
ARTICLE 14.06 ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATION UTILITIES
Sec. 14.06.001 General
Development shall comply with section 12.12.020 of the Subdivision Chapter, as amended. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
ARTICLE 14.07 TREE & LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 14.07.001 Scope and purpose
The tree and landscape requirements as stated herein have been established for the purpose of providing visual buffering and screening to enhance
the appearance of the community and compatibility between adjacent land uses. They have been designed to ensure that the city is seen as an
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/526
attractive place to live and work; to conserve energy and natural resources contributing to air purification, groundwater recharge, retarding
stormwater runoff, and aiding in noise, glare, and heat abatement. They also help to break the monotony of urbanized development on the land,
contributing to the general health and welfare of the community.
Sec. 14.07.002 Generally
A common development, which includes more than one lot, shall be treated as one lot for the purposes of this article. Split ownership, planning in
phases, construction in stages, or multiple site development permits for a project shall not prevent it from being such a common development (i.e.
shopping centers). Each phase of a phased project shall comply with this article.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.07.003 Administration
(a) Portions of this Article governing required landscape area shall be implemented under the direction of the Director of Development Services, or
their designee, who shall enforce and administer the provisions of this Article. No oversight or dereliction on the part of the enforcing personnel shall
legalize, authorize and/or excuse the violation of any of the provisions of this Article. See Article 14.11, compliance and enforcement of this Chapter.
(b) The Director of Development Services, or their designee shall require a certificate from an architect, landscape architect, professional engineer,
certified landscape professional, licensed surveyor or licensed nurseryman that verifies that plans submitted for approval comply with the
requirements of this Article prior to issuance of a site development permit.
(c) The Director of Development Services, or their designee shall require a certificate from an architect, landscape architect, professional engineer,
certified landscape professional, licensed surveyor or licensed nurseryman shall be required that verifies the development complies with the
requirements of this Article prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy and provision of permanent utilities. The Director of Development
Services, or their designee may inspect each site in conjunction with final inspection to ensure compliance with this Article.
(d) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy and receipt of permanent utilities to the site, any requirements must have been satisfied, or fiscal
security for the performance of requirements shall be provided.
(e) A separate tree program, referred to as the City tree program, shall be held by the City for cash in lieu of amounts required when the number of
replacement trees or required trees cannot practically be placed on the site.
(f) Written guidelines for the interpretation of the provisions of this Article, including proper plantings, planting techniques, planting areas,
irrigation information, as examples, as well as prescribing the measures required to protect trees against damage in connection with construction and
property development, identifying actions that will be interpreted as “removal,” and identifying the root areas requiring protection against soil
compaction or against the effects of impervious paving shall be in accordance with the procedures defined in this Article.
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
Sec. 14.07.004 Land disturbance/site clearing
(a) Development for purposes of this Article shall include the performance of any building activity or the making of any material change in the use
or appearance of any structure or land, including the subdivision of land, and the creation or termination of rights of access or riparian rights,
including activities that change or disturb the natural surface of the land such as clearing, grading, excavating, and filling.
(b) An approved site development permit and/or building permit shall be required prior to development on any site.
(c) Development not requiring a building permit shall obtain an approved site development permit from the Development Services Department
that demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this Article.
(d) Clearing of only brush and scrub cedars is not considered development as defined in this Article, as long as only rubber-tired equipment is
introduced to the site (no equipment with tracks).
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.07.005 Residential landscape requirements
(a) Single-family detached including patio homes (new construction/installation only).
(1) Front yard (between the fence line and the front property line).
(A) All lawn areas shall be fully sodded or fully established.
(B) Areas reserved for bedding shall be covered with three (3) inches of shredded mulch.
(C) A minimum of two (2) shade/canopy trees per lot shall be retained or planted from the preferred plant list. Shade/canopy trees
shall be a minimum of 3" (three-inch) caliper.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/526
(D) A minimum of three (3) five-gallon shrubs per lot and five (5) one-gallon shrubs shall be planted from the preferred plant list
along the front of the house, a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the foundation.
(E) Any ornamental trees planted shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallon/container grown.
(F) All required plant materials shall be installed according to sound planting guidelines adequate to sustain vigorous and healthy
growth. These may include, but not be limited to, methods used to:
(i) Protect and support tree trunks (guying, staking);
(ii) Provide adequate conditions for root growth (type of soil mix, planting hole depth and diameter, pruning for proper
root/crown balance, etc.);
(iii) Provide for retention of moisture (mulching, berming, watering schedule, etc.); and
(iv) Protect plants from equipment damage (mulching and edging for shrub beds, sleeves for tree trunks, etc.).
(G) All landscaping shall be in place or fiscal surety posted prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(2) Rear yard. A privacy fence shall be required to enclose the rear yard of all single-family detached residences including patio homes
and shall comply with section 14.07.007(b), herein, as amended.
(b) This section 14.07.005 residential landscape requirements, does not apply to the following:
(1) Permits for remodeling or expansion of a single-family detached residence.
(2) Substantial restoration, which occurs within a period of twelve (12) months of an incident, that causes a building to be damaged by
fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy or accident of any kind.
(3) Interior or facade maintenance or remodeling as long as the front and side exterior walls of the building remain in the same location.
(4) Carports, canopies, and freestanding covers supported by columns.
Sec. 14.07.006 Nonresidential, town home, and multifamily landscape requirements
(a) Site development review.
(1) For all developments for which a landscape plan is required separately or as part of the site development permit application, a
grading and tree protection plan shall be submitted with the site development plans. The plan shall be prepared so as to maximize, as
much as is practicable, the number of existing trees eight (8) caliper inches and larger on the site that will be retained with the
development.
(2) The landscape plan shall include the following information:
(A) The date, scale, north point, title and name of owner;
(B) The location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the tract;
(C) The approximate centerline of existing watercourses; the approximate location of significant drainage features; and the
location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, existing and proposed easements on or adjacent to the lot, existing and
proposed parking spaces, or other vehicular areas, access aisles, drives, and existing and proposed sidewalks adjacent to the street;
(D) The location and species of each existing tree having a trunk six-inches caliper or larger and the approximate size of their
crowns; reference section 12.12.022 for tree preservation and mitigation requirements;
(E) The location and names of existing vegetation to be preserved;
(F) An indication of how the applicant plans to protect the existing trees and vegetation, which are proposed to be retained, from
damage during construction;
(G) The location, size, and type (tree or shrub, ground cover, or grass) of proposed landscaping, together with a plant listing that
includes the common and botanical name, quantity, size and spacing of all proposed landscaping material at time of planting;
(H) Planting and installation details in accordance with sound horticultural practices;
(I) The proposed irrigation system as required by this Article;
(J) The proposed lighting plan for the entire area of the site plan;
(K) A tabulation clearly displaying the relevant statistical information necessary for the Director of Development Services, or
their designee to evaluate compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. This includes gross acreage, square foot area of
preservation areas, number of trees to be planted or preserved, square footage of paved areas, and similar other information to ensure
conformance with all required standards;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/526
(L) Existing and proposed grades;
(M) Plan view of existing and proposed water quality of detention controls;
(N) Limit of construction line encompassing all areas of natural vegetation of the site which are to be left undisturbed;
(O) A survey of all trees six (6) caliper inches and larger (measured four-and-one-half (4-1/2) feet above ground level). Trees are
to be represented by circles using the formula of one foot of radius for every one (1) inch of trunk diameter. (This also defines the
critical root zone - CRZ.) Unbroken circles indicate trees which are to remain. Dashed circles indicate trees proposed for removal.
Include type and general condition of all protected trees within the subdivision (or off site in the area of proposed off-site
improvements, if any);
(P) Identification of temporary measures to protect existing trees that are to remain, including any protected trees, during
construction;
(Q) Identification of permanent controls, practices or design features to assure long term maintenance of the existing trees and
landscape;
(R) The location, quantity, size, common name, and scientific name of proposed landscaping in proposed landscaped areas;
(S) The location, quantity, size, common name, and scientific name of existing trees;
(T) The location of the proposed irrigation system or hose connections; and
(U) Information necessary for verifying whether the minimum required landscaping requirements have been met.
(3) An architect, landscape architect, engineer, certified landscape professional, licensed surveyor, or licensed nurseryman shall certify
that the plans satisfy the requirements of this Article, provided, however, that for a common development or project greater than two (2)
acres in size, such plans and certification shall be made by an landscape architect.
(4) The Director of Development Services, or their designee shall require a certificate of compliance from an architect, landscape
architect, or certified nurseryman that the site complies in full with the landscape requirements set forth on the approved site plan, before
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and permanent utility service. The Director of Development Services, or their designee may inspect
each site in conjunction with final inspection to ensure compliance with this Article.
(b) Landscape requirements. For all nonresidential applications and all applications for town homes, amenity centers and multifamily residential
projects in any district, the following minimum landscape requirements shall be provided:
(1) Fifty percent (50%) of the existing trees on site that are six-inch caliper or greater and are from species included in the preferred
plant list or of equivalent value shall be retained and protected during development of the site.
(2) Based on special circumstances of the site such as physical characteristics or traffic issues, any request to retain less than fifty
percent (50%) requires the approval of the Director of Development Services, or their designee. If the applicant is dissatisfied with the
determination made by the Director of Development Services, then the applicant may appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission. If
the applicant is dissatisfied with the determination made by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant may appeal to the City
Council.
(3) Street yard requirements.
(A) On all lots, at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the street yard shall be landscaped area.
(B) Major corridor. The street yard requirements for properties within the major corridor shall apply to the area located behind the
required twenty-five-foot building setback line. The landscaped twenty-five-foot building setback area is included in the street yard
calculations. Existing trees preserved within the twenty-five-foot landscaped area may count toward existing tree credits for any
remaining street yard requirements outside the major corridor setback area.
(C) Self-storage facilities. Street yard requirements shall apply to the area between the required twenty-five-foot buffer area and
the front building walls.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/526
(D) For development without a building, (parking lots, etc.) the entire lot shall be considered the street yard.
(E) The required twenty percent (20%) of landscaped area in the street yard shall include buffer yards. Such area shall not include
detention/retention facilities, except when the facilities are designed in a manner to qualify for one-half (1/2) credit toward the
square footage requirement.
(F) To secure one-half (1/2) credit of square footage involved in any detention/retention facilities, such facilities shall be designed
as an integral part of the landscape, including a slope no greater than 3:1, no concrete except at the outlet, and no requirement for or
installation of barrier fencing.
(G) Detention/retention ponds shall be constructed so that, whenever possible, they do not require a fence. Whenever such a
situation does require fencing, such fencing shall be black or green coated chainlink and shall be buffered from the street view by
planting shrubs and vines that will, at maturity, screen at least sixty percent (60%) of the view of the fence.
(H) In required landscaped street yard areas less than 10,000 square feet, at least one (1) shade/canopy tree and three (3) shrubs
shall be retained or planted within the street yard for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of required street yard. In required
landscaped street yard areas containing between 10,000 and 110,000 square feet, (1) one shade/canopy tree for every required 2,500
square feet of landscaped area is required over the requirement of 10 trees and thirty (30) shrubs. In required landscaped street yard
areas containing over 110,000 square feet, (1) one shade/canopy tree for every required five thousand (5,000) square feet of
landscaped area is required over the requirement of fifty (50) trees and thirty (30) shrubs.
(4) Existing tree credits in the street yard.
(A) As credit toward the preservation of native hardwood trees, each square foot of landscaped area which is pervious and within
the area encompassed by the dripline of an existing hardwood tree of at least two (2) caliper inches, measured four-and-one-half (4-
1/2) feet from the ground, shall count as one-and-one-fourth (1-1/4) square feet of landscaped area for the purposes of satisfying the
minimum requirements of this Chapter.
(i) Overlapping dripline area cannot be counted twice.
(ii) No credit will be given if more than one-half (1/2) of the dripline area is impervious.
(iii) No credit will be given where damaging grade changes within the dripline (of a tree) has occurred.
(B) All existing surveyed trees over two (2) caliper inches or tree cluster of at least four (4) one-inch caliper trees preserved
within the street yard may satisfy tree requirements one for one (tree). All existing trees six (6) caliper inches or more measured
four-and-one-half (4-1/2) feet from the ground shall count twice (double) toward satisfying these requirements. Credit shall not be
given if more than 1/2 of the dripline area is impervious, where damaging grade changes within the dripline (of a tree) has occurred,
or where damage to the tree before or during construction occurs that threatens the vitality of the tree.
(5) Parking areas.
(A) Parking lots and all vehicular parking and maneuvering areas, including loading zones, unless specifically exempt below,
shall be buffered from street view and adjacent properties and shall contain areas constructed, planted and maintained as landscaped
islands, peninsulas, or medians.
(B) The minimum total area in landscaped islands, peninsulas and medians in the street yard shall be ninety (90) square feet for
each twelve (12) parking spaces; in the area outside the street yard, the area shall be sixty (60) square feet.
(C) The area within landscaped islands, peninsulas and medians that are located in the street yard counts toward the twenty
percent (20%) landscape requirement.
(D) No parking space shall be located further than fifty (50) feet from a permeable landscaped island, peninsula or median and a
tree, except for parking lots that contain more than three (3) parking modules. They shall be located evenly through the parking
areas, however the location of landscaped islands, peninsulas, and medians may be adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other
natural features.
(E) A planting median shall be placed between every third parking bay of adjacent parking bays, at a minimum, to prevent traffic
movement across parking isles.
(i) The planting median shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide and may include a sidewalk, where necessary for pedestrian
circulation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/526
(ii) The planting median shall contain the following vegetation, at a minimum:
a. One tree, planted 35 feet on center, in a continuous or staggered row.
b. Ten shrubs for every tree required, planted in rows or clustered groups.
(iii) The planting median shall contain defined breaks, as necessary, to provide pedestrian circulation between bays of
parking. The breaks shall allow for ADA accessibility from one side of the planting median to the other and onto the sidewalk
within the planting median if a sidewalk is located within the median.
(F) Landscaped terminal islands (end islands) shall be located at the end of all parking modules in a configuration to allow for
turning radii of intersecting aisles shown in the Transportation Criteria Manual to protect parked vehicles, provide for visibility,
confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways and provide space for landscaping.
(G) For each tree planted, the landscape island shall contain a minimum square footage of one (1) parking space (166.5 sq. ft.) of
pervious area, be at least ten (10) feet wide and allow four (4) feet between the tree and parking space to allow for clearance of the
vehicle or its door.
(H) Parking spaces shall be buffered from the street view and from adjacent properties except where there is shared access and/or
shared parking between such uses.
(i) Buffering consists of screening at least sixty percent (60%) of the view of parking areas by using plantings, berms and
decorative walls.
(ii) Shrubs must be evergreen and a minimum of two (2) feet tall at time of planting, with predominately a mature height of
three to four (3-4) feet.
(iii) Decorative walls shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. Walls and berms shall not predominate over the use of
vegetative materials.
(iv) Plantings, fences, or walls shall be set back a minimum of three (3) feet from the curb or wheel stop to allow for the
overhang of the vehicle; plantings shall have a minimum of three (3) feet for planting area.
(v) If a change in grade or elevation provides an equivalent level of screening for the parking lot as the vegetative screen,
the buffering requirements shall be considered to be met.
(I) Loading zones shall be buffered from view and shall consist of hedge-like screening using plantings, berms and/or decorative
walls. A vegetative screen planting area shall be at least five (5) feet wide. At least two different types of plant materials shall be
used, shrubs must be evergreen with predominately a mature height of six (6) feet.
Loading and service zones located within the major corridor district shall be buffered from view by walls that match the
building materials and colors. Screen walls shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet high. Berming used in conjunction with
intensive landscaping may be considered to reduce the height of the screen wall.
(J) As an alternative to the credits provided in subsection (b)(4), the applicant may request a reduction in the number of parking
spaces required by the City's parking regulations, in exchange for retaining and protecting existing trees on site. For every existing
tree measuring eight caliper inches or greater, measured four-and-one-half (4-1/2) feet above the ground, that is retained and
protected during development, the applicant shall be entitled to a five percent (5%) reduction in the number of parking spaces
required.
(6) Landscape requirements for projects located within the major corridor district. (See section 11.03.151 for a list of roadways.)
(A) A twenty-five-foot landscaped area is required from the right-of-way of the designated roadway along the entire frontage of
the tract. Driveways, primary side walks, and bicycle paths are permitted within the landscaped area and are excluded from the area
calculations of subsection (i) below. The following elements shall be incorporated into the landscaped area.
(i) Landscape plants shall be chosen from the preferred plant list, with at least ninety (90) percent live vegetative coverage.
The remainder of the area may be impervious landscape.
(ii) All vigorous, existing 4-inch caliper or larger hardwood trees that stand within the 25' front setback area described above
shall be retained and protected as a landscape buffer, save and except trees that lie within the area of the driveway. Preservation
of significant understory vegetation (such as clusters of Possumhaw, Yaupon Holly and Texas Wild Plum) is encouraged and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/526
credited. All trees existing 4-inch caliper or larger hardwood trees that have to be removed for utility purposes shall be
replaced by the utility removing the trees at a one-to-one ratio with minimum 3-inch caliper trees from the preferred plant list.
(iii) Existing hardwood trees that are preserved may count toward this requirement if they are two (2) caliper inches or
greater.
(iv) Trees and shrubbery are required within landscaped area at a ratio of at least (1) one two-inch caliper shade/canopy tree
and (3) three five-gallon shrubs for every 1,000 square feet of land within the front building setback. Ornamental trees (15-
gallon size or larger) are allowed to be substituted for every two 5-gallon shrubs. Ornamental trees may be substituted for up to
fifty percent (50%) of the required canopy trees when there are issues of visibility. Five (5) shrubs may be substituted for one
(1) ornamental tree.
(v) At least thirty percent (30%) of the required trees within the twenty-five-foot front building setback and landscape buffer
shall be between the sidewalk and the designated street right-of-way. Flexibility to this requirement may be considered for the
purpose of saving existing trees.
(vi) There shall be no gaps of greater than forty (40) feet between plantings.
(B) Drainage facilities may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the twenty-five-foot landscaped area. Drainage facilities
include all detention ponds, water quality ponds, outlet structures, berms, improved channels or other improvements associated with
the drainage improvements. All detention ponds and water quality ponds within the twenty-five-foot landscaped area shall be
designed as curvilinear, contoured shapes. Detention ponds and water quality ponds within the twenty-five-foot landscaped area
shall be designed so as to not require fencing or concrete walls.
(7) Transitional buffering (buffer yards).
(A) Buffer yards are required along common property lines, which are not adjacent to a public street right-of-way and thus are not
governed by the landscape street yard requirements. Certain types of land uses require more parking, storage of raw materials, and
traffic than others, or are visually incompatible with land uses. Therefore, different levels of transitional buffers have been
developed. Any given parcel may require different levels of transitional buffering depending on the zoning designation of the
adjacent properties.
(B) Where buffer or compatibility requirements are already required by nature of the use in the zoning ordinance, such as selfstorage
and industrial uses, the most restrictive standards shall apply.
(C) Only those properties, which are adjacent to properties with less restrictive zoning or equivalent uses, are required to have
transitional buffers as established in the table entitled “buffer yard requirement.”
(D) The trail buffer yard is considered a less restrictive use that triggers a buffer yard and is applicable to uses abutting the active
railroad right-of-way and designated hike/bike trails.
(E) Common developments do not require transitional buffers internal to the site.
(8) Additional requirements for projects with three (3) or more dwelling units in one (1) building:
(A) A minimum landscaping area of twenty percent (20%) of the internal area of the site (site area excluding the buffers and street
yard) is required. Plantings shall consist of a minimum of one (1) tree and three (3) five-gallon shrubs for every one thousand
(1,000) square feet of the required minimum landscaping area to be planted or retained internal to the project, ninety percent (90%)
to be chosen from the preferred plant list.
(B) Shade/canopy trees shall be a minimum of 3-inch caliper. Any ornamental trees planted shall be a minimum size of fifteengallon/
container grown. Areas reserved for bedding shall be covered with a minimum of three (3) inches of shredded mulch, and all
turf areas shall be fully sodded or established.
(9) Buffer yard requirements.
Adjacent Zoning
District
Developing Project's Use District
DR. ES, SR, SU UR, MF, NB PO, LB, GB, PS, MU H, HC, LI. HI
DR, ES, SR, SU buffer yard* none buffer yard* 20'/fence buffer yard* 20'/fence buffer yard* 30'/fence
UR, MF, NB buffer yard* none buffer yard* none buffer yard* 20'/fence buffer yard* 30'/fence
PO, LB, GB, PS, MU buffer yard* none buffer yard* none buffer yard* none buffer yard* 20'/fence
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/526
H, HC, LI, HI buffer yard* none buffer yard* none buffer yard* none buffer yard* none
* Refer to buffer yard descriptions below for full listing of requirements that apply.
The buffer yard requirements shall be the responsibility of the more intensive use. The first three levels of buffer yards shall consist
of strips of landscaped open space according to the following standards:
(A) In level one, the minimum width requirement of the buffer yard shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
(i) This buffer yard is intended to be used for landscaping only. A semiopaque screen shall be installed with in the buffer
yard which consists of a vegetation screen or a combination of vegetation screen and berms. If fencing is required pursuant to
this Code, it shall be eight (8) feet in height and shall be placed on the common property line.
(ii) No light fixtures, parking, dumpsters, storage, recreation facilities, accessory buildings, or alleyways shall be permitted
within this buffer yard.
(iii) The following plantings are required in this buffer yard. Where similar vegetation already exists, such vegetation shall
be credited toward this requirement, not to exceed a reduction in excess of one-half the requirements for new plantings:
One (1) 4-inch caliper canopy tree, three (3) 15-gallon evergreen ornamental trees, and four (4) 5-gallon shrubs with a
mature height of six (6) feet for every thirty (30) linear feet of buffer yard. lf the grade between the common property
line and edge of the buffer yard exceeds three (3) feet, the planted canopy height shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet tall.
(iv) When a fence is required per the table of buffer yard requirements, the shrub planting requirement may be waived.
(B) In level two, the minimum width requirement of a buffer yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
(i) This buffer yard is intended to be used for landscaping only. A semiopaque screen shall be installed within the buffer
yard which consists of a vegetation screen or a combination of vegetation screen and berms. A security or optional privacy
fence may be located on the exterior edge of the buffer yard only if the adjacent property triggering the buffer yard is also
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/526
bounded by a privacy fence. Fencing is not encouraged unless noted in the table of buffer yard requirements. If fencing is
required pursuant to this Code, it shall be eight (8) feet in height and placed on the common property line.
(ii) No light fixtures, parking, dumpsters, storage, recreation facilities, accessory buildings, or alleyways shall be permitted
within this buffer yard.
(iii) The following plantings are required in this buffer yard. Where similar vegetation already exists, such vegetation shall
be credited toward this requirement, not to exceed a reduction in excess of one-half (1/2) the requirements for new plantings:
One (1) 4"-caliper canopy tree, three (3) 15-gallon evergreen ornamental trees, and four (4) 5-gallon shrubs with a
mature height of six (6) feet for every thirty (30) linear feet of buffer yard. If the grade between the common property
line and edge of the buffer yard exceeds two (2) feet, the planted canopy height shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet tall.
(iv) When a fence is required per the table of buffer yard requirements, the shrub planting requirement may be waived.
(c) Subsection (b) landscape requirements, does not apply to the following:
(1) Substantial restoration, which occurs within a period of twelve (12) months of an incident, that causes a building to be damaged by
fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy or accident of any kind.
(2) Interior or facade maintenance or remodeling as long as the front and side exterior walls of the building remain in the same location.
(3) Carports, canopies, and freestanding covers supported by columns.
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
Sec. 14.07.007 Fencing regulations
(a) General regulations.
(1) Fences shall not impede drainage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/526
(2) No fence or other structure more than thirty (30) percent solid or more than three (3) feet height shall be located so that it impairs
the sight distance triangle at the intersection of any rights-of-way.
(3) Fences and walls must be maintained in a safe manner, plumb (vertical) to the ground. Fences or walls no longer maintained in a
safe manner through neglect, lack of repair, manner of construction, method of placement, or otherwise must be repaired, replaced, or
demolished. Failure to maintain a fence or wall in accordance with this section constitutes a violation of this section, punishable pursuant
to section 1.01.009.
(4) Prohibited fence types:
(A) Fences or walls constructed primarily of barbed or razor wire, except for the purpose of enclosing livestock for agricultural
purposes in RA districts or properties that have an agriculture exemption;
(B) Fences or walls carrying electrical current, except for the purpose of enclosing livestock for agricultural purposes in RA
districts or properties that have an agriculture exemption;
(C) Fences or walls constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, or similar highly flammable material; and
(D) Fences or walls topped with barbed wire or razor wire, except as used by developments within industrial zoning districts,
public institutions, or utilities for public safety or security purposes.
(5) Fence height is measured from the natural grade where the fence post is set to the highest edge of the post.
(6) All residential fences perpendicular to an existing subdivision wall shall meet the subdivision wall at the same height as the existing
wall and may transition to a maximum of eight (8) feet in height.
(b) Residential fences.
(1) Fences located in the rear and side setback shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and shall be constructed of wood, wrought iron,
masonry or similar material, permanently affixed to the ground.
(2) Only fences less than or equal to three (3) feet in height shall be allowed in the front setback, except a fence may be allowed in the
front setback that is less than or equal to six (6) feet in height if the residential lot is greater than 20,000 square feet. All fences in the front
setback taller than three (3) feet shall be constructed of wrought iron or similar material.
(3) For residential subdivisions located on or adjacent to a corridor overlay roadway, see also section 12.12.017 subdivision walls for
additional fencing requirements.
(4) Fences required to enclose rear yards of two-family/duplexes residences shall be a minimum of four (4) feet and a maximum eight
(8) feet in height and shall provide separate enclosures with gates for each unit.
(5) Fences to be located along a public right-of-way shall face the finished edge toward the public right-of-way.
(6) To create one consistent, horizontal and even plane, all fences shall be installed at the same height as fencing along adjacent
common property lines, unless, to do so would require the installed fencing not to comply with the height restrictions set forth in this
section 14.07.007(b).
(c) Nonresidential fences.
(1) Unless otherwise required by this Article, fences shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height and
shall be constructed of masonry materials such as brick, stone, or decorative reinforced concrete or similar two-sided masonry or other
equivalent material approved by the director of planning. Fence posts shall be constructed of rust-resistant metal parts, concrete-based
masonry or concrete pillars of sound structural integrity.
(2) Both sides of all fences shall be finished.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/526
(3) Fencing requirements for projects located within the corridor overlay district:
(A) No fencing is allowed within the 25-foot front setback area from a designated roadway. For a list of designated roadways
see section 11.02.278 [sic].
(B) Any fencing behind the 25-foot front setback shall be wrought iron or tubular steel, or alternative similar products may be
approved by the director of planning with appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(C) Chainlink fences shall only be used around detention ponds and/or water quality ponds. Chainlink fencing shall be black or
green vinyl-coated, including posts, and must be buffered by planting five-gallon evergreen shrubs and vines that will, at maturity,
screen at least thirty percent (30%) of the view of the fence.
(Ordinance CO03-17-11-16-E1 adopted 11/16/17)
Sec. 14.07.008 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 14.07.008 pertaining to nonresidential fence requirements and deriving from Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07, was deleted in its
entirety by Ordinance CO48-12-04-12-C2 adopted 4/12/12.
Sec. 14.07.009 Screening requirements–nonresidential only
(a) Screening requirements for outdoor storage. dumpsters and equipment.
(1) For areas containing outdoor storage, one (1) of the following shall be provided:
(A) A privacy fence that is in conformance with the provisions specified in this Article; or
(B) A hedge-like screen of evergreen plant material capable of attaining a minimum height of six (6) feet at maturity, planted at
equal intervals of four (4) feet on center and a minimum of two-and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height at time of planting. A vegetative
screen planting area shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. Existing vegetation may be used as screening, however, the area must
contain the equivalent of one (1) canopy tree, two (2) ornamental trees and six (6) shrubs.
(2) For outdoor condensers, utility huts, and other building service equipment, such equipment shall be completely screened from view
on all sides using a vegetative screen with at least two (2) varieties of plant material from the preferred plant list that, at maturity, is at
least the height of the equipment to be screened.
(3) All refuse and/or recycling containers, shall be completely screened from public view and the view of adjoining properties.
(A) All containers shall be screened on three sides by walls other than wood, with the resilience of metal or concrete, not less than
the height of the bin or container.
(B) An opening shall be situated so the container is not visible from adjacent properties, public streets, or visible to the public
maneuvering on site, unless the opening is equipped with an opaque gate. Gates must have tiebacks to secure in open position and
fasteners to keep them closed.
(C) Dumpster pads shall be placed on concrete six (6) inches in thickness, twelve (12) feet in width and ten (10) feet in depth. The
dumpster pad for a metal side loaded container shall be nine (9) feet in width and six (6) feet in depth. A 300/90-gallon pad site shall
be three (3) feet in width and three (3) feet in depth.
(D) Dumpsters must be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any single-family residential property line.
(E) Dumpsters located within the major corridor shall be located no closer to the designated roadway than the front wall of the
principal structure.
Sec. 14.07.010 Planted street medians (traffic islands) residential and nonresidential
When necessary and appropriate, planted street medians should be used to define vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
(1) Whenever possible, the existing trees in the areas of the proposed island should be preserved and a grading plan for the roadway
should consider the existing driplines and maintain at least sixty percent (60%) of the dripline of existing trees to be preserved from the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/526
area beginning two (2) feet from the curb. Measures shall to be taken to ensure that adequate protection of the trees during construction
shall be provided as part of subdivision review and approved by the Development Services Department. All branches shall be pruned to a
height of seven (7) feet from the ground and all vegetation between thirty (30) inches and seven (7) feet shall be cleared to provide for
clear sight distance.
(2) In areas without existing trees, one four-inch caliper, or three two-inch caliper shade/canopy trees for every l,000 square feet of
planting area shall be provided with ground cover planted at one-foot centers in a checkerboard pattern.
(3) All plant material must exhibit a mature canopy height under thirty (30) inches or above seven (7) feet with no more than three
trunks in order to allow adequate visibility. All plants shall be tolerant of harsh, dry, roadside conditions. All planting must be designed to
consider the level of expected maintenance, and provide a neat clean appearance.
(4) All plantings within a site triangle or distance area must be maintained under twenty-four (24) inches or above seven (7) feet, as
measured vertically from top of adjacent raised curb and must be approved by the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
Sec. 14.07.011 Planting requirements–residential and nonresidential
All planting shall be designed to consider the level of expected maintenance, and provide a neat and clean appearance.
(1) All required plant materials shall be selected from the preferred plant list, section 14.07.023. Other plant materials may be used if
determined by the Director of Development Services, or their designee to be equivalent in quality, adaptability, and low-maintenance as
those listed herein. Arizona ash, cottonwood, honeylocust, willows and photinias are among those discouraged and shall not be included
as credit toward the landscaping requirements.
(2) Unless otherwise specified in this Article, at time of planting;
(A) All shade/canopy trees planted shall be a minimum of 3" caliper measured one (1) foot above finished grade[.]
(B) All ornamental trees shall be a minimum of fifteen-gallon container grown nursery stock.
(C) All shrubs shall be a minimum of five-gallon container grown nursery stock.
(D) All vines and ground cover at time of planting shall be one-gallon container grown nursery stock. Ground cover shall be
planted at one-foot intervals in a checkerboard pattern to provide for quick coverage, discourage erosion and discourage weed
growth.
(3) For berms, the maximum side slope is 3:1 and shall be entirely vegetated with turf grass or ground cover within two (2) years after
the date of planting. When using grass, solid sod shall be used at time of planting on areas subject to erosion.
(4) All required landscape areas shall consist of at least fifty percent (50%) live plant material. Hardscape (nonliving landscape
features) shall not predominate the use of living plant materials. All required landscape areas adjacent to pavement shall be protected with
concrete curbs or equivalent barriers.
(5) Requirements of tree types shall be as follows:
(A) A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of all required trees shall be shade/canopy trees for all nonresidential properties.
(B) A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the required trees may be substituted by shrubs adjacent to retail storefronts where
deemed necessary. Five (5) shrubs shall be substituted for each tree that is otherwise required.
(C) All newly planted ornamental trees shall be planted so that they have a minimum pervious area extending a minimum of three
(3) feet from the trunk in all directions. All newly planted shade/canopy trees shall have a minimum pervious cover area of four (4)
feet in all directions.
(6) When more than ten (10) trees are to be planted to meet the requirements of this Chapter for nonresidential properties, a mix of
species shall be provided. The number of species to be planted shall vary according to the overall number of trees required to be planted.
The minimum number of species to be planted are indicated below. Species shall be planted in proportion to the required mix. This
species mix shall not apply to areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law.
Required Number of Trees Required Number of Species
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/526
11–20 2
21–30 3
31–40 4
41+ 5
(7) Trees shall not be placed in easements, where they interfere with site drainage, or where they will require frequent pruning to avoid
interference with overhead power lines.
(8) Credit for existing trees for nonresidential properties. To encourage the preservation of existing hardwood trees which will impact
the site, all existing surveyed trees over two (2) caliper inches or tree cluster of at least four (4) one-inch caliper trees preserved may
satisfy tree requirements one for one (tree). All existing trees six (6) caliper inches measured four-and-one-half (4-1/2) feet from the
ground shall count twice (double) toward satisfying these requirements. Credit shall not be given where more than one-half (1/2) of the
dripline area is impervious, where damaging grade changes within the dripline (of a tree) has occurred, or, where damage to the tree
before or during construction occurs that threatens the vitality of the tree.
(9) Turf grass should be planted in drought resistant species normally grown as permanent lawns, such as bermuda, zoysia, or buffalo,
unless it receives under six (6) hours of sun, in which case St. Augustine is more appropriate. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged,
sprigged or seeded.
(10) Winter rye shall be considered only as a temporary measure to reduce soil erosion through the winter season. It shall be completely
replaced with permanent turf grass during the first planting season following the winter season. (See fiscal requirements.)
(11) All mulched areas shall have at least three (3) inches of shredded mulch. Gravel shall not be used as a mulch for plantings or in
planting beds. Extensive unplanted stone or mulch beds shall be prohibited.
(12) Synthetic or artificial lawns or plants shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this Article.
(13) Gravel shall not be used as a mulch or landscape feature as part of the landscape area of this Article.
(14) The use of architectural planters may be permitted toward the fulfillment of landscape requirements.
(15) Any approved decorative hardscape or pervious brick pavers shall qualify for landscaping credit if contained in planting areas, but
not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area to be landscaped. No credit shall be given for concrete or other impervious surfaces.
(16) Refer to sight obstruction standards (TCM).
(17) Landowners are encouraged to landscape and maintain the areas within the nonpaved street right of-way abutting their land,
provided however:
(A) The City or other applicable governmental jurisdiction may at any time require such landscaping to be removed and the City
shall not be responsible or liable in the event any landscaping in the right-of-way must be removed or is requested to be removed by
the City.
(B) Landscaping in the right-of-way shall observe the provisions pertaining to traffic and pedestrian safety in accordance with the
Transportation Criteria Manual.
(C) Any underground sprinkler systems, planters or other permanent structures placed in the right-of-way shall require a license
agreement with the City. When any other governmental jurisdiction is trustee of the public right-of-way at the particular location in
question, arrangements must be made with that jurisdiction.
(D) No landscaping shall be placed in an area of right-of-way where a capital improvement project has been funded for such
location, unless and until such project has been completed.
(18) All required plant materials shall be installed according to sound planting guidelines adequate to sustain vigorous and healthy
growth. These may include, but not be limited to, methods used to:
(A) Protect and support tree trunks (guying, staking, trunk wrapping);
(B) Provide adequate conditions for root growth (type of soil mix, planting hole depth and diameter, pruning for proper
root/crown balance, etc.);
(C) Provide for retention of moisture (mulching, berming, watering schedule, etc.); and
(D) Protect plants from equipment damage (mulching and edging for shrub beds, sleeves for tree trunks, etc.).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/526
(19) All landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In the case of seasonal restrictions because of
severe weather or seeding, the owner may post fiscal sureties for the full cost of materials and installation of the landscaping remaining.
The owner will then have thirty (30) days from the date of the season to proceed to fully complete installation.
(20) Where it is not practical for the continued growth or vigor of the trees to plant all of the replacement trees or other required trees
on the site, cash in lieu to the City tree program may be used at an amount comparable to the cost of nursery stock required to replace the
caliper amounts required and the cost of installation on a per unit basis, subject to the approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation or
his designee.
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
Sec. 14.07.012 Irrigation requirements–residential and nonresidential
(a) The owner shall be responsible for the irrigation of all required landscape areas and plant materials, with exception of natural areas and
xeriscape plantings after the first two (2) years, utilizing one or a combination of the following methods:
(1) An automatic underground irrigation system (conventional spray, bubbler, etc.), equipped with a rain sensor that automatically turns
off the system when it has rained sufficiently.
(2) An automatic water-saving irrigation system (drip, porous pipe, leaky pipes etc.) equipped with a rain sensor that automatically
turns off the system when it has rained sufficiently.
(3) A hose attachment within one hundred (100) feet of all required landscape areas and plant materials.
(b) The irrigation method used shall be in place and operational at the time of the landscape inspection for certificate of occupancy and shall be
maintained and kept operational at all times to provide for efficient water distribution.
(c) Landscape areas utilizing xeriscape plants and installation techniques, including areas planted with native grasses and wildflowers, may use a
temporary and aboveground system and shall be required to provide irrigation for the first two (2) years only.
(d) Landscape plans shall indicate by a detail, a drawing, or by specification in a note on the site plan, the type and location of irrigation which will
be used. Plans should be specific enough to show that adequate irrigation will be provided to all required landscape areas and plant materials. All
irrigation, trenching in the critical root zone (CRZ) of existing trees to be retained shall be done by hand to avoid damaging the root system.
(e) No irrigation shall be required for undisturbed natural areas or undisturbed existing trees.
Sec. 14.07.013 Maintenance requirements–nonresidential only
(a) The owner shall be responsible for:
(1) Regular maintenance of all required landscape areas and plant materials in a vigorous and healthy condition, free from diseases,
pests, weeds, and litter. This maintenance shall include weeding, watering, fertilization, pruning, mowing, edging, mulching or other
needed maintenance, in accordance with generally accepted horticultural practice.
(2) The repair or replacement of required landscape structures (walls, fences, etc.) to a structurally sound condition.
(3) The regular maintenance, repair, or replacement, where necessary, of any screening or buffering required by this article.
(4) All open space areas that are to be preserved as natural plant communities shall be trimmed, at least once a year, of all exotic
vegetation, lawn grasses, trash, or other debris. Natural area should be mulched, pruned and otherwise maintained so that plants are
vigorous.
(b) Failure to regularly maintain landscape areas shall constitute a violation of this article.
(c) Required plant materials, if dead, diseased, or severely damaged, shall be removed by the owner as soon as possible, but no later than sixty (60)
days after notification. All such plants shall be replaced within six (6) months of notification or by the next planting season, whichever comes first.
(d) Replacement plants must be the same size and species as shown on the approved landscape plan or must be equivalent in terms of quality and
size. Such replacement will not be considered an amendment to the approved plan.
(e) If any of the trees required to be retained or trees planted as part of the landscaping plan should die within a period of two (2) years after
issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the owner of the property shall replace the trees within six (6) months at a ratio of one-to-one with an
approved tree having a minimum diameter of two (2) inches measured at a point one (1) foot above natural grade.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.07.014 Tree survey/tree preservation plan–residential and nonresidential
Development shall comply with section 12.12.022 of the Subdivision Chapter, as amended. (Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/526
Sec. 14.07.015 Alternative compliance methods–nonresidential only
(a) If a unique, site-specific problem exists with the site development plans which makes compliance with this Article impractical or unwise, the
applicant may request alternative compliance through an alternative landscape plan, which shall:
(1) Identify the provision(s) of this article with which the applicant is unable to comply; and
(2) Provide alternative locations for landscaping that are practical, contain approximately the same area, type, and amount of
landscaping materials required by this Article, that are located such that the alternative landscaping will be visible to the public from the
street view or other prominent location, and that are within the spirit and intent of this Article.
(b) An application for alternative compliance shall be submitted in writing to the Director of Development Services, or their designee for review in
conjunction with a site development plan.
(c) Final approval of the alternative landscape plan or site development plan depicting protected trees or heritage trees shall constitute an approval
for removal of the protected trees and heritage trees specifically identified therein for removal, provided that each such removal is specifically
reviewed and approved by the Director of Development Services, or their designee.
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
Sec. 14.07.016 Hazardous trees and storage of cut oak wood
(a) The planting, preserving or maintaining of trees which present a danger to the community shall be deemed a public nuisance and are prohibited.
Such trees shall include all trees, which are hazardous or may result in injury to person or property because of a defective or diseased condition
(including but not limited to oak wilt), trees made hazardous as a result of severe trenching near the trunk, during construction, making them unstable
and liable to fall upon any sidewalk, street or building, trees damaged by a tornado, storm, flood, high winds, or other natural act of God, and
diseased cut oak wood.
(b) The city shall have the right to examine trees, alive or dead, and logwood piles to determine whether they are contagiously diseased, including
the gathering of samples for laboratory testing, as long it does not result in any damage to the tree.
(Ordinance CO13-13-01-10-C3 adopted 1/10/13)
Sec. 14.07.017 Preservation of protected trees
Development shall comply with section 12.12.022 of the Subdivision Chapter, as amended.
Sec. 14.07.018 Preservation of heritage trees
Development shall comply with section 12.12.022 of the Subdivision Chapter, as amended.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.07.019 Penalties and enforcement
Any person otherwise in violation of this article shall be subject to fine or restitution in accordance with the provisions of this article and section
1.01.009 of this code. Notification of violations pertaining to this article shall be consistent with the Texas Government Code. Enforcement of this
article shall be consistent with the provisions found in section 1.01.009 of this code as well as other applicable rules, regulations, and standards
consistent with the code. Each day of any violation to the requirements of this article shall be considered a separate offense. (Ordinance CO13-13-01-
10-C3 adopted 1/10/13)
Sec. 14.07.020 Fiscal surety–residential and nonresidential
(a) Fiscal surety requirements for single-family detached and patio homes. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, any fiscal surety in an
amount equal to the cost of materials and installation for any landscaping which is incomplete for any reason at the time the applicant requests the
certificate of occupancy shall be posted. Such fiscal surety required by this Article shall ensure that if the applicant fails to install the remaining
required landscape materials, the same will be installed by the City, and the fiscal surety posted by the applicant shall be applied toward the City's
cost of such installation.
(b) Fiscal surety requirements for nonresidential and multifamily. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, any fiscal surety in an amount
equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the cost of materials and installation for any landscaping which is incomplete for any reason at the time
the applicant requests the certificate of occupancy shall be posted. Such fiscal surety required by this Article shall ensure that if the applicant fails to
install the remaining required landscape materials, the same will be installed by the City, and the fiscal surety posted by the applicant shall be applied
toward the City's cost of such installation.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/526
Sec. 14.07.021 Redevelopment
In the event a site undergoes a voluntary improvement, change of use, partial replacement, or expansion, the Development Services Committee may
require any or all sections of this chapter to apply, dependent upon the hindrance of the site. (Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.07.022 Appeals
If a landscape plan, alternative landscape plan, protected tree removal application, or heritage tree removal or pruning application is denied by
Director of Development Services, or their designee, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Planning and Zoning Commission in writing by no
later than the tenth (10th) business day following the date of such denial.
Sec. 14.07.023 Preferred plant list
The City's preferred plant list shall include the City of Austin's “Grow Green Guide” plant list, the Lower Colorado River Authority's (LCRA) plant
list, and the following. For species not listed, please request alternative acceptance from the Director of Development Services, or their designee:
(plants listed in italics are considered xeriscape or xeriscape plants)
Common Name Botanical Name Comments
SHADE/CANOPY TREE
Pecan Carya illinoinensis Deep tap root
Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia Disease resistant
Shumard Red Oak (other red oaks) Quercus shumardii (etc.) Red fall color
Live Oak Quercus virginiana Very hardy evergreen
Bur Oak and (other White Oaks) Quercus macrocarpa (etc.) Nice branch char.
Big Tooth Maple Acer grandidentatum Fall color
Chinese Pistachio (e) Pistacia chinenesis Fall color
Gingko Ginkgo biloba Yellow fall color
Catalpa Catalpa sp. Flowers, slightly messy
Western Soapberry Sapindus drummondii Showy winter fruit, yellow fall color
Southern Magnolia Magnolia grandiflora Large evergreen, large white flowers
Bald Cypress Taxodium species Fernlike leaves, fall color
Montezuma Cypress Taxodium species Fernlike leaves, fall color
Texas Picchio Pistacia texensis Evergreen in this area, new growth red
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/526
Texas Ash Fraxinus texensis Long-lived, fast growing
TexMex Sycamore Plantus hybrid Insect and disease resistant
ORNAMENTAL TREE
Texas Persimmon Diospyros texana Smooth gray bark
Possumhaw Holly Ilex decidua Deciduous, redfruit in winter
Texas Redbud Cercis canadensis texana Longflowering in spring
Desert Willow Chilopsis linearis Drought tolerant, summer blooms
Yaupon Ilex vomiloria Very hardy, red berries
Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica Some die-back, flowers
Eve's Necklace Sophora affinis Fernlike foliage, winter fruit color
Japanese Black Pine Pinus thunbergi Great color, best of pines
Loquat Eriobotrya japonica Evergreen, fall fruit
Tx. Mountain Laurel Sophora secundiflora Fragrant purple flower
Mexican Plum Prunus mexicana White flowers
Mexican Buckeye Ungnadia speciosa Brilliant pink flowers in spring
Eldarica Pine (Afghan) Pinus eldarica 30–80', suited to alkaline soils
SHRUBS
Hollies (most varieties) Ilex sp. Durable, some have berries
Elaegnus Elaegnus pungens Large, gray, tolerates heat, drought
Dwarf Wax Myrtle Myrica pusilla Mass plantings, hedges
Evergreen Sumac Rhus virens Evergreen red fruit
Flame Leaf Sumac Rhus lanceolata Brilliant red foliage
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/526
Florida Jasmine Jasminum floridum Spring yellow blooms
Indian Hawthorn (all varieties) Rhaphiolepis indica Spring flower
Red Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora Coral flower spikes
Viburnum (all varieties) Viburnum sp. Dark green, spring flowers
Moonbay Nandina Nandina moonbay Compact, winter color
Gulf Stream Nandina Nandina gulfstream Winter color, fuller at base
Italian Jasmine Jasminum humile Flower small, bright yellow
Mexican Buckeye Ungnadia speciosa Hardy, spring pink flowers
Agarita Berberis trifoliata Holly-like foliage, flowers, berries
Muhly grass (most varieties) Muhlenbergia lindheimeri Looks like small pampas grass
GROUND COVERS
Holly Fern Cyrtomium falcatum Coarse texture, dark green
Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis Coarse texture, dark green
Santolina (green and gray) Santolina spp. Will Lake extreme heal
Cherry Sage Salvia Greggii Nearly evergreen, long bloom season
Liriope Liriope muscari Hardy, blue flower
Mondo (monkey) Grass Ophiopogon japonicus Thin, dark leaves, hardy
Asian Jasmine Trachelospermum asiaticum Some die back
Ajuga (carpet bugle) Ajuga reptans Shade, part shade, purple flower
Star Jasmine Trachelospermum jasminoides Sun, white flower, can be vine
VINES
Cross Vines Bignonia capreolata Bi-colorflower
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/526
Carolina Jessamine Gelsemium sempervirens Yellow flower
Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens Red flower
Lady Banksiae Rose Rose Banksia Yellow flower, needs support
Boston Ivy Parthenocissus tricuspidata Climbing, bright red in fall
(Ordinance CO12-19-03-14-E1 adopted 3/14/19)
ARTICLE 14.08 LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 14.08.001 Scope and purpose
Site lighting provides safety and security and enhances the architectural and natural features of the site. Glare and illumination standards shall assure
that the mechanisms providing light do not negatively impact the appearance of the site. (Ordinance CO47-17-08-24-E1 adopted 8/24/17)
Sec. 14.08.002 Conformance with applicable codes
All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this Article, section 12.12.021 of the Subdivision Chapter,
as amended, the building code, the electrical code, and the sign ordinance as applicable, and under appropriate permit and inspection.
Sec. 14.08.003 Shielding and outdoor lighting standards for residential
Holiday lighting is allowed from October 15th to March 15th.
Sec. 14.08.004 General standards for nonresidential
Holiday lighting is allowed from November 15th to February 15th.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.08.005 Lighting design standards for nonresidential
Lighting shall be used to provide safety while accenting key architectural elements and to emphasize landscape features. Light fixtures shall be
designed as an integral design element that complements the design of the project. This may be accomplished through style, material or color. All
lighting fixtures designed or placed so as to illuminate any portion of a site shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The light source shall be completely concealed within an opaque housing and shall not be visible from the street or adjacent
properties. In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spill into the night sky and onto adjacent properties, all
lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff fixtures.
(2) Lighting shall be oriented not to direct glare or illumination onto streets in a manner that may distract or interfere with the vision of
drivers on such streets.
(3) Lighting fixtures shall not be more than twenty-five (25) feet in height within an on-site parking area.
(4) Lighting fixtures located within fifty (50) feet of any residential use shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
(5) Lighting fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is contained on site and does not cross any property line
of the site.
(6) Wall-mounted floodlamps/wall-packs internal to a site that are not visible from a public road or adjacent to residential or
multifamily district may be of any design. Wall-mounted floodlamps/wall-packs visible from public roads and adjacent to any residential
or multifamily use shall not be allowed.
(7) Fixtures used to accent architectural features, landscaping or art shall be located, aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the
night sky.
(8) Architectural and landscaping lighting. Outdoor lighting used to illuminate flags, statues, signs or other objects mounted on a pole,
pedestal or platform, spotlighting or floodlighting used for architectural or landscape purposes, must use full cutoff or directionally
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/526
shielded lighting fixtures that are aimed and controlled so that the directed light is substantially confined to the object intended to be
illuminated.
(9) All exterior lighting shall comply with applicable terms of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted by the City. In
cases where terms of this Chapter conflict with the International Energy Conservation Code, the more restrictive shall apply.
Sec. 14.08.006 Lighting in design districts
(a) All lighting poles in areas designated as a design district, shall be decorative poles, as that term is defined by Texas Local Government Code
Chapter 284, as amended.
(b) The zoning districts designated as design districts are set forth below and shall include the City right-of-way adjacent to each zoning district:
(1) Development Reserve District Interim (DR).
(2) Rural/Agricultural District (RA).
(3) Manufactured Home Residential District (MH).
(4) Estate Lot (ES).
(5) Single-Family Residential District, Large Lot (SF).
(6) Single-Family Residential District, Large Suburban Lot (SF-1).
(7) Single-Family Residential District, Large Urban Lot (SF-2).
(8) Single-Family Residential District, Urban Lot (SF-3).
(9) Town Home Residential District (TH).
(10) Condominiums Residential District (CD).
(11) Duplex Residential District (DP).
(12) Multifamily Residential District (MF).
(13) Transitional Office District (TO).
(14) Transitional Commercial District (TC).
(15) General Office District (GO).
(16) Local Retail District (LR).
(17) General Retail District (GR).
(18) Hospital District (H).
(19) Business District (BD).
(20) Public Services District (PS).
(21) Commercial Services District (CS).
(22) Heavy Commercial District (HC).
(23) Light Industrial District (LI).
(24) General Industrial District (GI).
(25) Heavy Industrial District (HI).
(26) Open Space Greenbelt District (OSG).
(27) Open Space Recreation District (OSR).
(28) Downtown District (DD).
(29) Mixed Use District (MU).
(30) Planned Development District (PD).
(31) Corridor Overlay (CO).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/526
(32) Historic Preservation Overlay (HPO).
Sec. 14.08.007 Recreational facilities
Any light source permitted by this Article may be used for lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to,
football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, tennis courts, or show areas, provided all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The mounting height of outdoor sports field and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall not exceed eighty (80) feet from
finished grade unless approved by the Development Services Committee as having no adverse effect or approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission as part of a variance request;
(2) All outdoor sports field and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall be equipped with a glare control package (louvers,
shields, or similar devices);
(3) The fixtures must be aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area;
(4) Lighting shall be shielded so as to cast no direct light on adjacent properties;
(5) Nonconforming fixtures lighting sports fields may be replaced or otherwise changed on an individual/small cluster basis with new
nonconforming fixtures; however, when all the fixtures are upgraded or otherwise changed, the fixtures must be brought into compliance
with the requirements of this Chapter;
(6) All stadium and other sports arena lights used for the illumination of the playing area must be extinguished by 10:00 p.m. or
immediately after the conclusion of the final event. No new event, activity, or game may start after 10:00 p.m. The remainder of the
facility lights, except for reasons of security, must be extinguished at 10:00 p.m. or within one hour after the final event;
(7) Lighting shall be shielded so as to cast no direct light on adjacent properties; and
(8) Any stadium-lit outdoor facility shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any residential use.
Sec. 14.08.008 Required site plan information
The following outdoor lighting information must be included with all site plan submissions:
(1) The location and height of all light poles, including parking lot and walkway light poles;
(2) Illustrations of each style of freestanding lighting fixture that show that such fixture is either a full cutoff or directionally shielded
lighting fixture; and
(3) A statement from the owner/developer certifying that all required outdoor lighting provisions will be met.
Sec. 14.08.009 Prohibited light sources
(a) Neon light sources that blink or flash.
(b) Cobra-head-type fixtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors which house other than incandescent sources.
(c) Searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures.
(d) Lighting fixtures that have flashing, rotating, moving, pulsing or alternating colored sources except between Thanksgiving Day and January
15th.
(e) Laser source light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected
above the horizontal is prohibited.
(f) Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited.
Sec. 14.08.010 Exemptions
The following are exempt from the outdoor lighting standards, provided that such fixtures do not cause disability glare:
(1) Lighting fixtures and standards required by federal, state or county agencies, including streetlights within the public right-of-way.
(2) Outdoor lighting fixtures used by law enforcement, fire and rescue, the state department of public safety or other emergency
response agencies to perform emergency or construction repair work, or to perform nighttime road construction on major thoroughfares.
Sec. 14.08.011 Nonconforming fixtures
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/526
Except where otherwise noted, all lighting fixtures existing and legally installed and operative before the effective date of this Chapter are exempt
from the requirements of this Article. Whenever a nonconforming fixture is replaced or moved, the replacement fixture shall meet the requirements
of this Article.
ARTICLE 14.09 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES (WTFs)
Sec. 14.09.001 General
(a) Preexisting WTFs for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements
of this Article as further specified in section 14.09.012 of this Article.
(b) WTFs serving a public safety purpose as approved by the City are exempt from the following regulations within this Article: section 14.09.003
height limitations, section 14.09.004 towers along major thoroughfares and gateways, section 14.09.006 separation between towers, and section
14.09.010(1) additional setbacks and separation requirements.
(c) This Article 14.09 does not apply to network nodes, as that term is defined by Texas Local Government Code chapter 284, as amended, that are
proposed to be located in the City right-of-way. All network nodes proposed to be placed in the City right-of-way are governed by Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284, as amended and Cedar Park Code of Ordinances Articles 16.02 and 16.03, as amended.
(Ordinance CO47-17-08-24-E1 adopted 8/24/17)
Sec. 14.09.002 Setbacks
(a) The standard setbacks for each zoning district shall apply to WTFs with additional setbacks or separation being required in the sections below.
(b) Transmission towers shall be placed a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower away from any residential structure or residential
zone boundary. No guy wires shall be used.
Sec. 14.09.003 Height limitations
In no case shall a proposed transmission tower exceed two hundred (200) feet within the city limits.
Sec. 14.09.004 Towers along major thoroughfares and gateways
(a) To preserve and protect the city's major thoroughfares, WTFs must be set back from freeways, expressways, and major and minor arterials by a
distance equal to three times the WTF height. The setback for these areas is determined by measuring from the centerline of the right-of-way of the
thoroughfare with the following exceptions.
(b) Exception. All direct-to-home services, citizen's band radio, and all stealth facilities.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.09.005 Towers along major corridors
(a) WTFs are not allowed within a major corridor with the following exceptions.
(b) Exception. All direct-to-home services, citizen's band radio, and all stealth facilities.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.09.006 Separation between towers
(a) The city desires to protect its natural beauty and skyline by limiting the number of towers per square mile. Densities for towers are calculated
using the following:
(1) For minor facilities, towers shall be separated by a minimum of the height of the tower multiplied by 50.
(2) For intermediate facilities, towers shall be separated by a minimum of the height of the tower multiplied by 45.
(3) For major facilities, towers shall be separated by a minimum of the height of the tower multiplied by 25.
(b) Exception. Stealth facilities.
Sec. 14.09.007 Additional uses permitted on lot
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/526
WTFs may be located on lots containing another principal use, and may occupy a leased parcel on a lot meeting the minimum lot size requirement of
the district in which it is located. Towers and their associated equipment shall be separated from other structures on the lot by a minimum distance of
ten (10) feet.
Sec. 14.09.008 Shared facilities and co-location policy
FCC-licensed wireless communication providers are encouraged to construct and site their WTFs with a view towards sharing facilities with other
utilities, to co-location with other existing WTFs and to accommodate the future co-location of other future WTFS, where technically, practically,
and economically feasible. The city reserves the right to notify other registered wireless communication providers of new WTF applications to
promote co-location.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.09.009 Review process
(a) The Development Services Department has three (3) review processes, which may apply to the development of WTFs.
(1) Platting. The normal platting requirements as required by the City subdivision ordinance and the Texas Local Government Code
shall apply to WTFs.
(2) WTF registration. This process is required for certain minor use subcategories and all intermediate and major subcategories with the
exception of direct-to-home services and citizen's band radio. The applicant can register by submitting the appropriate information to the
Development Services Department. This information will be used to aid in long range planning.
(3) Development Services Committee (DSC). This committee is the main body overseeing site design and development for the City.
They may implement any of the site-specific criteria set forth in this Chapter in addition to other local government codes and ordinances.
(b) To make application for site development review, the following is required:
(1) Completed application for site development review and application fee submitted to the Development Services Department.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
(2) WTF facility plan. A drawing and any supporting documents that identifies:
(A) The location of existing applicant-owned wireless telecommunication facilities in Williamson and/or Travis County.
(B) The type and height of each existing facility.
(C) The current proposed facility.
(D) The type and height of the proposed facility.
(E) At least three co-location alternatives to the applicant's own development along with proof of a genuine effort in co-locating
on or attaching to an existing support structure; a certified letter addressed to potential lessors is recommended in addition to
evidence that demonstrates that no existing tower or support structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed WTF. Any of the
following may be submitted as evidence:
(i) No existing structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(ii) Existing structures are of insufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(iii) Existing structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(iv) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing structures,
or the antenna on the existing structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(v) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing structure or to adapt an
existing support structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding those for new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
(vi) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing structures unsuitable.
The plan will assist the city in understanding the need for any new wireless telecommunication facility, assess the land use impacts,
and aid in comprehensive land use planning. It is not necessary to reveal future plans or locations for additional proposed facilities.
(3) Proof of compliance with FCC regulations.
(4) Notification of an impending environmental assessment required by the National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) and a
copy when the assessment is completed (if applicable).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/526
(5) A letter addressed to the city declaring an intent and willingness to build out a proposed tower to allow at least 2 other service
providers.
(6) Copies of a site plan (the site plan is not the same as the WTF facility plan) as per Development Services Committee requirements;
including signature lines for both the owner of the WTF and/or the owner of the property indicating an agreement to remove the entire
WTF and any related equipment within 60 days of abandonment.
(7) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a
licensed professional engineer.
(8) Upon receipt of the above items, the Development Services Committee will process the application and review the site plan.
Sec. 14.09.010 Site development criteria for WTFs review process
The site development requirements for WTFs follow the normal standards for any other type of development according to city code and ordinances.
However some additional standards apply to these sites as follows:
(1) Additional setbacks and separation requirements. Transmission towers shall be placed a minimum distance equal to the height of the
tower away from any residential structure or residential zone boundary. No guy wires shall be used. However, if the minimum distance
equal to the height of the tower away from any residential structure or residential zone boundary is less than the following, the greater
shall apply.
WTF height, excluding antenna array, does not exceed:
(A) One hundred (100) feet, if the WTF is at least two hundred (200) up to two hundred fifty (250) feet from any residential
district,
(B) One hundred twenty-five feet, if the WTF is at least two hundred fifty (250), up to five hundred forty (540) feet from
any residential district;
(C) One hundred fifty (150) feet, if the WTF is five hundred forty (540) feet or more from any residential district.
(2) Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing
device.
(3) Special aesthetic and lighting standards.
(A) New transmission towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or be painted in accordance with any applicable standards of
the FAA.
(B) The design of the related buildings and equipment shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend the facility to the natural setting and built environment.
(C) If an antenna is installed on a support structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusiveness as possible.
(D) WTFs shall not be artificially lighted with the exception of motion detectors as security lighting, except as required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If security lighting is required, the city shall review the available lighting alternatives and
approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding properties.
(4) Landscaping and screening. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping and screening for a transmission tower or any
parabolic antenna larger than two (2) meters:
(A) Tower compounds shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the base of the WTF site from
view of public right-of-way. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four (4) feet wide outside the perimeter of
the compound. A screening fence may be used in part to screen a WTF, but must be in addition to the required landscaping.
(B) Certain parabolic dishes attached to the ground shall be screened from public right-of-way by a combination of siting at or
behind the imaginary front line of the most major structure on site (largest in gross floor area) and landscaping a four (4) feet wide
strip between the dish and right-of-way.
(C) Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, where towers are sited on large, wooded parcels, natural growth around the site perimeter may be a sufficient buffer.
(D) It is the responsibility of the WTF owner to maintain any required landscaping.
(5) All proposed transmission towers shall provide a point of access from right-of-way which is in conformance with the TCM
driveway standards. No off-street parking is required.
Sec. 14.09.011 Abandonment
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/526
Any WTF that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 (twelve) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such a facility shall
remove same within 60 (sixty) days of receipt of notice from the city notifying owner of such abandonment. If such facility is not removed within
said 60 (sixty) days, the city may remove such facility at the property owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single WTF, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations on the tower.
Sec. 14.09.012 Nonconforming WTFs
WTFs in existence on the date of the adoption of this article, which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter (nonconforming WTFs) are
subject to the following provisions:
(1) Nonconforming WTFs shall continue in use for the purpose now used, but shall not be expanded without complying with this
article, except as further provided in this article.
(2) Nonconforming WTFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed no more than fifty (50) percent or greater due to any reason or
cause may be repaired and restored to their former use, location and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building permit therefor,
but without otherwise complying with this article.
(3) The owner of any nonconforming WTF may replace, repair, rebuild and/or expand such WTF in order to improve the structural
integrity of the facility, to allow the facility to accommodate co-located antennas or facilities, or to upgrade the facilities to current
engineering, technological or communications standards, without having to conform to the provisions of this article, so long as such
facilities are not increased in height by more than twenty (20) feet and/or setbacks are not decreased by more than ten percent (10%).
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.09.013 Modification to existing facilities or preexisting facilities which meet the requirements of this Article
(a) Minor modifications to WTFs permitted under this Article shall be approved by the Director of Development Services, or designee. Minor
modifications are as follows:
(1) The addition of no more than two antenna arrays to any existing WTF, so long as the addition of the antenna arrays add no more
than twenty (20) feet in height to the WTF.
(2) An increase in height of the support structure which is no greater than ten (10) percent, and a decrease in setbacks by no more than
ten (10) percent.
(3) Co-locations of up to one antenna array shall be considered a minor modification.
(b) Major modifications. Major modifications to WTFs permitted under this Chapter shall be subject to all terms of the section. Major
modifications are any modifications that exceed the definition of minor modifications.
ARTICLE 14.10 APPEALS
Sec. 14.10.001 Generally
(a) If a site development permit application is denied at the staff level, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(b) An appeal shall made in writing no more than thirty (30) days after the issuance of the last issued staff comment letter.
(c) An appeal may be considered when the application of the ordinances in regard to the site development permit application is contested.
Pecuniary hardship to the applicant, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute grounds for an appeal.
(d) Any requested appeal from this Chapter shall be made in writing at least thirty (30) working days prior to the date on which consideration is to
be given by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Submittal shall be made to the Development Services Department.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
ARTICLE 14.11 COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 14.11.001 Conflict with other provisions
(a) Public provisions. The regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute, or other
provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.
(b) Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction,
provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant,
or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/526
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
Sec. 14.11.002 Legal recourse
(a) At the request of the City Council, the City Attorney or his designated representative shall institute appropriate civil action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce these regulations.
(b) Violations of this Chapter shall be referred to the code enforcement officer for resolution in municipal court.
(c) Any person violating any provision of this Chapter within the City limits shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable
by a fine of not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day or as currently specified in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
ARTICLE 14.12 DEFINITIONS
Sec. 14.12.001 General Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandonment. Abandonment occurs when a person with a right or interest in a property voluntarily gives up that right or interest, either by physically
“abandoning” the property for ninety (90) days or more or by showing the intention to give up the right or interest.
Access. A way or means of approach to provide a vehicle or pedestrian a physical entrance and exit to a property.
Access aisle. An accessible pedestrian space between elements, such as parking spaces, that provides clearances appropriate for use of the elements.
Access sidewalk. A utilitarian sidewalk provided to lend access from the parking area to the building.
Accessible. Describes a site, building, facility, or portion thereof that can be approached, entered, and used by physically disabled people.
Accessible route. A continuous unobstructed path connecting all accessible elements and spaces that can be negotiated by a severely disabled person
using a wheelchair and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles,
curb ramps, walks, and ramps.
Aisle. The area within a parking lot, which allows vehicles access to parking spaces. The aisle serves as a travel way through the parking lot as well
as a maneuvering area, which permits full and direct ingress and egress to parking spaces.
Amenity center. A private facility associated with a specific development that provides social gathering areas, recreational facilities, or other types of
common space for the exclusive benefit of residents of the development and shall be operated by the property owners' association.
Applicant. Any person, business, or group required to submit a site development application in accordance herewith.
As-builts. Plans and specifications appropriately marked or otherwise denoted to clearly show all changes to the work that occurred during
construction.
Barrier. A device or treatment, which controls the movement, circulation, separation or direction of vehicular traffic. Such treatments include but are
not limited to wheel stops, end islands, and dividers.
Bay width. A distance measured perpendicular to and from the front of a parking space, across the maneuver space, to the front of the opposite
parking space.
Buffer yards. A combination of physical spaces and vertical elements such as plants, berms, fences, or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and
screen incompatible land uses from each other.
Buffering. The use of a mix of landscaping, consisting primarily of shrubs and trees, but including berms, walls, or decorative fences to reduce the
impact of noise and unsightly visual intrusions with less offensive or more harmonious elements.
Buildable area. An area located within a lot, bounded by the front, side, and rear setback lines. The area may be further restricted by the placement of
easements or special setbacks. Construction of the structures must be limited to this area.
Building. See structure.
Building height. The vertical distance from the grade plane to the average height of the highest roof structure.
Building line. See Setback line.
Caliper. The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk measurement for nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six (6)
inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size, and twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes.
Cedar park tree program. A program account used exclusively for the planting and maintenance of trees in public spaces.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/526
Condominium. A single-family dwelling unit with individual ownership of a dwelling unit and an individual interest in the common areas and
facilities, which serve the multiunit project.
Corner clearance. A distance measured from the edge of pavement of an intersecting street to the edge of pavement of the first driveway.
Critical root zone (CRZ). The circular region measured outward from the tree trunk representing the essential area of the roots that must be
maintained or protected for the tree's survival. One (1) foot of radial distance for every inch of tree DBH, with a minimum of eight feet for specimen
trees. The formula changes to 1.5 feet for every inch of tree DBH when the trees reach an eighteen-inch (18") diameter or greater and/or the tree is
considered a specimen.
Curb return radius. The radius defined by the arc section used in access apron design of an intersection or driveway at the curbline of the street.
Developer. The legal owner of land to be improved or his/her authorized representative.
Development services committee (DSC). Consists of representatives from the city staff charged with reviewing site development plans.
Development Services Coordinator. The officer or duly authorized staff representative, designated by the City Manager, charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
Development Services Director. The officer or duly authorized staff representative, designated by the City Manager, charged with the administration
and enforcement of this Chapter.
Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH). Tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks
below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split.
Dripline. The periphery of the area underneath a tree, which would be encompassed by perpendicular lines dropped from the farthest edges of the
crown of the tree.
Driveway. A private roadway providing access for vehicles from public or private property to the adjacent public street.
Driveway opening. Includes the area of the driveway connecting the public street to the vehicular travel approaches and parking areas located within
the property line.
Driveway separation. A distance measured from the edge of pavement of a driveway, along the curbline, to the edge of pavement of the next
driveway.
Duplex. A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced common wall extending from
ground to roof.
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Edge of pavement (EOP). The outermost edge of the pavement. For streets with curb and gutter, the outside edge of the curb is the EOP. For streets
without a curb, the edge of the asphalt pavement is the EOP. This should not be confused with the crushed rock base, which will often extend beyond
the asphalt pavement.
Encroachment. Part of a structure or building, which extends into a setback area, easement or right-of-way.
Fence. A physical barrier or enclosure consisting of wood, stone, brick, block, wire, metal, or similar material used as a boundary or means of
protection or confinement, but not including a hedge or other vegetation.
Full review. Review of a site plan by the Development Services Committee.
Hardscape. The nonliving elements used in landscape, i.e., decorative walls, ledges, fountains, sculpture, stone paths.
Heritage tree. Any of the following:
(1) A hardwood tree having a trunk of twenty-six (26) inches DBH or more; or
(2) A hardwood tree or cluster or stand of hardwood trees designated by resolution of the City Council to be of historical value or of
significant community benefit.
Home occupations. Occupations conducted within a dwelling. See zoning ordinance for criteria.
Joint access easement. An easement creating a legal means by which two or more property owners and/or two or more properties may utilize one
joint driveway for access. This easement shall be for public use but privately maintained.
Landscaped area (planting strip). Any area of ground that can support vegetative groundcover and other landscaping plant materials. Sidewalks and
other impervious surfaces are not considered landscaped areas, unless they are decorative sidewalks within a landscaped area.
Landscaping. Consists primarily of existing and introduced vegetation, as well as other related improvements to a lot including, but not limited to,
forming and berming, irrigation systems, landscape subsurface drainage systems, site furnishings, and nonstructural retaining walls.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/526
Letter of encroachment. A letter which serves as written evidence or which verifies that a building/structure encroachment was constructed prior to
the effective date of the zoning ordinance (March 24, 1975) or prior to any subsequent ordinance amendments which affect the building setback area
requirements.
Light pole height. Light pole height is measured from the grade or surface on which the light pole is mounted to the bottom of the lighting fixture.
Lighting fixture. A complete lighting unit consisting of the lamp, lens, optical reflector, housing and electrical components necessary for ignition and
control of the lamp, which may include a ballast, starter and/or photo control.
Lighting fixture, directionally shielded. A lighting fixture, which emits a light distribution where some light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane
located at the bottom of the fixture. Such fixtures may contain visors, louvers or other types of shields or lenses, which are designed to direct light
onto a targeted area and to minimize stray light.
Lighting fixture, full cutoff. A lighting fixture from which no light output is emitted at or above a horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the
lighting fixture.
Lot, corner. A lot or parcel of land abutting two or more streets at their intersection or two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less
than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot coverage. The impervious area of a lot, including but not limited to the area covered by parking spaces, driveways, sidewalks, rocked areas, and
equipment pads located thereon.
Lot depth. The average distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
Lot, developable. A lot upon which a building can be constructed. This requires that the lot have frontage on, or access to, an improved street and all
utilities (such as water, sewer, and electric).
Lot, double-frontage. A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
Lot, flag. A lot having legal access to a public street and having a depth greater than its frontage. All flag lots shall be required to be at least fifty (50)
feet wide at the narrowest part of the lot and no less than twenty-five (25) feet through a variance process. The maximum length of the pole of the
flag lot shall not exceed one hundred ten (110) feet.
Lot, front or frontage. That portion of a tract of land which is the principal side of a property and which abuts on a public street to which it has direct
access.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, legal. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Williamson and/or Travis
County or a lot subdivided by metes and bounds description prior to December 9, 1974, and in its original configuration. In Travis County the date is
September 1, 1983; in Williamson County the date is February 21, 1996; in the City of Austin the date is 1951.
Lot lines or property lines. The lines bounding a lot.
Lot size. The total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines.
Lot, substandard. A parcel of land that does not meet all city standards.
Lot width. The distance from one side lot line to the other as measured at the front setback.
Main structure. A structure in which the principal use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted. In a residential district, a primary dwelling shall
be deemed a main structure on the lot on which it is situated.
Marginal access street. Minor street which is parallel with and adjacent to arterial and collector streets and highways and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/526
Multifamily residential. A structure or grouping of structures where each structure contains three or more dwelling units intended for human
habitation.
Natural area. An area where the naturally grown landscaping is left primarily undisturbed, except for the removal of poison ivy, greenbriar, and
similar vegetation and allowing for maintenance of the trees to maintain vigorous growth.
Nonresidential development. All development except for that of single-family detached residential.
Ornamental trees. Smaller tree species, reaching a height of approximately ten to twenty-five feet (10'–25') at maturity. Such trees provide screening
and accent elements.
Parking bay. That portion of a parking area containing at least one row of parking spaces, but not more than two rows and the associated maneuver
space for entering and leaving the spaces.
Parking module. The clear width provided for the parking of vehicles including at least two rows of parking spaces adjacent to the aisle.
Parking space. A space in a parking area marked and reserved for the parking of all licensed motorized vehicles with four (4) or more wheels.
Patio home. A single-family dwelling on a separate lot with open space setbacks on three sides and a zero lot line on one side.
Pervious. The ability of a substance to allow for the passage of water.
Preferred plant list. A list of shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, etc. they are proven to thrive in this region with fewer
problems and requiring less care to remain healthy. The preferred plant list is developed by the city and is provided in section 14.07.023.
Privacy fence. A fence constructed of wood, cementatious concrete siding, masonry, or similar material to provide a visual barrier. Slats used in chain
link, cinder and/or cement blocks, or similar materials shall not be considered privacy fencing and shall not be used for screening.
Protected tree. Any of the following:
(1) A hardwood tree having a trunk of sixteen (16) inches DBH or more;
(2) A multitrunk hardwood tree having any single trunk of sixteen (16) inches DBH or more or an aggregate total trunk DBH of thirty
(30) inches or more (not counting trunks less than eight (8) inches in diameter at DBH); or
(3) A cluster of hardwood trees within a ten (10) foot radius circle having an aggregate total DBH of forty (40) inches or more (not
counting trunks less than eight (8) inches in diameter at DBH).
Prune. Cutting away unwanted or damaged parts of a tree including no more than thirty (30) percent of its viable crown.
Public easement. An area of land reserved for the use of the public by the grantor, in which to install and maintain utility lines, drainage ditches or
channel, or for other city or public services; the ownership or title to the land encompassed by the easement being retained by the owner. No building
or part of a building or other permanent structure may be located within the limits of the easement.
Recreational facilities. Facilities, which offer a wide variety of both casual and organized activities, for a diverse range of people within the
community.
Redevelopment. Any change of use, substantial reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure and/or
site.
Remove. Total disposition of a tree, including complete or partial severance of the trunk or limbs and the pruning or cutting away of more than thirty
(30) percent of a tree's viable crown.
Right-of-way. An area of land dedicated as public property on which an irrevocable right-of-passage has been recorded for public use.
Setback. The distance between the outside wall of the main building and any lot line. The setback may exclude uncovered walks, steps/stairs,
chimneys, bay windows, and roof overhangs up to 18 inches in width.
(1) Front setback. The line extending across a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
front property line and the outside wall of the main building.
(2) Rear setback. The line extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance
between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear setback shall
in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front setback.
(3) Side setback. The line between the building and side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being
the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the main building.
Setback area. Area of a lot defined by and contained within the property lines and the setback lines.
Setback lines. A line parallel with the property line at a specific distance therefore defining the minimum distance from the property line that a
structure may be erected.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/526
Shade trees (canopy trees). The largest plants in the landscape and provide the overhead structure needed for shading and under which other plants
live and grow. They spread and give overhead structure when they reach maturity.
Sight distance triangle. A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersections and dimensioned in accordance with the provisions of
the TCM, in which no visual obstructions are erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the line of visibility
of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
Single-family detached dwelling. A dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one family and surrounded by open space.
Single-family development. Development of a single-family lot for residential use. This includes single-family dwelling units, patio homes,
condominiums, and townhouses.
Site. Land upon which constructions, expansions, reconstructions or other improvements are to be done.
Site development plans. Detailed set of plans including but not limited to, the site plan, drainage plan, erosion and sedimentation control plan, utility
schematic, grading plan, landscape and tree preservation plan. Should also contain all the information required by this chapter and on the most
current site development application/checklist.
Street frontage. That portion of a property where the property line is adjacent to public right-of-way of a street or other designated travelway.
Street trees. Shade trees or ornamental trees that are planted either adjacent to or within the public right-of-way of a street for visual enhancement
along the travelway and/or a shaded canopy over pedestrian ways and traffic lanes.
Street yard. The area of a lot which lies between the street right-of-way line and the actual front wall of the building extended by an imaginary line
from the outer corners of the building and parallel to the street to the side property lines.
Structure. Any manmade construction either built or moved onto a site, affixed to the ground, and which is used to shelter, enclose, or support
persons or moveable property. A fence requiring footings or a foundation is considered a structure. Driveways, patio slabs, walkways, and fences 6'
tall or less shall not be considered as structures.
Throat depth. A distance measured from the edge of pavement of the street to the first point of conflict.
Townhouse. A single-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is
located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
Transportation criteria manual (TCM). Establishes rules and regulations for the design, development, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair,
conversion, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of roadways and thoroughfares within the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city.
Transportation master plan. Documents the goals, objectives, elements and means by which transportation infrastructure and management will be
addressed in the city.
Tree. Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant typically having a trunk diameter of no less than two (2) inches at maturity, measured at one (1)
foot above grade, and normally grows to an overall height of no less than fifteen (15) feet in central Texas.
Tree removal. Uprooting, severing the main trunk of the tree or any act which causes or may reasonably be expected to cause the tree to die,
including, without limitation, damage inflicted on the root system by machinery, storage of materials or soil compaction; substantially changing the
natural grade above the root system or around the trunk; excessive pruning; or paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious materials in a
manner which may reasonably be expected to kill the tree. If a plan shows more than fifty percent (50%) of the dripline disturbed, the tree will be
considered to be removed.
Vegetation screen. A buffer screen made up of live plant material that from two (2) years following planting, provides for a visually opaque screen.
Vicinity map. A map illustrating the location of a site within the city, not necessarily to scale.
Xeriscape. A method of landscaping which conserves water through the use of specific principles of design, plant selection, installation, and
maintenance.
Zero lot line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07; Ordinance CO48-12-04-12-C2 adopted 4/12/12; Ordinance CO56-12-06-28-C1, ex. A, adopted
6/28/12; Ordinance CO13-13-01-10-C3 adopted 1/10/13; Ordinance CO36-18-08-09-E2 adopted 8/9/18)
Sec. 14.12.002 Wireless telecommunication facilities definitions
Alteration. Any modification, replacement, or reconstruction that materially increases the height or any other dimension of a WTF.
Antenna. Any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals.
(1) Omni-directional antenna (also known as a whip antenna) transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a 360-degree radial
pattern.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/526
(2) Directional antenna (also known as a panel antenna) transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern
of less than 360 degrees.
(3) Parabolic antenna (also known as a dish antenna or satellite dish) is a bowl-shaped device for the reception and/or transmission of
radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern.
Attached wireless telecommunication facility. A wireless telecommunication facility that is affixed to an existing structure that is not primarily used
for the support or attachment of a wireless telecommunication facility and is not a normal component of such a facility.
Co-location. When more than one wireless telecommunications provider shares a wireless telecommunications support structure.
Compound. The fenced WTF area which may be a portion of a parcel or site, or the entire parcel or site.
Direct-to-home services. The distribution or broadcasting or programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber's premises without use of
ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber's premises or in the uplink process to the satellite; examples are direct broadcast
satellites (DBS), multichannel multipoint distribution (MMDS), and television broadcast stations (TVBS).
Existing support structure. Any structure existing prior to the adoption of this chapter that currently supports or can support a wireless
telecommunication facility.
FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC. Federal Communications Commission.
Height. The distance measured from ground level at the base of a wireless telecommunication facility to the highest point on the facility including
any antenna or related equipment.
Historic resource. Any district, structure or site designated as historically significant by any lawfully authorized local, state or federal historic
preservation entity or governmental entity, including the city.
Intermediate facility. A WTF measuring no more than 110 feet (or 33 meters) but greater than 35 feet (or 10.5 meters) in height.
Major facility. A WTF measuring greater than 110 feet (or 33 meters) in height.
Minor facility. A WTF measuring 35 feet (or 10.5 meters) or less in height (includes private or commercial ham radio operators, repeaters, whip,
directional, or parabolic antennas or any other small antenna facility).
Related equipment. All equipment or structures ancillary to the transmission and reception of voice and data via radio frequencies; such equipment or
structures may include, but is not limited to, cable, conduit and connectors, cabinets, and fencing.
Service provider. Any company, corporation, alliance, individual or other legal entity that provides a wireless telecommunication service directly to
the public for a fee or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public regardless of the facilities used; services include, but
are not limited to portable phones, car phones, pagers, digital data transmission, or radio or television communications.
Stealth technology or stealth facility. Design technology that blends the WTF into the surrounding environment, so it is unrecognizable as a
telecommunications facility; examples of stealth facilities include but are not limited to architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, buildingmounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural elements such as church spires or window wall, and
antenna structures designed to resemble light poles or flagpoles.
Transmission tower. A wireless telecommunications support structure designed primarily for the support and attachment of a wireless
telecommunications facility. Transmission towers include:
(1) Monopole tower. A self-supporting structure composed of a single spire used to support telecommunications antenna and/or related
equipment.
(2) Lattice tower. A self-supporting three or four sided, open, steel frame structure used to support telecommunications antenna and/or
related equipment.
(3) Guyed tower. An open, steel frame that requires wires and anchor bolts for support.
Support structure. Any structure that supports a wireless telecommunication facility; support structure types include, but are not limited to, any
existing or newly constructed structure such as buildings, water towers, light poles, stanchions, monopoles, lattice towers, wood poles or guyed
towers.
Wireless telecommunication facility (WTF). An unstaffed facility operating for the transmission and reception of low-power radio signals consisting
of an equipment shelter or cabinet, a support structure, antennas (e.g. omni-directional, panel/directional, or parabolic) and related equipment.
(Ordinance CO41-07-07-12-3H adopted 7/12/07)
CHAPTER 15
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/526
LANDSCAPE AND TREE REGULATIONS
[RESERVED]*
CHAPTER 16
TRANSPORTATION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 16.01 ADOPTION OF CITY OF AUSTIN TRANSPORTATION CRITERIA MANUAL
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, development, construction, alteration,
enlargement, repair, conversion, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of roadways and thoroughfares, that certain codes recommended by
the City of Austin Transportation Criteria Manual, being the most current edition thereof, and the whole thereof, as amended from time to time,
including later editions, except such portions as are hereinafter amended, deleted or modified by the city. One (1) copy of said code is now on file in
the office of the City Secretary, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the same shall be
controlling in the design, development, and construction of all transportation improvements within the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the city. (1998 Code, art. 9.1000; Ordinance CO-01-12-20-7.A adopted 12/20/01)
ARTICLE 16.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sec. 16.02.001 Title and purpose
This article shall be known as the reserved right-of-way regulations. The reserved right-of-way regulations acknowledge and respond to the impact
that construction of improvements in a right-of-way can have upon the city's efforts to provide adequate roadways necessary to accommodate traffic
generated by new development. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1101)
Sec. 16.02.002 Application of requirement
The requirements of this article shall become applicable to each individual lot at such time as an application on such lot is made for one of the
following:
(1) Zoning or rezoning initiated by the property owner;
(2) Preliminary plan or final plat;
(3) Site plan.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1102)
Sec. 16.02.003 Declaration of building lines
Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the city from establishing building lines along specified roadways pursuant to state law, whereupon the
provisions of this article relating to the reservation of right-of-way and the waiver procedures of this article shall be of no further force and effect for
properties within such corridor. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1103)
Sec. 16.02.004 Reservation of right-of-way
(a) The city hereby reserves right-of-way along each roadway designated in the roadway plan or in an established capital improvement project
located within the planning jurisdiction of the city. The extent and general location of the reserved right-of-way shall be as set forth in the roadway
plan or established capital improvement project.
(b) No structure shall be erected nor shall improvements be made in reserved right-of-way except as provided in this section.
(c) All setbacks required by the zoning and subdivision ordinance shall be measured from the reserved right-of-way, unless a waiver from the
provisions of this section is obtained.
(d) The alignment shall be based upon the designated alignment in the roadway plan or capital improvement project, and upon appropriate
engineering criteria such as grades, curvature and existence of floodplains. In areas designated for state roadway projects, alignment may be
established by the Texas Department of Transportation. For an existing or platted street, the alignment shall be based upon the existing centerline
established before additional dedications from the opposite side, unless the center line of the street is proposed to be shifted from its present
alignment, in which case the proposed centerline shall be the basis for dedication and reservation. If the alignment cannot be determined in manner
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/526
described in the preceding sentences of this subsection, the reserved right-of-way shall be established equally on each side of the center line of an
existing roadway.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1104)
Sec. 16.02.005 Dedication of right-of-way
(a) If the director of planning determines that all or a portion of the right-of-way is needed to accommodate additional traffic expected to be
generated by the proposed development, right-of-way shall be dedicated in accordance with the following standards:
(1) For a roadway subject to reserved right-of-way under which is internal to a proposed subdivision or development project, a total
right-of-way width of up to one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be dedicated.
(2) For an existing or proposed roadway subject to reserved right-of-way which abuts a proposed subdivision or development project,
up to fifty percent (50%) of the total right-of-way requirement (measured from the centerline established according to this section) shall
be dedicated. If the total right-of-way width specified in the roadway plan equals or exceeds one hundred-fifty (150) feet, no more than
seventy-five (75) feet of reserved right-of-way width is required to be dedicated.
(b) Additional dedication of right-of-way may be required for streets not subject to reserved right-of-way where the streets do not meet the
standards set forth in the Transportation Criteria Manual or are necessary to accommodate traffic generated by the proposed development.
(c) With the approval of the director of planning, dedication required at one stage of the development process may be deferred until a later stage,
including but not limited to building permit, provided that all dedication requirements are completed prior to the release of the subsequent
application.
(d) In addition to the dedication of right-of-way, the city may require the construction of a roadway improvement or may assess a fee instead of
requiring construction of a roadway improvement to offset the traffic effects generated by a proposed development.
(Ordinance CO03-06-01-26-3C, sec. 2, adopted 1/26/06)
Sec. 16.02.006 Waiver request required
Whenever an application proposes the erection of structures or the construction of improvements in reserved right-of-way or in a required setback
from reserved right-of-way, and the applicant has not executed an agreement pursuant to section 16.02.005, the applicant must include a request for a
waiver from the reservation requirements of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1106)
Sec. 16.02.007 Temporary use of right-of-way by agreement
By specific agreement, the city may authorize the use of reserved right-of-way for temporary structures or improvements, including parking areas,
detention ponds, landscaping, and signs. The agreement shall require that code requirements governing the need for and use of such improvements
shall be satisfied upon removal of such improvements from the right-of-way. The agreement shall include, without limitation, an expiration date for
the use of the right-of-way, the method of notification to the property owner for replacement of the temporary improvements, and sanctions if the
improvements are not replaced. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1107)
Sec. 16.02.008 Waiver request permitted
The owner of property reserved for right-of-way who has not filed an application for the construction of improvements in the reserved right-of-way
may apply for a waiver from the reservation requirements of this article if fifteen percent (15%) or more of the property is or would be subject to the
reservation requirements under section 16.02.005. A waiver, if granted, shall be effective until the city determines that acquisition of the reserved
right-of-way is feasible. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1108)
Sec. 16.02.009 Procedure upon receipt of waiver request
(a) Upon receipt of the waiver request and after determination that the application is complete, if an application has been filed, the director of
planning shall establish the alignment of all roadways pursuant to section 16.02.005 and, if an application has been filed, shall apply the dedication
standards pursuant to section 16.02.006. When the application is for an area designated as a state roadway project, the director of planning shall
notify the Texas Department of Transportation that a request for a waiver has been filed and, if applicable, an application has been filed proposing
construction in a reserved right-of-way or setback from reserved right-of-way, and shall request field notes from the Texas Department of
Transportation. If the proposed structure of improvement lies in reserved right-of-way which must be dedicated, the director shall require that the
application be amended consistent with dedication requirements. In all other cases, the director shall report to the director of public works that:
(1) The dedication requirements have been applied to the application and that a request for waiver in order to erect structures or
construct improvements in the right-of-way has been made; or
(2) That a request for waiver from the reservation requirements of this section has been made in the absence of an application and that
fifteen percent (15%) or more of the property is or would be subject to the reservation requirements of this section.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/526
(b) As soon as possible, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after receipt of certification, the director of public works shall determine
whether it is feasible for the city to acquire the reserved right-of-way. If the director determines that it is not feasible for the city to acquire the
property, then he shall notify the director of planning, who shall then either release the application, if one has been filed, from compliance with these
requirements; or, if no application has been filed, grant the waiver request for such period of time as the city is unable to acquire the reserved rightof-
way. If the director determines that it is feasible to acquire the reserved right-of-way, he shall report these findings to the director of planning, who
shall deny the waiver and disapprove the application for a period not to exceed six (6) months. After the delay period has lapsed, the application shall
proceed.
(c) A decision by the director of planning to deny a waiver request may be appealed to the City Council.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1109)
Sec. 16.02.010 Amendment of development application
Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the applicant from amending the application to exclude improvements from the reserved right-of-way, in
which event the city, at its sole discretion, may discontinue procedures to acquire the reserved right-of-way. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1110)
Sec. 16.02.011 Variance
The director of planning may grant a variance from the dedication requirements of section 16.02.006 if it finds that application of the terms of this
article works an undue hardship peculiar to the property or renders the property unsuitable for any economically feasible use. A denial of a variance
by the director may be appealed to the City Council. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1111)
ARTICLE 16.03 USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sec. 16.03.001 Purpose and definitions of use of right-of-way
The purpose of this Article is to provide minimum standards for the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic through or around any activity
which temporarily occupies a street, alley, sidewalk, pedestrian way, or thoroughfare. Subject to additional definitions contained in other chapters,
sections, divisions, parts, or sections of the Cedar Park Code of Ordinances:
Public service agencies. The agencies whose primary function is to provide and maintain public utilities.
Roadway. The portion of public highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel or parking. If a highway includes two or more
separate roadways, the term “roadway” refers to such roadway.
Sidewalk area/pedestrian way. The portions of a street right-of-way not used as a roadway, generally located between the curb or edge of the
roadway and the adjacent property line.
Sec. 16.03.002 Use of right-of-way for certain construction activities
The director of public works may authorize construction activities by the City or a public service agency for the purposes of repair or maintenance of
utilities, pavement structure, or surfaces within the public right-of-way without requiring compliance with section 16.03.003.
Sec. 16.03.003 Undergrounding utilities
All utilities in the right-of-way shall be installed underground in accordance with Cedar Park Code of Ordinances section 14.06.001, as amended.
Sec. 16.03.004 Lighting in design districts
All lighting facilities installed in the right-of-way shall comply with Cedar Park Code of Ordinances section 14.08.006 lighting in design districts, as
amended.
Sec. 16.03.005 Permit required
(a) The director of public works shall have the authority to require any person undertaking to perform any activity upon, in, under, above or
adjacent to any public street, which activity requires the temporary closing or blocking in whole or in part of any City roadway, to secure a permit
before closing or blocking any part of such street.
(b) A permit is required prior to the installation of any facilities in the City's right-of-way and an application for a permit must comply with section
16.03.014(g), as applicable.
Sec. 16.03.006 Application for activity requiring the temporary closing or blocking of a City roadway
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/526
When a permit for the occupancy of public right-of-way is required pursuant to section 16.03.003, the permit application shall be filed with the
director of public works no less than nine (9) days before the day the applicant seeks to first block or close any part of the right-of-way unless
otherwise authorized for good cause by the director of public works.
Sec. 16.03.007 Action on the application for activity requiring the temporary closing or blocking of a City roadway
(a) In passing upon an application for a permit pursuant to section 16.03.003, the public shall take into consideration the following:
(1) The need for the amount of space requested, taking into consideration the type of construction as shown by the application.
(2) The period of time of occupancy of such space.
(3) The public safety of the pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and adjacent to the space to be occupied.
(4) The traffic congestion and the vehicular parking requirements at the location.
(b) No application shall be approved which does not show adequate protection of the pedestrian and vehicular traffic at the location of the
requested space.
(c) The director of public works may disapprove applications for permits under this section for the following reasons:
(1) The proposed barricading, signing, warning or other traffic-control procedures or the equipment therefore do not comply with the
requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices and the Transportation Criteria Manual.
(2) The nature of the activity to be performed or its location is such that the work without imposing any undue hardship on the
applicant, can be performed without the necessity of blocking or closing the street.
(3) The activity or the manner in which it is to be performed will violate a City ordinance or a state law.
(4) Failure to furnish all of the information required by this section or, except for good cause shown, to file the application within the
time prescribed by this section.
(5) Misrepresenting or falsifying any information in the application.
(6) The requested space assignments have already been reserved and the projects cannot be conducted simultaneously.
(7) Activity would cause extreme safety hazard or traffic congestion.
(8) A decision on an application for a permit may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Sec. 16.03.008 Special requirements of permit for activity requiring the temporary closing or blocking of a City roadway
The director of public works may require that any of the following special traffic-control devices, working hours, project layout, and operations be
imposed upon a permit issued under this Article:
(1) The use of additional barricades, signals, signs, or other traffic-control or safety devices;
(2) That the activity be performed only at certain hours during the day or night or during specified days of the week;
(3) That only a specified area or not more than a specified number of lanes shall be blocked or closed at the same time or at specified
times of the day;
(4) That materials and equipment used in the activity and materials removed from any excavation be located other than in the vehicle
traffic lanes of such street; or
(5) Any construction activity that will require traffic to be detoured will be coordinated with said director or department before such
detour is implemented unless such detour is necessary under emergency conditions.
Sec. 16.03.009 Insurance
If it is determined that a permit is required for the occupancy of public right-of-way, each person applying for such permit shall furnish to the City
evidence that he has procured public liability and property damage insurance or obtained self-insurance in the following amounts:
(1) For damages arising out of bodily injury to, or death of one person in any one accident: One hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
(2) For damages arising out of bodily injury to, or death of two or more persons in any one accident: Three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00).
(3) For injury to, or destruction of, property in any one accident: Twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/526
(4) Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect during the period of time for which a permit shall be issued or the space
occupied. No insurance shall be required of a franchise holder if the franchise fee includes the cost of using the City streets, and said
franchise includes an insurance or indemnification agreement between the City and the franchise holder.
Sec. 16.03.010 Posting
(a) All permits issued under this Article shall be kept available and shall be produced for inspection upon demand of any City official.
(b) A copy of a right-of-way use for construction permit shall be kept at an easily accessible place on the construction site or business premises at
all times during the period for which the permit is valid.
Sec. 16.03.011 Traffic-control devices
Any person undertaking to perform any activity upon, in, under, above, or adjacent to any public street, highway, roadway, alley, sidewalk, or any
portions of public right-of-way shall use barricades, signals, flags, flares, and all other traffic-control and warning devices and procedures about the
area during the duration of the activity within the public right-of-way of the type and of the manner required by the Transportation Criteria Manual
and Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
Cross reference–Chapter 17, Article 17.02, “Traffic-Control Devices.”
Sec. 16.03.012 Responsibility for barricades and signs
The permit holder shall provide, erect, place, and maintain all warning signs, traffic-control devices, and barricades required by the Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, the Transportation Criteria Manual, or the permit. All such signs, devices and barricades should be in good
condition, clean and legible, and shall be of the type required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices and the Transportation Manual;
provided, that the Public Works Department may authorize the use of different or special devices and equipment if the director finds such equipment
will be at least as effective for its intended purpose as that set forth for such purpose in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices and the
Transportation Criteria Manual. When regulatory signs are required to be provided and installed by said manuals or are deemed necessary by said
manuals or deemed necessary by said director, such signs will be installed by the City.
Sec. 16.03.013 Restoration of work site
(a) Upon completion of any or all activity requiring the blocking or closing of the public street, the public right-of-way will be restored to its
original condition. If a permit issued pursuant to this section is revoked, the permit holder shall immediately commence operations to restore the
activity area within the street to its original condition and complete such work within twenty-four (24) hours. Except as required to restore the
activity area, the permit holder shall remove all equipment, persons, materials, and debris from the street. The activity area shall be restored
according to the procedures contained within the Transportation Criteria Manual.
(b) If the restoration required by subsection (a) is not compiled as determined by the Public Works Department, the City shall be authorized, at its
election, to restore the premises to its proper condition and shall be entitled to recover from the permit holder by civil action the actual expenses
incurred in such restoration, including without limitation the cost of labor, materials, overhead, rental of any equipment used in restoring the site, and
attorney's fees, and for such purposes, the City shall have a right of action against any bonds in effect running from the permit holder to the City,
conditioned upon compliance with all ordinances dealing with the performance of said work.
Sec. 16.03.014 Deployment of network nodes in public rights-of-way
(a) Applicability. This section shall apply to the deployment of all network nodes, network support poles, and transport facility in the City rightsof-
way in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, as amended. In the event that this section conflicts with Article 14.09
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities, this section shall govern.
(b) Definitions. The definitions of the following terms shall be the definitions of those terms pursuant to Texas Local Government Code chapter
284, as amended:
(1) Network node;
(2) Network provider;
(3) Network support pole;
(4) Public right-of-way;
(5) Public right-of-way rate;
(6) Service pole; and
(7) Transport facility.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/526
(c) Public right-of-way rate. A network provider shall pay the public right-of-way rates for use of the public right-of-way in accordance with
Appendix A of this Code.
(d) Collocation on service poles. A network provider may collocate on a service pole subject to a license agreement with the City and upon
payment of fees in accordance with Appendix A of this Code.
(e) Design manual. Any network provider installing network nodes in the City shall comply with a design manual on file with the Public Works
Department, and as amended by the Director of Public Works or their designee.
(f) Prohibited installation. Installation of network node support poles is prohibited in the public right-of-way of municipal parks and adjacent to
certain streets or thoroughfares pursuant to Texas Local Government Code section 284.104, as amended.
(g) Permit required.
(1) A network provider shall obtain a permit from the City before installing a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in
public right-of-way.
(2) A network provider who submits a permit application to install or collocate multiple network nodes may file a consolidated permit
application with the Engineering Department for not more than 30 network nodes.
(3) Application. A network provider shall complete and submit to the City a right-of-way permit application, pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the Design Manual, as amended. All relevant fees in accordance with Appendix A of this Code shall be
submitted in accordance with the application.
(h) Application review process.
(1) Determination of completeness.
(A) The City shall determine whether an application is complete and notify the application of that determination not later than:
(i) The 30th day after the City receives and application for a permit for a network node or network support pole; and
(ii) The 10th day after the City receives an application for a permit for a transport facility.
(B) If the City determines that the application is not complete, the City shall specifically identify the missing information.
(2) Action on application.
(A) The Director of Public Works, or their designee shall approve or deny an application:
(i) For a node support pole not later than the 150th day after the date the City receives the complete application;
(ii) For a network node not later than the 60th day after the date the City receives the complete application; and
(iii) For a transport facility, not later than the 21st day after the date the City receives a complete application.
(B) An application shall be deemed approved if the application is not approved or denied on or before the applicable date for
approval or denial prescribed by this subsection.
(3) Denial of application.
(A) If the Director of Public Works, or their designee, denies a complete application, the Director of Public Works, or their
designee, must document the basis for denial, including the specific applicable Code provisions or other municipal rules,
regulations, or other law on which the denial was based. The Director of Public Works, or their designee shall send the
documentation by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date the Director of Public Works, or their designee denies the
application.
(B) Not later than the 30th day after the date the Director of Public Works or their designee, denies the application, the applicant
may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation and resubmit the application without paying an additional
application fee, other than a fee for actual costs incurred by the City. Notwithstanding, subsection (2) herein, the Director of Public
Works or their designee, shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the 90th day after the
date the City receives the completed revised application. The Director of Public Work's, or their designee's, review of the revised
application is limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation.
(i) Notice for other work.
(1) While a permit is not required for the following work, the network provider shall provide the Director of Public Works, or designee,
notice that the network provider will be performing the work no fewer than 30 days prior to the work commencing:
(A) Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way;
(B) Replacing and upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size (as defined by Texas
Local Government Code chapter 284, as amended) or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or
vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/526
(C) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between
existing poles or node support poles, in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
(2) Work that is necessary to restore existing service may be performed without notice.
(Ordinance CO47-17-08-24-E1 adopted 8/24/17)
ARTICLE 16.04 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS
Sec. 16.04.001 Title and purpose
This article shall be known as the traffic impact analysis requirements. The traffic impact analysis requirements acknowledge and respond to the
relationship between land uses and the vehicular traffic generated by those uses on public roadways. The purpose of these requirements is to adopt
methods to assess the traffic related impacts at the time significant land use decisions regarding property within the city limits and ETJ of the city are
made. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1301)
Sec. 16.04.002 General provisions
(a) A traffic impact analysis (TIA) is a study that provides information on the projected traffic likely to be generated by a proposed development
and to assess its impact on the roadways in the immediate proximity of a proposed development. The TIA should identify any potential traffic
operational problems or concerns and recommend appropriate action to address such problems or concerns.
(b) A traffic impact analysis shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section and the Transportation Criteria Manual. The
geographic area to be considered in the TIA shall be established by the director of planning. The TIA should consider and account for the potential
traffic generated by other undeveloped sites within the established boundaries.
(c) A neighborhood traffic analysis is a simplified traffic impact analysis that assesses the impact of a proposed project on residential streets. A
neighborhood traffic analysis is limited to an evaluation of existing and projected operating levels of residential streets and an identification of
mitigation measures needed to minimize traffic impacts.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1302)
Sec. 16.04.003 Application of requirements
(a) TIA requirements apply to each individual lot or tract of land under the following circumstances:
(1) When an application is made to zone or rezone;
(2) When an application is made to subdivide or resubdivide;
(3) When seeking site plan approval to develop;
(4) When required by the director of planning; or
(5) When required by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
If an application is made to zone or rezone only a portion of a tract of land that zoning will later be requested on the entirety, a TIA may, at the
discretion of the director of planning or the Planning and Zoning Commission, be required for the entire tract if an application is made to subdivide
or resubdivide only a portion of a tract of land that will later be subdivided in its entirety, a TIA shall be required for the entire tract.
(b) A review fee shall accompany the submission of the TIA as prescribed in Appendix A, article 2.000, section 2.400 of this code of ordinances.
(Ordinance CO-01-09-13-8.A. adopted 9/13/01)
Sec. 16.04.004 Threshold conditions requiring a traffic impact analysis
(a) Local or collector street. Means any roadway not designated as an arterial street. For the purposes of this section, a residential local or collector
street is one along which fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage within one thousand, five hundred (1,500) feet of the proposed project's
property lines (or to the nearest arterial, whichever distance is less) is zoned for single-family or more restrictive uses.
(b) The director of planning shall have the authority to require a TIA if the expected number of trips generated by the project exceeds two thousand
(2,000) vehicle trips per day.
(c) The director of planning shall have the authority to require a neighborhood traffic analysis if the project has access only to a residential local or
collector street and the expected number of trips generated by the project exceeds three hundred (300) vehicle trips per day over the existing uses.
(d) The Planning and Zoning Commission by a majority vote shall have the authority to require a TIA when needed to address public concerns
expressed in a public meeting.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/526
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1304)
Sec. 16.04.005 Determination of traffic impact analysis requirements
The director's decision that a TIA is not required pursuant to sections 16.04.003 and 16.04.004 shall be based on data provided by the applicant in
accordance with the procedures and standards established in the Transportation Criteria Manual, or on data otherwise available to the director. (1998
Code, sec. 9.1305)
Sec. 16.04.006 Responsibility for traffic impact analysis
(a) If a TIA is required for a project pursuant to sections 16.04.003 and 16.04.004, the performance of the TIA shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. The TIA must be performed under the supervision of a qualified registered professional engineer or other qualified individual. The TIA
report must be prepared documenting the study, the data used, the findings, and the recommendations of the study consistent with the requirements
specified in the Transportation Criteria Manual. The TIA shall be signed by the registered professional engineer or other qualified individual
responsible for the supervision of the study and preparation of the TIA. If the director of planning determines that the TIA is inadequate or not in
accordance with this section, the applicant may be required to supplement the TIA to address any deficiencies.
(b) If a neighborhood traffic analysis is required for the project, the performance of the study shall be the responsibility of the Planning
Department. If current counts are not available, however, the applicant may be required to conduct traffic counts on the affected streets in accordance
with procedures established by the Public Works Department.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1306)
Sec. 16.04.007 Actions based on a traffic impact analysis
(a) An application subject to these traffic impact analysis requirements may be disapproved when the results of a traffic impact analysis
demonstrate that the proposed project may overburden the city's street system, or the applicant may modify an application to minimize the trafficrelated
impacts identified as part of the required traffic impact analysis. Modifications to applications for projects on non-residential streets may
include, but are not limited to:
(1) A reduction in the projected vehicle trips per day;
(2) Dedication of additional right-of-way;
(3) Reroutings of traffic and of proposed access and egress points serving the proposed project; or
(4) Participation in the funding of traffic signal and/or intersection improvements.
(b) On residential local or collector streets and on which the traffic volume is in excess of an undesirable operating level, as defined in subsection
(d) below, a project shall be disapproved when the traffic generated by the project is shown to raise the operating levels to an undesirable operating
level as defined below on any street within the study area, of the TIA or the neighborhood traffic analysis, or when the results of a TIA or a
neighborhood traffic analysis demonstrate that the project will endanger the public safety. An applicant shall be allowed to modify a proposed site
plan or remedy other traffic related impacts identified as part of the TIA in order to lower the projected traffic volume on streets affected by the
project within the TIA study area below the undesirable operating level.
(c) On residential local or collector streets and on which the traffic volume is in excess of an undesirable operating level, as defined in subsection
(d) the project shall be disapproved unless the Planning Commission or City Council, as appropriate, determines that the project will not result in a
significant deterioration of the undesirable operating level.
(d) On residential local or collector streets, traffic shall be considered to be operating at an undesirable level if it exceeds the volumes indicated
below:
Pavement Width Undesirable Operating Level
Less than 30 feet 1,200 vehicles per day
30 feet to less than 40 feet 1,800 vehicles per day
40 feet or wider 4,000 vehicles per day
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1307)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/526
Sec. 16.04.008 Waiver of traffic impact analysis requirements
The director of planning may waive the submittal of a TIA. If a TIA is required, the director of planning shall not waive the requirements of
subsections (b) or (c) of section 16.04.007. In those instances where the threshold conditions provided in section 16.04.004 are exceeded and the TIA
requirements are waived, the director of planning shall record the rationale for the waiver as a part of the decision or recommendation on the
application. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1308)
ARTICLE 16.05 STREET DESIGN
Sec. 16.05.001 Design and construction
(a) All streets and alleys shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Transportation Criteria Manual and City of Austin Standards and
Standard Specifications.
(b) Where topographical conditions, drainage channels, proposed limited development on one side of the street, or other special conditions warrant
a local street of less than fifty (50) feet in width, a lesser width may be approved by the director of public works.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1401)
Sec. 16.05.002 Arterial and collector streets
(a) Arterial streets shall be located and designed in accordance with the roadway plan and the Transportation Criteria Manual.
(b) Designation of collector streets shall be made by the Planning and Zoning Commission based upon the recommendations of the director of
planning and director of public works.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1402)
Sec. 16.05.003 Partial construction of boundary streets
The director of public works is authorized to build or allow construction of one-half of a divided arterial roadway abutting or bordering a subdivision
if the roadway pavement to be constructed has a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and can be safely utilized as a two-way street until
construction of the entire divided roadway is completed. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1403)
ARTICLE 16.06 DRIVEWAYS AND SIDEWALKS
Sec. 16.06.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and convenient access to abutting private property
along streets and highways; to provide for environmentally sound design; to avoid unnecessary removal of trees; to provide suitable geometric
layout, materials and methods of construction of sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs, gutters and appurtenances on public property; to utilize and
project trees in order to better control rainwater runoff and land erosion; and to increase visual and noise buffering without restricting safe sight
distances for traffic maneuvers. The right of the public unhampered passage on the public streets and sidewalks shall be held paramount to other
interests. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1501)
Sec. 16.06.002 Definitions
Subject to additional definitions contained in other chapters, sections, divisions, parts, or subsections of this code, and unless the context otherwise
requires, in this article:
Contractor. Any person engaged in the business of installing or altering sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs, gutters, pavements or appurtenances
on public property. This term shall also include those who represent themselves to be engaged in the business whether or not actually doing the work.
Curb. A vertical sloping structure located along the edge of a roadway, normally constructed integrally with the gutter, which strengthens and
protects the pavement edge and clearly defines the pavement edge to vehicle operators.
Driveway approach. A facility between the roadway and private property designed for and intended to provide vehicular access from the roadway to
private property.
Encroachment. Any structure or device positioned within, over or upon a right-of-way that is not the property of the city.
Gutter. A generally shallow waterway adjacent to a curb used or suitable for drainage of water.
Pedestrian way. Those portions of a street right-of-way not used for a roadway.
Roadway. That portion of a street or alley designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/526
Sidewalk. The paved portion of a pedestrian way, generally constructed of concrete or other durable materials.
Type 1 driveway approach. A concrete driveway approach designed and intended to serve as access from a roadway to a lot or parcel of land which is
a location for a one or two-family residence.
Type 2 driveway approach. A concrete driveway approach designed and intended to serve as access from a roadway other than a principal roadway
area, as defined in the Transportation Criteria Manual, to a lot or parcel of land used for any development or purpose other than a one or two-family
residence.
Type 3 driveway approach. A temporary driveway approach intended to provide vehicular access to a lot or parcel of land from a roadway not yet
constructed with permanent lines and grades.
Type 4 driveway approach. A concrete or asphalt driveway approach designed and intended to serve as access from a principal roadway area
roadway to a lot or parcel of land used for any development purpose other than a one or two-family residence.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1502)
Sec. 16.06.003 Permit required
(a) The chief building official shall have the authority to require that no person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove replace, pave,
repave, surface or resurface a sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway approach or appurtenance, or perform work incidental to a pedestrian way; nor shall
any person in connection with any such construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal, placement, replacement, paving, repaving, surfacing,
resurfacing, or other incidental construction remove any tree on public right-of-way within the city without first obtaining a valid construction permit
issued by the chief building official.
(b) Construction authorized by a permit shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter except that minor repairs or construction, as determined
by the chief building official, shall be exempt from the license requirements. The form of exemptions authorized by this section shall be as approved
by the City Attorney.
(c) The permit otherwise required by this section is not required if the proposed construction is in accordance with an approved site plan.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1503)
Sec. 16.06.004 Exemptions from permit
(a) Any city department, including its contractors and agents, public utility, or franchise holder shall not be required to obtain a permit when
normally engaged in the work described in this section.
(b) Driveway approaches that are constructed or altered by the Texas Department of Transportation shall be subject to the requirements of this
section except that such construction is exempt from permit fees and the issuance of a permit.
(c) The construction of driveway approaches, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or appurtenances on existing or proposed pedestrian ways do not require a
permit if the construction is related to a new subdivision, is included on the subdivision's approved street drainage construction plans, and is
completed with the streets and drainage systems. Sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and driveway approaches constructed in a new subdivision shall not be
finally accepted until all utility connections are complete and any cuts required by the utility installation have been restored. The exemption provided
by this subsection does not apply after acceptance of street and drainage construction by the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1504)
Sec. 16.06.005 Design and construction standards
(a) Sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs, gutters, pavements, and appurtenances on public property and other facilities to provide access to
abutting property shall be designed, constructed, provided, altered or repaired in accordance with the Transportation Criteria Manual. Curbs and
gutters shall also comply with the Drainage Criteria Manual.
(b) To ensure safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement, all existing driveways may be required to conform with this section and
the Transportation Criteria Manual, including driveway closing and curb construction where required, as a condition of the approval of any
application for zoning, rezoning, or site plan. The chief building official shall have the authority to require driveway closings and curb construction
as a condition of the approval of an administrative site plan and may recommend to the Planning Commission and council that driveway closing or
curb construction be required as a condition of zoning and rezoning. The director's action shall be based on criteria defined in the Transportation
Criteria Manual.
(c) All access to a lot from an alley must be approved by the chief building official. Existing unpaved alleys may be required by the director to be
paved for all or a portion of the entire length when access from an alley is proposed in an application for zoning, rezoning, or site plan approval.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1505)
Sec. 16.06.006 Establishment of line and grade
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/526
The establishment of line and grade and the setting of line and grade stakes and their protection shall be the responsibility of the applicant and, if
required by the chief building official, shall be set under the direct supervision of a registered public surveyor or registered professional engineer.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1506)
Sec. 16.06.007 Relocation or replacement of certain facilities
If relocation of any public utility equipment, service, facility, or stormwater drainage facility is required due to the nature of the proposed
construction, the applicant for the permit required by this article shall be responsible for all costs of such relocation. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1507)
Sec. 16.06.008 Use of right-of-way
The use of barricades during the repair or construction of sidewalks, driveways, curbs, gutters, pavement, and appurtenances on public property or
any work which requires occupancy of any portion of any public right-of-way shall conform to the provisions of articles 16.02 and 16.03 of this
chapter. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1508)
Sec. 16.06.009 Inspection procedures
Inspection procedures for construction authorized by this article shall be determined by the chief building official and shall include the following:
(1) Phase 1. Inspection of line and grade, forms, reinforcing steel, drainage and subgrade before concrete or other final courses of
material are placed; and
(2) Phase 2. Final inspection of construction, including cleanup.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1509)
Sec. 16.06.010 Automatic suspension
Each permit shall be automatically suspended if construction results in damage to or interferes with any public utility equipment or service,
stormwater drainage facility or tree in the pedestrian way without prior approval by the owner of the utility service, drainage system, or pedestrian
way. The permit shall be reinstated by the chief building official only upon a finding that the damage has been compensated and the interference has
been eliminated. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1510)
Sec. 16.06.011 Fraudulent applications
A permit based upon a fraudulent application shall not operate as granting any right and shall be void upon discovery of such fraud. (1998 Code, sec.
9.1511)
Sec. 16.06.012 Alternate materials, designs and construction methods
The chief building official may authorize the use of types of materials, designs, or methods of construction as an alternate for the types of materials,
designs, or methods of construction specifically required by this section and the Transportation Criteria Manual, if such alternate types of materials,
designs, or methods of construction are sufficient, safe, durable, and equivalent to the standards set out in this section and the Transportation Criteria
Manual. The approved types of materials, designs, or methods of construction shall be used and installed in accordance with specific terms of
approval. (1998 Code, sec. 9.1512)
ARTICLE 16.07 DRIVEWAY PERMITS
Sec. 16.07.001 Driveway permit applications
(a) The chief building official shall review driveway permit applications as to their impact on vehicular and pedestrian traffic and safety and
approve or deny the permit based on these considerations. No permit shall be denied unless it is determined by the director that the proposed location
of the driveway will have an adverse effect on the public safety. In making this determination, the director shall consider:
(1) The topography of the land;
(2) Land use (including but not limited to the intensity of development and trip attraction/generation potential, mix of vehicles, turning
movements);
(3) Function of the public street (including but not limited to the number of lanes, medians, median openings, vertical and horizontal
curvature, sight distance, operating speeds, traffic volumes, entrance/exit ramps, frontage roads);
(4) The location of nearby streets and driveways;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/526
(5) The site plan (including but not limited to on-site circulation, delineation of the intended paths, parking stalls, location of buildings,
location of loading areas); and
(6) Actual or anticipated excessive increases in vehicular traffic being routed onto local residential streets occurring as a result of any
such permit.
(b) No driveway permit shall be issued unless the design of the driveway approach has been approved by the chief building official or is
established in accordance with an approved site plan.
(c) Any permit applicant who is aggrieved by the decision of the director under this article may appeal the decision to the Planning Commission.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1601)
Sec. 16.07.002 Defective conditions or special uses; abandonment of existing curb openings or driveway approaches
(a) The person owning, leasing, or otherwise controlling any property abutting a sidewalk, driveway approach, gutter, curb, or appurtenance that
has become defective, unsafe, or hazardous shall be responsible for correcting such condition at that person's expense. The city shall not assume any
liability for defects by reason of the approval or disapproval by the city of any access, facilities, surfacing or appurtenances.
(b) It shall be the duty of any person making special use of any sidewalk, pedestrian way, driveway approach, or curb for the purpose of
ingress/egress for loading elevators, down spout drains or any other special use of any character, to keep such sidewalk, pedestrian way, curb, or
driveway approach abutting such property in a good and safe condition and free from any defects and hazards of any kind and character.
(c) Existing curb openings or driveway approaches that are no longer required due to a new driveway approach construction on the same lot,
parcel, or tract shall be removed and new curbs, gutters, or sidewalks, if required, shall be installed to match existing abutting curb grade and
alignment. Such construction shall be completed along with the installation of the new driveway approaches.
(1998 Code, sec. 9.1602)
CHAPTER 17
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 17.01 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM ACT*
The City Council hereby adopts the Texas Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, known as Article 6701d of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as
heretofore and hereafter amended, and ordains that such act shall be in full force and effect upon all streets, roads, alleys and thoroughfares within the
city. (1998 Code, art. 10.100)
ARTICLE 17.02 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES*
Sec. 17.02.001 Traffic Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted
All traffic control devices including signs, signals, and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling
traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, (hereafter called the
manual), Article 6701d, Vernon's Civil Statutes states. All signs, signals, and markings erected or used by the city shall be uniform and be located so
far as practicable according to the directions shown in the manual throughout the city. All existing traffic control devices and those erected in the
future by the city being consistent with the manual, state law, and this article shall be official traffic control devices. (1998 Code, sec. 10.201)
Sec. 17.02.002 Duty to obey instructions of traffic control devices
The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle, or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device, sign, signal, or marking
applicable thereto placed in accordance with this article, the manual and any ordinance directing that such traffic control device, sign or signal shall
be installed or erected unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle permitted under state law. (1998 Code, sec. 10.202)
Sec. 17.02.003 Unauthorized traffic control devices
(a) Unauthorized signs, signals, and markings prohibited. No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street, or
alley any unauthorized signs, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
control device or any railroad sign or signal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/526
(b) Commercial advertising prohibited. No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street, or alley
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(c) Directional information signs. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets, or
alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(d) Prohibited signs declared a public nuisance. Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the
chief of police or other authority is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice.
(1998 Code, sec. 10.203)
Sec. 17.02.004 Unlawful to deface or remove traffic control devices
No person shall without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device, sign, or
signal, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or sign thereon, or any part thereof. (1998 Code, sec. 10.204)
Sec. 17.02.005 Installation
(a) City council to authorize by ordinance. The City Council hereby authorizes the director of public works to install upon, over, along or beside
any highway, street or alley, all necessary signs, signals and markings based on studies by the director of planning in conformance with the Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Such new traffic control devices and all traffic control devices placed or erected prior to the adoption of
this article are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic control devices provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this article or state law.
(b) Report to be filed with City Secretary. Whenever the city has erected and installed any official traffic control device, signal, or sign at any
location in the city or has caused the same to be done in obedience to this article, the manual or another ordinance directing the erection of such
device, signal or sign the installer shall thereafter file a report with the City Secretary in writing stating the type of traffic control device, sign, or
signal, and when and where the same was erected and installed. The City Secretary shall file and maintain such report among the official papers of
the office of the City Secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 10.205)
Sec. 17.02.006 Prima facie evidence of authorized installations
It being unlawful to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign, or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those
streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals, evidence that any traffic control device, sign, signal, or marking was actually in place on
any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed pursuant to the authority of this article and of the ordinance directing the
installation of such device, signal, or marking. (1998 Code, sec. 10.206)
Sec. 17.02.007 Ratification of existing traffic control devices
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this code of ordinances and in use for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding vehicles or pedestrian traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic control devices, provided
such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article or state law. (1998 Code, sec. 10.207)
Sec. 17.02.008 Through streets
The city hereby designates certain streets as through streets. The designated through streets for the city are described in Traffic Control Device
Inventory - Schedule I on file in the office of the City Secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code as if set at length
herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the City Council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the City
Secretary at all times. Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the city to place and
maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting
such through street unless traffic at any such street is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of
two (2) such through streets, or at the intersection of a through street and a heavily traveled street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of either, or both of said streets as may be determined by the city upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. (1998 Code, sec.
10.208)
Sec. 17.02.009 Four-way stop signs
The city hereby designates certain intersections to be controlled by four-way stop signs. The designated four-way stop intersections for the city are
described in Traffic Control Device Inventory Schedule II on file in the office of the City Secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated
in this code as if set at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the City Council. A current schedule shall be
maintained by the City Secretary at all times. (1998 Code, sec. 10.209)
Sec. 17.02.010 Special hazard intersections controlled by stop signs
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/526
The city hereby designates certain special hazard intersections to be controlled by stop signs. The designated special hazard intersections for the city
to be controlled by stop signs are described in Traffic Control Device Inventory - Schedule III on file in the office of the City Secretary. This
schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code as if set at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of
the City Council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the City Secretary at all times. (1998 Code, sec. 10.210)
Sec. 17.02.011 Special hazard intersections controlled by yield signs
The city hereby designates certain special hazard intersections to be controlled by yield signs. The designated special hazard intersections for the city
to be controlled by yield signs are described in Traffic Control Device Inventory - Schedule IV on file in the office of the City Secretary. This
schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code as if set at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of
the City Council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the City Secretary at all times. (1998 Code, sec. 10.211)
Sec. 17.02.012 School zones and speed limits
(a) The city hereby designates school zones on certain streets. The designated school zones for the city are described in Traffic Control Device
Inventory-Schedule V on file in the office of the City Secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code as if set at length
herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the City Council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the City
Secretary at all times.
(b) During the times posted or indicated by flashing lights, the maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour is established within the
designated school zones, except school zones established on state highways. The maximum speed limit for school zones on state highways shall be as
authorized by the Texas Department of Transportation.
(Ordinance CO-01-09-13-8.B. adopted 9/13/01)
ARTICLE 17.03 SPEED LIMITS*
Sec. 17.03.001 No person to drive vehicle on any street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
No person shall drive a vehicle on any street or highway within the corporate limits of the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the circumstances then existing. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speeds in order to operate or drive such vehicle in a
reasonable and prudent manner on or entering a highway or street, a speed of thirty (30) miles per hour along the streets and highways within the
corporate limits of the city shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not
reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful, except on streets or highways which have a speed limit set by the city or the Texas Department of
Highways and Public Transportation which differs from the general speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour. On any such street or highway, it is
lawful to drive a vehicle at the speed which the said highway department or city has posted. (1998 Code, sec. 10.301)
Sec. 17.03.002 Speeds greater or less than thirty (30) mph to be determined by engineering and/or traffic regulations
Whenever the city shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and/or traffic investigation that the thirty (30) miles per hour speed limit
hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place, or upon any
part of the street or highway, the city shall upon authorization by the City Council by appropriate ordinance establish such speed limit as shall be
effective at all times when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersection or other place or part of the highway or street.
(1998 Code, sec. 10.302)
Sec. 17.03.003 No person to drive at such slow speed as to impede normal movement of traffic
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law, or at the direction of a police officer. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this
provision by directions to drivers and, in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with the direction of an
officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 10.303)
Sec. 17.03.004 Speed limits established for certain described streets
(a) It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the prima facie maximum speed limit on those portions of
roads and highways in the city limits, is as hereinafter stated and shall be effective at all times, and signs will be erected giving notice of the prima
facie maximum speed limit so declared.
(b) No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle or other vehicle upon the following described streets at a greater speed than the speed
designated for the street or portion of that street as set forth herein, and any speed in excess of the limits set forth in this article shall be prima facie
evidence that such speed is neither reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful:
(1) Highway 183.
(A) For northbound traffic.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/526
(i) Beginning at the south city limit at milepoint 26.091, to milepoint 24.563, a distance of 1.528 miles, a prima facie
maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour.
(ii) From milepoint 24.563 to milepoint 24.206, a distance of 0.357 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 50 miles
per hour.
(iii) From milepoint 24.206 to milepoint 22.641, a distance of 1.565 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 45 miles
per hour.
(iv) From milepoint 22.641 to milepoint 21.664, a distance of 0.977 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 50 miles
per hour.
(v) From milepoint 21.664 to the north city limit at milepoint 21.216, a distance of 0.488 miles, a prima facie maximum
speed limit of 55 miles per hour.
(B) For southbound traffic.
(i) Beginning at the north city limit at milepoint 21.216 to milepoint 21.664, a distance of 0.448 miles, a prima facie
maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour.
(ii) From milepoint 21.664 to milepoint 22.641, a distance of 0.977 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 50 miles
per hour.
(iii) From milepoint 22.641 to milepoint 24.206, a distance of 1.565 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 45 miles
per hour.
(iv) From milepoint 24.206 to milepoint 24.563, a distance of 0.357 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 50 miles
per hour.
(v) From milepoint 24.563 to the south city limit at milepoint 26.091, a distance of 1.528 miles, a prima facie maximum
speed limit of 55 miles per hour.
(2) RM 1431 (Whitestone Boulevard).
(A) Between Sam Bass Road and Parmer Lane (FM 734), a distance of 1.502 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be
60 miles per hour.
(B) Between Parmer Lane and a point 1034 feet west of Cottonwood Creek Trail, a distance of 1.634 miles, the prima facie
maximum speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour.
(C) Between a point 1034 feet west of Cottonwood Creek Trail and US 183, a distance of 1.357 miles, the prima facie maximum
speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour.
(D) Between US 183 and Lakeline Boulevard, a distance of 1.322 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 50 miles
per hour.
(E) Between Lakeline Boulevard and the Williamson/Travis County Line (a point 454 feet west of Anderson Mill Road), a
distance of 0.534 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour.
(F) Beginning at the Williamson Co. and Travis Co. Line (a point approximately 37' east of the centerline of Anderson Mill Road)
to the west city limit at milepoint 24.021, a distance of 1.468 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour.
(3) Bagdad Road.
(A) Between RM 1431 and New Hope Drive, a distance of 0.88 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per
hour.
(B) Between New Hope Drive and Kettering Drive, a distance of 0.46 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45
miles per hour except within the Leander High School marked school zone which the prima facie maximum speed limit Monday
through Friday shall be 30 miles per hour during the effective times as posted.
(Ordinance CO34-11-08-11-C1 adopted 8/11/11)
(4) New Hope Drive.
(A) Between RM 1431 and New Hope Spur (Gann Ranch entrance), a distance of 0.610 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles
per hour.
(B) Between New Hope Spur (Gann Ranch entrance) and Lakeline Boulevard, a distance of 0.605 miles, the prima facie
maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour.
(C) Between Lakeline Boulevard and Bagdad Road, a distance of 0.653 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45
miles per hour.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/526
(D) Between Bagdad Road and Bell Boulevard (US 183), a distance of 0.609 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be
45 miles per hour.
(E) Between Bell Boulevard (US 183) and Main Street, a distance of 0.319 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be
45 miles per hour.
(F) Between Main Street and 183A, a distance of 0.875 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour.
(G) Between 183A and the eastern corporate city limits, a distance of 0.545 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be
40 miles per hour.
(Ordinance CO01-13-10-03-C1 adopted 10/3/13)
(5) Cypress Creek Road.
(A) Between 183A and US 183, a distance of 0.56 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour.
(B) Between US 183 and Lakeline Boulevard, a distance of 1.73 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per
hour, except between the marked school zone of Faubion Elementary School, which the prima facie maximum speed limit Monday
through Friday shall be 30 miles per hour during the effective hours as posted.
(C) Between Lakeline Boulevard and the west city limit at El Sol, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per
hour, except between the marked school zones of Cedar Park Middle School and Cedar Park High School, which the prima facie
maximum speed limit Monday through Friday shall be 30 miles per hour during the effective hours as posted.
(6) Lakeline Boulevard.
(A) Between the south corporate limits of the city at West Riviera Drive and Cypress Creek Road, the prima facie maximum
speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour.
(B) Between Cypress Creek Road and Buttercup Creek Boulevard, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per
hour.
(C) Between Buttercup Creek Boulevard and Whitestone Boulevard (RM 1431), the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45
miles per hour.
(D) Between Whitestone Boulevard (RM 1431) and the north corporate limits of the city, the prima facie maximum speed limit
shall be 45 miles per hour, except between the marked school zones of Mason Elementary School and Running Brushy Middle
School, which the prima facie maximum speed limit Monday through Friday shall be 30 miles per hour during the effective hours as
posted.
(Ordinance CO34-11-08-11-C1 adopted 8/11/11)
(7) Brushy Creek Road.
(A) Between Parmer Lane and Darkwoods Drive, a distance of 2.08 miles, the maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 45 miles
per hour, except between the marked school zone of Cox Elementary which the prima facie maximum speed limit Monday through
Friday shall be 30 miles per hour during the effective hours as posted.
(B) Between Parmer Lane and the east corporate limits of the city, a distance of 2.01 miles, the maximum prima facie speed limit
shall be 45 miles per hour.
(C) Between Bell Boulevard and Cougar Avenue, a distance of 0.44 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles
per hour.
(Ordinance CO01-13-10-03-C1 adopted 10/3/13)
(8) Vista Ridge Boulevard.
(A) For northbound traffic.
(i) Beginning at Brushy Creek Road and extending north to RM 1431, a distance of approximately 1.66 miles, the prima
facie maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour.
(ii) Beginning at the southern school zone sign north to the northernmost end school zone sign, a distance of approximately
0.72 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit Monday through Friday during the effective hours as posted shall be 25 miles
per hour and at all other times shall be 40 miles per hour.
(B) For southbound traffic.
(i) Beginning at RM 1431 and continuing south to Brushy Creek Road, a distance of approximately 1.66 miles, the prima
facie maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/526
(ii) Beginning at the northern school zone sign south to the southernmost end school zone sign, a distance of approximately
0.72 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit Monday through Friday during the effective hours as posted shall be 25 miles
per hour and at all other times shall be 40 miles per hour.
(9) Colonial Parkway.
(A) For eastbound traffic.
(i) Beginning at Vista Ridge Boulevard and extending east to Parmer Lane, a distance of approximately 0.63 miles (3,325
ft.), the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour.
(B) For westbound traffic.
(i) Beginning at Parmer Lane and continuing west to Vista Ridge Boulevard, a distance of approximately 0.63 miles (3,325
ft.), the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour.
(10) Anderson Mill Road. Between RM 1431 and 200 feet south of Caspar Bend, a distance of 1.30 miles, the prima facie maximum
speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour.
(11) Arrow Point Drive. Between RM 1431 and La Jaita Drive, a distance of 0.38 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be
40 miles per hour.
(Ordinance CO34-11-08-11-C1 adopted 8/11/11)
(12) Buttercup Creek Boulevard. Between US 183 and Lakeline Boulevard, a distance of 1.46 miles, the prima facie maximum speed
limit shall be 35 miles per hour, except between the marked school zones of Cedar Park Charter Academy School, within which the prima
facie maximum speed limit Monday through Friday shall be 20 miles per hour during the effective hours as posted. (Ordinance CO01-16-
10-27-E1 adopted 10/27/16)
(13) Cottonwood Creek Trail. Between RM 1431 and New Hope Drive, a distance of 0.60 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit
shall be 45 miles per hour.
(14) Discovery Boulevard. Between US 183 and RM 1431, a distance of 0.83 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 35
miles per hour.
(15) Hatch Road. Between RR620 and Spiderlily View Drive, a distance of 0.64 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be
35 miles per hour.
(16) La Jaita Drive. Between Cottonwood Creek Trail and Arrow Point Drive, a distance of 0.40 miles, the prima facie maximum speed
limit shall be 35 miles per hour.
(17) Market Street. Between RM 1431 and Colonial Parkway, a distance of 0.31 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be
35 miles per hour.
(18) Medical Parkway. Between 183A frontage and Cottonwood Creek Trail, a distance of 0.65 miles, the prima facie maximum speed
limit shall be 40 miles per hour.
(Ordinance CO34-11-08-11-C1 adopted 8/11/11)
(19) Park Street.
(A) Between Vista Ridge Boulevard and Greater Scaup Lane, a distance of 0.61 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall
be 40 miles per hour.
(B) Between Greater Scaup Lane and Lynnwood Trail, a distance of 0.90 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 35
miles per hour.
(C) Between Lakeline Boulevard and Bell Boulevard, a distance of 1.52 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 35
miles per hour.
(Ordinance CO01-13-10-03-C1 adopted 10/3/13)
(20) Ranch Trails. Between Parmer Lane and the southeast termini of Ranch Trails at Salorn Lane, a distance of 0.90 miles, the prima
facie maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour.
(21) Woodall Drive. Between RM 1431 and New Hope Drive, a distance of 0.70 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit shall be
45 miles per hour.
(Ordinance CO34-11-08-11-C1 adopted 8/11/11)
(22) Gupton Way. It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the prima facie maximum
speed limit on those portions of Gupton Way routed in the city limits, is as hereinafter stated, which prima facie maximum speed limit
shall be effective at all times except as specifically limited herein and signs will be erected giving notice of the prima facie maximum
speed limit so declared to wit:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/526
(A) Between Brushy Creek Road and E. Park Street, a distance of approximately 0.70 miles, the prima facie maximum speed
limit shall be 45 miles per hour.
(B) Between the north school zone sign and the south school zone sign, the prima facie maximum speed limit Monday through
Friday during the effective hours as posted shall be 25 miles per hour and at all other times shall be 45 miles per hour.
(Ordinance CO15-11-02-10-C1 adopted 2/10/11)
(23) Old Hwy 183. Between Bell Boulevard and Brushy Creek Road, a distance of 0.51 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit
shall be 35 miles per hour. (Ordinance CO01-13-10-03-C1 adopted 10/3/13)
(24) Ronald Reagan Boulevard. Between Whitestone Boulevard and the north city limit, a distance of 1.52 miles, the prima facie
maximum speed limit shall be 65 miles per hour. (Ordinance CO23-15-04-23-C1 adopted 4/23/15)
Sec. 17.03.005 Construction speed limits
The city shall adopt by separate ordinance construction speed limits for roadways approved for construction which will supersede the speed limits
shown in section 17.03.004 until such construction is formally accepted by the city.
(1) Whitestone Boulevard (RM 1431). Between Market Street and Sam Bass Road, a distance of 2.12 miles, the construction speed
limit shall be 50 mph.
(Ordinance CO50-14-06-12-C1 adopted 6/12/14)
ARTICLE 17.04 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING REGULATIONS*
Sec. 17.04.001 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is as follows:
(1) To establish general parking requirements and regulations, including definitions of terms for all vehicles on public roadways within
the City.
(2) To provide for the safety of pedestrians and bicycles by maintaining safe sight clearance within residential subdivisions and clearing
pedestrian ways.
(3) To provide for accessibility to residences by emergency vehicles.
(Ordinance CO32-16-02-25-C2 adopted 2/25/16)
Sec. 17.04.002 Application of Article
The provisions of this Article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle on a public roadway or public right-of-way shall apply at all
times, unless otherwise herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other
traffic or comply with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. (Ordinance CO21-17-02-09-E1 adopted 2/9/17)
Sec. 17.04.003 Regulations not exclusive
The provisions of this Article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
Sec. 17.04.004 Definitions
Types of traffic areas and roadways named shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Texas Transportation Code, section 541.302, as amended.
Abandoned motor vehicle. Shall have the meaning ascribed by Texas Transportation Code section 683.002, as amended. For purposes of this Article,
the term shall also include motor vehicles left unattended on the right-of-way of a City street for more than forty-eight (48) hours.
Fire lane. Shall have the meaning ascribed and be identified by markings consistent with section 5.01.002 of this Code, as amended.
Motor vehicle. A self-propelled vehicle.
Recreational vehicle. Any motor vehicle or trailer designed for temporary or seasonal dwelling, camping, or recreational purposes. The term shall
include travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks, vans, and buses, boats, boat trailers, personal
watercrafts, and personal watercraft trailers.
Residential subdivision. Any platted subdivision zoned or used for any permitted residential use in the City.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/526
Stopping, standing, and parking. Shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Texas Transportation Code, section 541.401, as it may be amended.
Trailer. A vehicle with or without motive power designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to transport persons or property. For the purposes of
this Article the term shall include house trailers, pole trailers, and semitrailers, as defined by Texas Transportation Code, section 541.201, as
amended.
Vehicle. A device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a highway. The term shall include motor vehicles and trailers.
(Ordinance CO32-16-02-25-C2 adopted 2/25/16)
Sec. 17.04.005 Parking prohibited on public roadways or public right-of-way in residential subdivisions
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle having a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of more than one and one-half
(1-1/2) tons or exceeding twenty-one (21) feet in length (measured from the outer most edge of the bumper or any appurtenances attached to such
vehicle to the outer most edge of the bumper or appurtenance attached to the opposite end of such vehicle), any trailer, recreational vehicle, or any
abandoned motor vehicle on any public roadway or public right-of-way in any residential subdivision at any time, except as follows:
(1) Where the operator is using such motor vehicle or trailer as defined above to make bona fide pickups or deliveries, or for the
temporary loading or unloading of the vehicle, provided that the operator furnishes evidence to that effect upon demand by a peace officer
and provided that the operator removes such motor vehicle or trailer from the roadway immediately upon completion of said pickups,
deliveries, loading or unloading;
(2) Maintenance vehicles, trailers and equipment owned and operated by, or on behalf of, the City, or any public utility or governmental
entity, where the person operating the vehicle, trailer or equipment is engaged in maintenance work;
(3) Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in Texas Transportation Code sec. 541.201, and any amendments thereto, provided
such vehicle is conclusively identified;
(4) Any bus or school bus actively engaged in the receiving or discharging of passengers;
(5) Recreational vehicles and roll-off dumpsters displaying valid permits issued under section 17.04.013 of this Code; or
(6) Motor vehicles and trailers left at or on an active jobsite under a current valid permit issued by the City.
(Ordinance CO21-17-02-09-E1 adopted 2/9/17)
Sec. 17.04.006 Parking prohibited at designated locations
(a) When signs are erected or pavement markings are provided giving notice of a designated no parking or restricted parking area as provided in
section 17.02.002 and section 17.02.005, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time upon any public roadway or right-of-way at the
locations so specified within the corporate limits of Cedar Park.
(b) The City shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare as determined by the Chief of
Police or Fire Chief or their respective designees, to temporarily prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a public roadway. The City shall
post signs or barricades to such effect, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on a roadway at any time while such signs or barricades are
displayed.
(Ordinance CO32-16-02-25-C2 adopted 2/25/16)
Sec. 17.04.007 Parking not to obstruct traffic; angle parking
(a) No person shall park any vehicle upon a public roadway in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet
in width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. If the roadway is divided into at least two clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic,
no person shall park any vehicle in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet in width of any marked lane
for free movement of vehicular traffic.
(b) Subject to subsection (a) above and except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic in compliance with the law, or to obey the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, angle parking is allowed in cul-de-sacs of all residential subdivisions within the corporate
limits of the City.
(Ordinance CO21-17-02-09-E1 adopted 2/9/17)
Sec. 17.04.008 Parking in designated fire lanes
Except for emergency response vehicles, no person shall park any vehicle within a designated fire lane. (Ordinance CO32-16-02-25-C2 adopted
2/25/16)
Sec. 17.04.009 Parking on public roadway for sale or repairing
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/526
No person shall park a vehicle upon any public roadway or public right-of-way or City-owned property for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for
sale, or repairing, servicing or maintaining such vehicle, except repairing or servicing necessitated by an emergency.
Sec. 17.04.010 Overnight parking of certain vehicles restricted
No vehicle having a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of more than one and one-half (1-1/2) tons or exceeding 21 feet in length (measured from
the outer most edge of the bumper or any appurtenances attached to such vehicle to the outer most edge of the bumper or appurtenance attached to
the opposite end of such vehicle), or any trailer, recreational vehicle, or abandoned vehicle shall be parked upon any public roadway or public rightof-
way in the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for repairing or servicing necessitated by an emergency, or pursuant to a
permit issued under section 17.04.013.
Sec. 17.04.011 Prohibited parking areas where no signs are required
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic in compliance with the law, or to obey the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following locations:
(1) In a place or manner which obstructs any portion of a sidewalk;
(2) Within street right-of-way in front of or within five (5) feet of a public or private driveway serving single-family or duplex uses, or
in front of or within twenty (20) feet of a driveway serving a use other than single-family or duplex (for purposes of this section, the
driveway does not include the rounded or clipped corner at the intersection of the driveway and the public street);
(3) Within the rounded corner (curb return) at an intersection;
(4) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
(5) Adjacent to the curb of any public street unless parking is parallel and immediately adjacent to the curb of the street, the vehicle is
oriented in the correct direction of travel and parking is not otherwise prohibited on the street, or unless parking is in compliance with
section 17.04.007(b) of this Article; or
(6) Within the roadway or public right-of-way of any arterial roadway so designated by the City within the corporate limits of the City.
Sec. 17.04.012 Habitation of a vehicle
No person shall inhabit a vehicle, including a recreational vehicle, at any time when such vehicle is parked upon a public roadway or public right-ofway
located within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ordinance CO21-17-02-09-E1 adopted 2/9/17)
Sec. 17.04.013 Issuance of permits; fee
(a) The Building Official or their designee may issue a permit that will allow a recreational vehicle with proof of current valid registration to be
parked on a public roadway. The permit for a recreational vehicle shall be valid for a period of not more than seven (7) consecutive days, and no
recreational vehicle shall be issued such a permit for more than fifteen (15) days within a calendar year.
(b) The Building Official or their designee may issue a permit allowing a roll-off dumpster to be parked on a public roadway if necessary for
public health and safety purposes. The permit for a roll-off dumpster shall be valid for a period of not more than seven (7) consecutive days. The
Building Official may grant additional permits valid for a period of seven (7) consecutive days if necessary for public health and safety purposes.
(c) Such permits shall be evidenced by an official City-issued sticker or tag that shall be prominently displayed on the recreational vehicle or rolloff
dumpster, noting the address where the vehicle is to be parked, the date of validation and expiration, and the vehicle registration number, if
applicable.
(d) The owner or resident of the residence where the permitted vehicle shall be parked shall apply for such permit.
(e) Fees for the recreational vehicle permit authorized under this Article shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the Appendix A of
this Code.
(f) It shall be unlawful to connect a recreational vehicle parked on a public roadway to any water or electricity, except when it is being readied for
use elsewhere or for routine maintenance. It shall be unlawful under any circumstance to connect a recreational vehicle to a sewer, gas, television
cable, or other utility line not listed in this section.
Sec. 17.04.014 Removal of illegally parked vehicle
(a) The Chief of Police, or, in an emergency, the Fire Chief, Emergency Management Director, or their designee is hereby authorized to direct the
removal of any vehicle that is stopped, standing, or parked in violation of this Article or the Texas Transportation Code. A vehicle removed or towed
away shall be stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment of the removal or towing fee plus a
storage charge, as prescribed in Appendix A of this Code, as amended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/526
(b) The Chief of Police or their designee is hereby authorized to direct the removal of any abandoned motor vehicle from a public roadway, rightof-
way, or public property. In the event, and only when, it is determined by the officer or authorized employee that the vehicle is not an immediate
hazard, a sticker will be placed on the front windshield notifying the owner that the vehicle is to be towed twenty-four (24) hours after posting of the
sticker if the vehicle is located on the roadway or right-of-way of a controlled-access highway, or forty-eight (48) hours after the posting of the
sticker if the vehicle is located on any other public roadway, right-of-way, or public property. A vehicle removed or towed away shall be stored in a
safe place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment of the removal or towing fee plus a storage charge, as
prescribed in Appendix A of this Code, as amended.
Sec. 17.04.015 Obstruction by personal property
No person shall place or position any personal property in a location or manner which obstructs any portion of a sidewalk or interferes with the flow
of traffic on a public roadway. Any personal property placed in violation of this section shall be subject to removal without notice by the Chief of
Police or their designee, or by any Peace Officer having jurisdiction within the City.
Sec. 17.04.016 Owner's responsibility for violations
No person shall knowingly cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle owned by him or registered in his name or operated by him to stop, stand or be
parked in violation of any provision of this Article or state law.
(1) If a vehicle is found to be in violation of this Article or state law, it is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person
who stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred.
(2) A vehicle owner who is engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles under written rental or leasing agreements shall not be
liable for fines, costs, and fees imposed by the City on a rented or leased vehicle if, within thirty (30) days after receiving written notice of
a parking violation, the owner provides in affidavit form the true name, address and driver's license number and state of issuance of the
person in possession of the vehicle at the time the parking citation was issued, or a true copy of the lease or rental agreement in effect at
the time the parking citation was issued.
Sec. 17.04.017 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or their designee, or any other Peace Officer having jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the City, to
enforce the provisions of this Article. The Fire Chief or their designee shall have authority to enforce the provisions of sections 17.04.008 and
17.04.011(4) of this Article.
Sec. 17.04.018 Parking violations made offense
A violation of this Article constitutes a class C misdemeanor as provided in chapter 1, Article 1.01, section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of
Ordinances.
(Ordinance CO32-16-02-25-C2 adopted 2/25/16)
ARTICLE 17.05 THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC
Sec. 17.05.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is as follows:
To establish general regulations controlling through truck traffic for trucks driving or operating on city streets, roadways or highways, or any segment
thereof within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 17.05.002 Application of article
The provisions of this article prohibiting the driving or operation of a truck shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated
by official signs, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
Sec. 17.05.003 Definitions
(a) Types of vehicles named shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Texas Transportation Code, Secs. 502.001 and 622.014, as it may be
amended.
(b) For the purpose of this article, truck means any truck or tractor-trailer combination that has dual or tandem rear axles.
(c) For the purpose of this article, commercial vehicle means any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of
material or property and which is used for the loading and unloading of such material or property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/526
Sec. 17.05.004 Through truck traffic
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any truck or other vehicle:
(1) registered to have a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 22,000 pounds according to the manufacturer's specifications; or
(2) with tandem or more axles;
on any street, roadway, highway or segments of such street, roadway, or highway within the city limits when such street is marked with a
sign prohibiting through truck traffic.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles that are:
(1) Owned, leased, used or in service to the city, the county, the state or the United States;
(2) School buses and public buses;
(3) Emergency vehicles en route to and returning from an emergency, including any wrecker or tow trucks;
(4) Making home deliveries or pickups of goods or services to a residence located on said street;
(5) Mobile homes which are being installed or removed from within the boundaries of the city;
(6) Travel trailers, boats and recreational vehicles;
(7) Owned or used in the service of public utilities when in the performance of their duties; or
(8) Making business deliveries to or pickups from a business or construction site located on said street.
(c) If the point of origin or destination (for commercial purposes only) for any such truck shall be off such street, roadway or highway and the only
route to such location is by using such street, then such truck may proceed by the most direct route to and from the nearest street, roadway or
highway not so marked. A bill of lading, routing sheet or other such documentation portraying the specific address from which the merchandise,
goods or services are to be picked up to the address to which the delivery is to be made is prima facie proof of legitimacy.
Sec. 17.05.005 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or any other police officer having jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the city to enforce the provisions
of this article.
Sec. 17.05.006 Through truck violations made; offense
A violation of this article constitutes a Class C Misdemeanor as provided in chapter 1, article 1.01, section 1.01.009 of the Cedar Park Code of
Ordinances.
(Ordinance CO-01-05-10-P.1. adopted 5/10/01)
ARTICLE 17.06 TRAFFIC RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 17.06.001 Engine braking prohibited
(a) Use of an engine brake, engine retarder or downshifting of engine gears to assist in slowing or braking of a commercial motor vehicle, except
for a fire truck engaged in emergency duties, is prohibited.
(b) This section applies to all roadways or streets within the corporate limits of the city including a state-maintained roadway.
(Ordinance CO74-06-12-14-2G adopted 12/14/06)
ARTICLE 17.07 QUIET ZONES
Sec. 17.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section;
provided that, unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they
have in common usage, and so as to give this article its most reasonable application.
Public highway at-grade rail crossing. A location where a public highway, road, or street, including associated sidewalks or pathways, at least one
side of which is maintained by the city, crosses one or more railroad tracts at grade.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/526
Quiet zone. A segment of rail line, within which one or a number of consecutive public highway-rail crossings where the sounding of train horns are
prohibited, except as provided by this article.
Train horn. An air horn, steam whistle, air siren, or other similar high-decibel audible warning device mounted on a train.
Sec. 17.07.002 Quiet zone established
It is hereby determined that a quiet zone shall be established along the rail line from the north city limits to a point approximately one quarter mile
northwest of BMC Drive. The quiet zone shall also include the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Blockhouse Drive, from approximately one-quarter mile
north of the rail line intersection of Blockhouse Drive to one-quarter mile south of the crossing.
Sec. 17.07.003 Sounding of train horn
No person shall sound or permit the sounding of any train horn within the quiet zone, except under circumstances outlined in section 222, title 49 of
the CFR and section 5.8 of General Code of Operating Rules.
Sec. 17.07.004 Advance warning signs
The City Council hereby orders and directs that no train horn (W10-9) advance warning signs be posted on each road approaching a public highwayrail
grade crossing within the quiet zone as outlined in the 2006 Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Sec. 17.07.005 Remedy of action
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as taking away any remedy or action for neglect against the railroad for any person injured as a result of
negligence.
Sec. 17.07.006 Penalty
Train operators who violate any of the provisions of this article, or fail to comply therewith within the city limits, and including Block House Drive,
shall be reported to the Capital Metro Rail Office. The Capital Metro Rail Office shall investigate and enforce the provisions of the quiet zone in
compliance with title 49 CFR parts 222 and 229.
Sec. 17.07.007 Effective date
This article shall be effective upon its passage and publication in accordance with the Local Government Code. The quite zone will be effective on
January 1, 2009 in accordance with title 49 CFR section 222.43(a)(4).
(Ordinance CO25-08-12-18-C1 adopted 12/18/08)
CHAPTER 18
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 18.01 CEDAR PARK WATER RATES, CHARGES, AND SERVICE REGULATIONS*
Sec. 18.01.001 Monthly rates and charges for water sales and services
The monthly rates and charges for water sales and services rendered by the City to customers either outside or within the corporate limits of the City
(excluding wholesale customers) are established, fixed and prescribed as provided for in the fee schedule found in the Appendix A of this Code.
Sec. 18.01.002 Additional fees and charges
In addition to the monthly rates above scheduled, the City may assess fees and charges in connection with utility service to its customers as provided
for in the fee schedule found in the Appendix A of this Code.
Sec. 18.01.003 Deposits
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/526
(a) Generally. Security deposits in the amount set forth in this section shall be required in accordance with the fee schedule, and shall be assessed
on the customer's first bill. The security deposit shall be held by the City without payment of interest for the life of the account, or credited back to
the account after twelve (12) consecutive months if the customer has not made more than one (1) delinquent payment during that time. The
remainder of the security deposit shall be held and refunded upon termination of service in accordance with subsection (c) below. If a customer's
account becomes delinquent more than one (1) time during any twelve (12) month period, the full security deposit may be required as a condition of
continued water or sewer service to that customer.
(b) Former customers. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary herein, any customer receiving water from the Cedar Park Water Supply
Corporation at the time of the passage of this section, shall have their membership fee credited as their deposit, as set out under section 18.01.002
above. If said customer paid in excess of the amount specified for deposit, then the excess shall be returned by way of credit to said customer's water
statement in such increments, and over such period of time, as the City may deem, in order to prevent undue financial disruption of the system.
Should the membership fee be less than the amount specified for deposit, no further deposit will be required.
(c) Refund. Upon termination of water service (and wastewater service if such service is provided by the City), such portion of the deposit as is not
required to pay for damages to the water meter, accrued service charges, penalties, library fines, City property taxes, and court-imposed fines for
which a final judgment has been issued, shall be refunded to the customer. Normal wear and tear in the ordinary course of use shall not be construed
to be damage to the water meter under this Article.
Sec. 18.01.004 Payment for services
(a) Mailing. The City shall mail a monthly bill to all customers of the City's water and wastewater systems.
(b) No consumption. Customers with no monthly water consumption will be billed the minimum charge.
(c) Due date. Payment of bills is due fifteen (15) days from the date such bills are placed in the United States Mail with proper postage affixed;
provided, that if such 15th day is a weekend or holiday, payment shall be due on the next following business day.
(d) Returned checks. There will be a returned check charge in the amount indicated in the Appendix A of this Code, for any check written for
payment of services rendered by the City water or wastewater utilities and returned for any reason.
(e) Delinquency.
(1) Any bill not paid by the due date shall be deemed past due and a delinquent payment charge in the amount indicated in the
Appendix A of this Code shall be assessed. When both water and wastewater services are included in a bill, payment in full for both
services must be made or else the entire bill will be considered delinquent. All accounts more than ten (10) days past due are subject to
service termination by the City. Reconnection shall be made only in accordance with the procedure set out in section 18.01.007(b) of this
Article.
(2) Persons of age 65 or older under the Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Art. 1446c-2 cannot be charged a penalty until bill is past due by 25
days. The City adopts the state statute as it now exists or may hereafter be amended or replaced.
(f) No free service. There shall be no free services provided. City departments using water and wastewater services shall pay the rate set out in the
Appendix A of this Code.
(g) Installment payments. In unusual circumstances and in limited cases, the City Administrator may, at his or her discretion, enter into a written
agreement with a customer for extended or installment payments.
(Ordinance CO52-16-09-08-D1 adopted 9/8/16)
Sec. 18.01.005 Connection to system
(a) Generally. With the exception of those premises using water sources other than the city's water system as of the effective date of this section,
all premises within the city shall hereafter be connected to the water system of the city for the purpose of all household uses and other uses intended
for human consumption.
(b) Connection to meters. Connection to meters shall be the responsibility of the user, but shall be made only under the supervision of authorized
personnel of the city. Water service customers shall install a cut-off valve outside their meter box on the underside thereof. Yard lines connected to
meters shall not cross into private property or private easements not owned by the customer.
(c) Separate meter required. Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate water meter; however, this provision may be
waived for good cause upon written application by the water service customer, subject to approval by the City Manager.
(d) Commingling prohibited. There shall be no connection to any water lines of the city, or any water lines served by water from the city's water
system, to any other source of water, nor shall water from the city's water system in any manner be commingled with other water systems in direct
contact with water from the city's water system.
(e) Design. No water connection to the city's water system shall be made to any sprinkling, condensing, cooling, plumbing or any other system
unless the said connection is of such a design to insure against any backflow or siphonage or sewage or contaminated water from said system into the
drinking water supply.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/526
(f) Violations. Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any water service, whether owned by the city or not, without the prior
knowledge and consent of the owner of such service, shall be deemed in violation of this section. Any unauthorized operations of city utilities shall
result in charges as outlined in the appendix of this code.
Sec. 18.01.006 Voluntary disconnections
Water customers wishing to discontinue the use of water service shall give written notice thereof to the city water department. The water customer's
deposit shall be refunded in accordance with the provisions of section 18.01.003(c) above. Failure to give such written notice shall render such water
customer liable for the payment of all water bills to the premises until such notice has been given.
(Ordinance O2000-18 adopted 3/23/00)
Sec. 18.01.007 Termination of water service
(a) Reasons for termination enumerated. The City shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any water and/or wastewater
service connection for the following reasons:
(1) Failure of the water or wastewater service customer to meet the applicable provisions of law;
(2) Violation by water or wastewater service customer of the rules and regulations pertaining to such service;
(3) Nonpayment of bills by water or wastewater service customer;
(4) Payment of a water or wastewater bill or security deposit with a check or draft which is not honored by the drawee;
(5) Willful and negligent waste of water due to leaks during an established emergency;
(6) Molesting any meter, seal, or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of water or wastewater service;
(7) Theft or diversion and/or use of water or wastewater without payment therefor;
(8) Vacancy of premises;
(9) Selling, delivering, or furnishing water without written permission from the City water department, either on or off the consumer's
premises; or
(10) Existence of a known dangerous condition for as long as the condition exists, in which case service may be terminated without
notice.
(b) Termination notice. Except for circumstances requiring immediate action to protect, life or property, termination of service shall not take place
prior to the giving of at least five (5) days notice to the customer by mail of the intention of the City to so terminate. Said notice shall:
(1) Be sent by mail to the last known billing address of the customer;
(2) State the reason for the proposed termination;
(3) State the customer's right to a hearing before such termination occurs; and
(4) State that the customer who desires a hearing must request a hearing by contacting the City Manager at a stated telephone number
or in person before the expiration of five (5) days from the date of mailing.
(c) Resumption of water service. If any of the reasons for termination set forth in subsection (a) above continue for a period in excess of five (5)
days after notice is mailed, and the customer has not requested a hearing within the specified time period, or if a hearing is requested and the City
Manager determines that the facts support the issuance of the termination, water and wastewater service to the user shall be shut off and the meter
removed or meter box locked. Water service shall not be resumed until:
(1) Generally. The necessary reparations are made by the customer to the City in accordance with the City Manager's ruling.
(2) For delinquency. All amounts owing by the customer are paid in full, including any penalty charge, return check charge and
reconnection fee, if applicable.
(Ordinance CO52-16-09-08-D1 adopted 9/8/16)
Sec. 18.01.008 Meters
(a) Required. All premises using city water services must be equipped with an adequate water meter furnished by the city. Before any premise is
occupied, a water meter shall be installed, all inspections must be made by the city's building inspector or arrangements made by said inspector. All
large non-residential customers (those using an average of 25,000 gallons or more a month) shall be required to install a separate water meter if they
have an irrigation system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/526
(b) Reading. The water superintendent shall read or cause to be read every water meter used in the city at such times as are necessary in order that
the customer's water bill may be sent out in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(c) Testing. Any municipal water meter shall be tested upon receipt of a complaint by a water service customer and payment by said customer of a
fee as set forth in section 18.01.002 above. If such meter is found to be more than three (3) percent from being accurate, it shall be repaired or
replaced, and said fee for such testing shall be returned to the water service customer.
(d) Installation. Meters shall be installed in a location that will provide easy access to the personnel of the city water department.
(e) Fees. Tap fees in accordance with the fee schedule in the appendix of this article shall be collected prior to installation of any service.
(f) Maintenance. The water service customer shall maintain and keep in good repair, yard lines connected to their water meter. Meter boxes shall
be maintained from any overgrowth and vegetation to facilitate their accessibility by city personnel.
Sec. 18.01.009 Responsibility for water leakage
All property owners, their agents and tenants, shall be responsible as consumers for loss of water and property damage due to leakage in pipes or
plumbing on the customer side of the meter or on the owner's property. In accordance with the city's water leak adjustment policy, customers may
make a written request, once per year, for an adjustment due to substantial leakage as defined in the policy.
Sec. 18.01.010 Annual rate review required
The City Manager shall cause the city staff to conduct a review and assessment of the city's water and sewer rate structure to determine the existing
and projected fiscal impact of the rate structure on the city. The City Manager shall cause this review and assessment of the rate structure to be
completed each year following the auditor's annual report to the City Council and shall report to the City Council the results of the annual review and
assessment along with recommendations for needed changes in the rate structure.
Sec. 18.01.011 Permit for fire hydrant use
(a) The City Manager may issue permits authorizing companies or individuals to take water from city fire hydrants. The annual fee for such
permits shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. The minimum monthly charge to permit holders shall be as
provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. All water use in excess of 2,000 gallons shall be charged at a rate as provided for
in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. The City Manager shall establish rules and regulations for the measurement of consumption
and the methods of connection of the fire hydrants.
(b) Persons taking water from a fire hydrant must have a permit and an approved fire hydrant wrench in their possession and must display such
permit or wrench for inspection by city employees upon request. In order to protect the city's water system from pressure loss, before taking water
from any fire hydrant, the permittee must notify the city water department and receive approval for such taking at a specific time and location.
(c) The failure to display the above mentioned permit or wrench upon request by a city employee and the failure to obtain city approval prior to
each instance of taking water at a specific time and location shall be offenses punishable by a fine and/or revocation of the permit.
(Ordinance O2000-18 adopted 3/23/00)
Sec. 18.01.012 Water credit policy
(a) Customers who have experienced water loss due to the following reasons may request an adjustment to their accounts:
(1) Underground leaks
(2) Leaks behind walls
(3) Leaks in the slab
(b) The adjustment must be received in writing with proof of repairs: plumbing invoices or receipt of plumbing supplies. The request for this
adjustment must be made within 6 months of the repair date.
(c) The adjustment will be made at one-half the difference between the customer's highest consumption during the leak period and normal
comparable consumption within a two month range.
(d) Current water rates will be used to determine the amount to be adjusted to the customer's account.
Example: 70,000 gallons – monthly consumption billed with leak
50,000 gallons – normal comparable consumption
Adjustment formula: 70,000 gallons – 50,000 gallons = 10,000 gallons
2
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/526
10, 000 gallons of water to be credited based on current water rates
(Ordinance CO30-03-09-11-10C adopted 9/11/03)
ARTICLE 18.02 SANITARY SEWER USER CHARGE SYSTEM
Sec. 18.02.001 Classes of consumers
There are hereby established three (3) classes of customers for purposes of sanitary sewer rates to be charged by the city to all customers either
outside or within the corporate limits of the city, excluding wholesale customers, as follows:
(1) Residential (predominate use is as a domicile)
(2) Non-residential (primary use is not as a domicile)
(3) Large non-residential (yearly average water use over 25,000 gallons per month)
Sec. 18.02.002 Monthly rates and charges for sanitary sewer service
The monthly rates and charges for sewer sales and services rendered by the city to customers either outside or within the corporate limits of the city
are established, fixed and prescribed as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
Sec. 18.02.003 Existing customers
Non-residential customers inside the city and those residential customers outside the city that have a separate city water meter for irrigation, the city
will base wastewater billing for domestic usage on actual monthly water consumption. The city will not use a wastewater average.
Sec. 18.02.004 New customers
(a) Residential. For new residential customers, the city will base the wastewater charge on the current city-wide winter average or actual water
usage, whichever is lower, until a wastewater winter average has been calculated for the new customer.
(Ordinance CO30-03-09-11-10.C. adopted 9/11/03)
(b) Non-residential.
(1) Except as provided by section 18.02.003, if a customer establishes a new account at a service location where an earlier account
established a wastewater average, the city will use the earlier wastewater average for wastewater service billing purposes until the new
account establishes its own wastewater average.
(2) Except as provided by section 18.02.003, the city will impute a wastewater average of 8,000 gallons to new accounts until they have
established a wastewater average. The city has the discretion to adjust the 8,000 gallon average when the customer has had an established
wastewater average at another city service address.
(3) If, in the judgment of the city, the new customer will place a substantially different demand on the wastewater collection and
treatment system, the city will bill the new customer for wastewater service based on actual metered water consumption until the new
customer has established a wastewater average.
(4) If a new customer has installed a separate city water meter for irrigation, the city will base the new customer's wastewater billing for
domestic usage on actual monthly water consumption. The city will not use a wastewater average.
(c) Large Non-Residential. (Yearly monthly average over 25,000 gallons of water per month). New large non-residential customers will be
required to install a separate water meter for irrigation. The city will bill the customer each month for sewer service based on water consumption
from the main meter less any consumption recorded on the irrigation meter.
Sec. 18.02.005 Connection regulations
(a) All residential and commercial structures within the city, which are within the distances specified hereinafter of a sewer line of adequate size
and capacity, shall be required within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date hereof to connect to such sewer line and discontinue use of any
other sewage disposal system. If such connection is not made as required, the city may disconnect water service to such structure and pursue other
available legal remedies to compel such connection.
(b) The owner of record of the property shall, upon connection, pay a connection fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of
this code; provided, that community impact fees have been paid for the property in accordance with article 18.07 of this chapter and the city is not
required to install sewer taps and service laterals. The owner shall pay a sewer tap inspection fee as provided for in the fee schedule instead of the
connection fee.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/526
(c) The method for determining whether or not a residential or commercial entity is in a position to receive sewer service shall be determined as
follows:
(1) The city sewer line is at an elevation such that the sewage from the entity can flow from the entity's outfall line to the city sewer line
by gravity with a slope of at least 0.5 feet per one hundred (100) feet.
(2) The nearest point (vertical wall) of the residential or commercial structure is within two hundred (200) feet of the closest common
property line between the property owner and the city right-of-way or easement in which the sewer line is located.
(d) (1) The City Manager shall make written demand by certified and regular first class mail delivery upon the owner and every
lienholder of any residential or commercial structure within the city which is in a position to receive sewer service as determined pursuant
to section (c)(1) and/or (2) above and which is not connected to the city sewer system, to connect such structure to the city's sewer system
within sixty (60) days of mailing.
(2) If the structure is not connected to the city sewer system within such sixty (60) day period, a penalty of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be assessed against such owner by the city.
(3) Notice of such penalty shall be sent to said owner and all lienholders at their last known address by certified and regular first class
mail.
(4) The City Manager shall file a notice of lien in the appropriate county deed or lien records showing the penalty as a lien against the
property upon which the unconnected structure is located.
(5) The penalty and procedures specified in subsection (2) shall be repeated annually until such time as the structure is connected to the
city sewer system.
Sec. 18.02.006 Installation regulations
The following standards shall be conformed to in the installation of all sewer lines which connect, directly or indirectly, to the city's sewer system:
(1) Sewer pipe shall be a minimum of four (4) inch diameter, Schedule 40 PVC.
(2) Bedding shall be one and one-half (1½) the diameter of the pipe.
(3) All joints shall be glued and watertight.
(4) Slope of the line shall be provided at the exit of the line from the structure, at the property line, and every fifty (50) feet.
(5) All lines shall have a minimum cover of six (6) inches.
(6) Clean out valves shall be provided at the exit of the line from the structure, at the property line, and every fifty (50) feet.
(7) No right angles will be allowed. All angles shall be forty-five (45) degrees or less. There shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24)
inches between all bends.
(Ordinance O2000-18 adopted 3/23/00)
ARTICLE 18.03 PRIVATE SEWAGE FACILITIES REGULATED
Sec. 18.03.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the terms listed below shall have the following meanings:
Board. The Texas Water Commission Board.
Executive director. The executive director of the Texas Water Commission.
Licensing authority. The person or agency designated by the City Council.
Organized disposal system. Any public or private system for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage operated in accordance with the terms
and conditions of a valid permit issued by the board.
Private sewage facilities. Septic tanks, injection wells used to dispose of sewage, chemical toilet treatment tanks, and all other facilities, systems and
methods used for the disposal of sewage other than organized disposal systems operated under a permit issued by the board.
Sewage. Waterborne human waste and waste from domestic activities such as washing, bathing and food preparation.
Subdivision. A subdivision which has been platted and recorded with the County Clerk of which is required by statute to be so platted and recorded.
Valid complaint. A written and signed complaint containing sufficient information concerning the nature and location of the alleged pollution or
threat of pollution to warrant investigation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/526
Watercourse. A definite stream of water in a definite natural channel, with well-defined bed and banks, originating from a definite source or source
that is characteristic of the sources of supply in the area.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.301)
Sec. 18.03.002 Areas of jurisdiction
The provisions of this article shall apply to all of the area located within the corporate limits of the city and to the extraterritorial jurisdiction thereof
with reference to approval of subdivisions in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. (1998 Code, sec. 11.302)
Sec. 18.03.003 Regulations controlling sewage discharges
After the effective date of this article, only the following types of sewage discharge shall be lawful:
(1) Sewage discharged into an organized disposal system.
(2) Sewage discharged into a private facility licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(3) Sewage discharged into a private sewage facility in existence at the effective date of this article, provided no complaint has been
received against such private sewage facility nor is such private sewage facility found to be endangering public health or polluting water.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.303)
Sec. 18.03.004 Licensing of new private sewage facilities
(a) License required for each new private sewage facility. After the effective date of this section, a license must be obtained from the city or its
licensing authority for each new private sewage facility which is to be constructed and utilized within the area described in section 18.03.002 above.
(b) Owner to obtain license. The owner of the private sewage facility is responsible for obtaining the license.
(c) Terms of license. Upon issuance, the license shall be in force and continue in force until such time as the licensing authority, pursuant to action
of the City Council, notifies the licensee requiring reinspection and relicensing. The City Council or the licensing authority may require reinspection
at any time should the condition existing at the time of the original licensing be found changed. If it is found that a system is causing pollution or
endangering public health, the existing license may be revoked or requirements for compliance of same be set forth for the licensee. Refusal to issue
a license, revocation of a license and requirements for relicensing shall all be reserved to protect the public against water pollution and public health
problems.
(d) Guidelines and inspection fees. To obtain a license the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed private sewage facility will accommodate
the anticipated waste loading in a manner that will conform to the guidelines developed by the Texas Department of Health and pay the appropriate
fees. There will be a fee for the inspection of any commercial facility and on any private system being redone. Such fees set by the City Council will
be based upon reasonable costs of such inspections, and will be subject to periodic change by action of the City Council. Any application for such
license shall also show that so far as is known to the applicant, the installation of the proposed system will not affect or render unacceptable by the
license standards any present sewage facility or adjoining property nor render any adjoining property unusable for any type development similar to
the development for which application is being made.
(e) Technical standards and regulations. Subject to, and except for provisions to the contrary as set forth in this section, technical standards and
regulations for septic tanks shall be those adopted by the county and the Texas State Department of Health, as they now exist, or may hereafter be
amended or replaced.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.304)
Sec. 18.03.005 Requirements for new subdivisions utilizing private sewage facilities
(a) Requirements to be met prior to sale of lots. After the effective date of this section, any developer or other interested person desiring to create a
subdivision which will utilize, wholly or in part, private sewage facilities must fulfill the following requirements prior to commencing any sale of lots
or tracts:
(1) A plat of the proposed subdivision must be filed with and approved in accordance with the city subdivision regulations as found in
chapter 12 of this code of ordinances.
(2) Where appropriate by reason of the type of facility proposed, a percolation test profile of the entire subdivision consisting of
percolation tests of a representative number of proposed lots or tracts (as determined and approved by the licensing authority) must be run
and the results given to the City Council by the developers or their agents when they file their preliminary plat.
(3) Notice of the terms and conditions of this article and of the applicability of the article to each lot or tract in the subdivision must be
given to every buyer by the developer, his agents or assigns. Failure to give adequate notice shall constitute a violation of this article.
(b) City to notify developer prior to plat approval. The city will notify the applicant developer of its determination regarding the use of private
sewage facilities within the subdivision prior to approval of the plat.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/526
(c) Licensing conditions. Every private sewage facility to be utilized within the subdivision must be licensed in accordance with the terms and
conditions of section 18.03.004 of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.305)
Sec. 18.03.006 Development of organized waste collection, treatment and disposal systems
Consideration of licenses under this article shall be subject to the following conditions and terms:
(1) No license shall be issued for any private sewage facility when any part of the private sewage facility is located within three
hundred (300) feet in horizontal distance to an organized disposal system; instead, the private sewage facility shall be connected to the
organized disposal system.
(2) Whenever an organized disposal system is developed within three hundred (300) feet in horizontal distance from any part of a
private sewage facility, that private sewage facility shall be connected to the organized disposal system and any license theretofore issued
may be canceled.
(3) In the event an organized disposal system is developed within three hundred (300) feet in horizontal distance from an existing or
proposed private sewage facility but is not legally or financially feasible to connect to such organized disposal system, then the applicant
shall follow the procedure outlined for granting an exception under section 18.03.009 of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.306)
Sec. 18.03.007 Special restriction and conditions
(a) Lot sizes. No new septic system will be approved on lots which are smaller in area than that permitted by the subdivision or zoning regulations.
Provided that a lot of lesser area may be approved if it is determined by the licensing authority that the facility will not result in a threat to public
health, nor will result in pollution. Further provided that this section shall not obviate any requirement of the subdivision or zoning regulations for
variances for smaller lots.
(b) Distances from property lines or public roads. No part of any private sewage facility shall be installed or operated within a minimum of ten
(10) feet in horizontal distance from any property line or public road. Greater distance may be required based on percolation tests.
(c) City council may delegate functions. The City Council may delegate the administrative functions or any part thereof contemplated by this
article, including among others, receipt of fees, review of plans and specifications, performing of percolation test, inspections prior to covering and
issuance of licenses to an appropriate officer, department or agency. If such delegation is made, any applicant shall have the right to repeal to the City
Council from any decision or ruling made by the officer, department or agency.
(d) Certain fees deemed necessary. The City Council has determined that the payment of certain fees by applicants for either subdivision approval
or license(s) is necessary and appropriate to recover the costs of administering this section and directs that all fees to be charged shall be reasonable.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.307)
Sec. 18.03.008 Complaints
(a) Upon the receipt of a complaint from a credible person that an existing private sewage facility, licensed or not, is endangering public health or
polluting water, the licensing authority shall immediately inspect the facility. If the licensing authority finds that the complaint is valid and that the
private sewage facility is endangering public health or polluting water, the licensing authority shall notify the owner of the facility in writing of such
fact and the action necessary to comply with section 18.03.004 of this article, and a reasonable amount of time in which to comply.
(b) At the expiration of the allotted time, the licensing authority shall reinspect the private sewage facility. Upon reinspection, if the facility is in
compliance with the requirements of section 18.03.004 of this article, a license shall be issued the facility upon the payment of the license fee.
(c) If the facility is not in such compliance, the licensing authority shall take appropriate action to enforce compliance under section 18.03.011 of
this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.308)
Sec. 18.03.009 Exceptions
(a) Procedure for filing. A person desiring an exception to any requirement of this article shall file a written statement with the licensing authority
stating:
(1) The nature of the exception; and
(2) The reason the exception should be granted.
(b) Review of requests for exceptions. The licensing authority shall review the request and reply to the applicant in writing within ten (10) days,
either granting or denying the request.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/526
(c) If the request is denied, the licensing authority shall include in its reply the reasons for the denial.
(d) Validity of exceptions. All exceptions granted under this article shall be valid for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.309)
Sec. 18.03.010 Appeal
(a) A person aggrieved by an action of the licensing authority made pursuant to this article is entitled to appeal to the City Council.
(b) The City Council may prescribe conditions and procedures for perfecting an appeal.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.310)
Sec. 18.03.011 Enforcement of this order
(a) Suits in district court. Whenever it appears that a violation or the threat of a violation of any of the terms and conditions of this article exists,
the city may institute a suit in a district court through its own attorney seeking injunctive relief or civil penalties, or both, against any persons
committing or threatening to commit the violation.
(b) Enforcement resolution. No enforcement action shall be brought by the city unless a resolution authorizing such enforcement action is adopted
by the City Council.
(c) Fines. A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is punishable by a fine as provided for
in section 1.01.009 of this code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
(d) Other remedies. Any criminal prosecution under this article shall not prejudice or bar the city from seeking civil enforcement; nor shall an
attempt to seek civil enforcement prejudice or bar the city from seeking criminal enforcement of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.311)
Sec. 18.03.012 Building inspector to process septic tank permit applications
The building inspector of the city or his duly authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to accept and process all septic tank permit
applications within the jurisdiction of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 11.312)
Sec. 18.03.013 Coordination with health department
The building inspector shall coordinate the processing of said permit with the county health department in such a manner that the said department
perform all percolation tests and design phase of all such permit processing and that the remainder of the processing procedure, including inspection,
be performed by the city or its duly authorized agent. (1998 Code, sec. 11.313)
Sec. 18.03.014 License fees
The fees for license and inspection, percolation test and system design under said private sewage facilities regulations shall be set and collected by
the Williamson County Health Department or Travis County Health Department as the case may be. (1998 Code, sec. 11.314)
Sec. 18.03.015 Health department to provide percolation and design information
The county health department is further charged with providing all required percolation and design information to the appropriate city personnel,
including but not limited to, prompt advice on refusal to issue a percolation test, or design a system within the corporate limits of the city. (1998
Code, sec. 11.315)
ARTICLE 18.04 NATURAL GAS UTILITY REGULATIONS
Sec. 18.04.001 Termination of natural gas service
The City Council of the city hereby adopts the following rules and regulations related to termination of service for residential and commercial natural
gas customers within the city:
(1) The due date of the bill for utility service shall not be less than fifteen (15) days after issuance or such other period of time as may
be provided by ordinance of the City Council. A bill for utility service is delinquent if unpaid by the due date.
(2) The gas utility company may offer an inducement for prompt payment of bills by allowing a discount in the amount of five (5)
percent for payment of bills within ten (10) days after their issuance. This provision shall not apply where it conflicts with existing
ordinances of the City Council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/526
(3) The customer's utility service may be disconnected if the bill has not been paid or a deferred payment agreement pursuant to the
rules of the gas utility company has not been entered into within five (5) days after the bill has become delinquent and proper notice has
been given. Proper notice shall consist of a mailing or hand delivery to the customer at least five (5) days prior to a stated date of
disconnection.
(4) Gas utility service may be disconnected for any of the following reasons:
(A) Failure to pay a delinquent account regardless of the amount of the customer's security deposit, or failure to comply with the
terms of a deferred payment plan for installment payment of a delinquent account;
(B) Violation of the rules of the gas utility company pertaining to the use of service in a manner which interferes with the service
of others or the operation of nonstandard equipment, if a reasonable attempt has been made to notify the customer and the customer
is provided with a reasonable opportunity to remedy the situation;
(C) Failure to comply with deposit or guarantee arrangements where required by the gas utility company;
(D) Existence of a known dangerous condition for as long as the condition exists, in which case service may be terminated
without notice;
(E) Tampering with a gas utility company meter or equipment or bypassing the same;
(F) Failure or refusal of consumer to repair or replace or to have repaired or replaced any of consumer's piping, appliances or
equipment when notified by the gas utility company of their hazardous condition;
(G) Fraudulent representation relating to the consumption of gas;
(H) Selling, delivering or furnishing gas or gas service without written permission from the gas utility company to other persons
either on or off consumer's premises; and
(I) Using gas for purposes other than as represented.
(5) Above notwithstanding, utility service may not be disconnected for any of the following reasons:
(A) Delinquency in payment for service by a previous occupant of the premises;
(B) Failure to pay for merchandise or charges for nonutility service provided by the gas utility company;
(C) Failure to pay for a different type or class of utility service unless fee for such service is included on the same bill;
(D) Failure to pay the account of another customer as guarantor thereof, unless the gas utility company has in writing the
guarantee as a condition precedent to service;
(E) Failure to pay charges arising from an underbilling occurring due to any misapplication of rates more than six (6) months
prior to the current billing;
(F) Failure to pay charges arising from an underbilling due to any faulty metering, unless the meter has been tampered with or
unless such underbilling charges are due;
(G) Failure to pay an estimated bill other than a bill rendered pursuant to an approved meter reading plan, unless the gas utility
company is unable to read the meter due to circumstances beyond its control.
(6) Unless a dangerous condition exists, or unless the customer requests disconnection, service shall not be disconnected on a day or on
a day immediately preceding a day, when personnel of the gas utility company are not available to the public for the purpose of making
collections and reconnecting service.
(7) The gas utility company may not abandon a customer without written approval from the City Council. Gas service shall
automatically terminate upon written approval from the City Council for removal or abandonment by the gas utility company of the
portion of its system or plant from which customer is served.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.401)
Sec. 18.04.002 Advertising expenses of gas utility allowed as operating expenses
The City Council hereby adopts the following rules and regulations regarding advertising expenses of a gas utility which will be allowed as operating
expenses to be recovered through charges for gas service, consistent with Rule 051.04.03.037 adopted by the Texas Railroad Commission.
(1) Actual expenditures for advertising will be allowed as a cost of service for ratemaking purposes; provided that the total sum of such
expenditures does not exceed two-tenths (0.2) of one (1) percent of the gross receipts of the utility.
(2) The allowed expenditure is authorized with the understanding that it is justified by the savings in total energy consumed as a result
of prompting the use of energy efficient appliances, equipment or service.
(3) Advertising which informs consumers of conservation techniques and encourages their use is allowable as a cost of service.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/526
(4) Other forms of advertising which are allowable as a cost of service include advertising required by law or regulation; advertising
regarding service interruptions, safety measures, or emergency conditions; advertising regarding employment opportunities; and
advertising which explains existing or proposed rate schedules or notifications of hearings thereon.
(5) Advertising expense is specifically prohibited as an allowable cost of service when it is for the purpose of influencing public
opinion with respect to legislative, administrative or electoral matters, or with respect to any controversial issue of public importance; the
support of or for membership in social, recreational, fraternal, religious clubs or organizations; contributions and donations to charitable,
religious or other nonprofit organizations or institutions.
(6) Advertising expenses which are disallowed by this rule may only be recovered from the shareholders or other owners of a gas
utility.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.402)
Sec. 18.04.003 Conflicting regulations
To the extent of any conflict between the rules promulgated by this article and the rules established by Lone Star Gas Company, or any other gas
utility providing service to customers within the city, this article shall prevail. (1998 Code, sec. 11.403)
ARTICLE 18.05 ELECTRIC UTILITY REGULATIONS
Sec. 18.05.001 Master metering
The City Council hereby adopts the standard established for master metering of electric service set forth in 113(b)(1) and 115(d) of the Public Utility
Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 in the case of new buildings within the city. (1998 Code, sec. 11.501)
Sec. 18.05.002 Automatic fuel adjustment clauses
The City Council hereby adopts a policy dealing with automatic fuel adjustment clauses, consistent with and pursuant to Texas Public Utility
Commission Substantive Rule 052.02.03.033(b)(2), allowing an adjustment for recovering the cost of fuel used in the generation of electric power
within the city, provided that:
(1) At the time of a rate hearing, the utility shall have filed with the commission all requested fuel contracts and cost data upon which
such total fuel costs are predicated with a schedule showing any adjustments anticipated under current contracts;
(2) The total cost of fuel per kilowatt hour and/or purchased power is shown on the bill; provided that the utility shall have the option of
also showing on the bill the total cost of fuel;
(3) The items included in the cost of fuel are approved by the commission;
(4) Fuel costs bill shall be for fuel consumed in the generation of electric energy in the calendar month that most closely corresponds to
the billing period; and
(5) The total fuel cost is applied equitably to each customer's bill and is proportional to the number of kilowatt hours used.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.502)
Sec. 18.05.003 Consumer information requirements
The City Council hereby adopts a policy regarding electric utility consumer information within the city, consistent with and pursuant to Texas Public
Utility Commission Substantive Rule 052.02.04.042(a), requiring each electric utility to do the following:
(1) Maintain a current set of maps showing the physical locations of its facilities and labeled so as to give an accurate description, to be
kept in a central location available for commission inspection during normal working hours. Each business office or service center shall
have available up-to-date maps, plans or records of its immediate area, with such other information as may be necessary to enable the
utility to advise applicants and others entitled to the information, as to the facilities available for serving that locality;
(2) Upon request, a prospective residential customer shall be informed of the utility's lowest priced alternatives available at the
customer's location, giving full consideration to equipment options and installation charges, if any, incident thereto;
(3) Notify customers affected by a change in rates or schedule of classification;
(4) Post a notice in a conspicuous place in each business office of the utility where applications for service are received, informing the
public that copies of rate schedules and rules relating to the service of the utility, are available for inspection;
(5) Furnish such additional information on rates and services as the customer may reasonably request; and
(6) Upon request, inform its customers as to the method of reading meters.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/526
(1998 Code, sec. 11.503)
Sec. 18.05.004 Termination of electric service
The City Council hereby adopts the following policy dealing with termination of electric utility service within the city, consistent with and pursuant
to Texas Public Utility Commission Substantive Rule 052.02.04.044:
(1) The due date of the bill for utility service shall not be less than fifteen (15) days after issuance. A bill for utility service is delinquent
if unpaid by the due date. The postmark, if any, on the envelope of the bill, or an issuance date on the bill, if there is no postmark on the
envelope, shall constitute proof of the date of issuance. If the due date falls on a holiday or weekend, the due date for payment purposes
shall be the next work day after the due date.
(2) A one time penalty not to exceed five (5) percent may be made on delinquent commercial or industrial bills; however, no such
penalty shall apply to residential bills under this rule.
(3) A customer's utility service may be disconnected if the bill has not been paid or a deferred payment agreement entered into within
twenty-two (22) days from the date of issuance and if proper notice has been given. Proper notice shall consist of a separate mailing or
hand delivery at least seven (7) days prior to a stated date of disconnection. If mailed, the cutoff day may not fall on a holiday or weekend,
but shall fall on the next work day after the seventh (7th) day. Payment at utility's authorized payment agency is considered payment to the
utility.
(4) Utility service may be disconnected after proper notice for any of the following reasons:
(A) Failure to pay a delinquent account for utility service or failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment agreement;
(B) Violation of the utility's rules pertaining to the use of service in a manner which interferes with the service of others or the
operation of nonstandard equipment, if a reasonable attempt has been made to notify the customer and the customer is provided with
a reasonable opportunity to remedy the situation;
(C) Failure to comply with the required deposit or guarantee arrangements;
(D) Existence of a known dangerous condition for as long as the condition exists, in which case service may be terminated
without notice; and
(E) Tampering with the utility company's meter or equipment or bypassing same.
(5) Utility service may not be disconnected for any of the following reasons:
(A) Delinquency in payment for utility service by a previous occupant of the premises;
(B) Failure to pay for merchandise, or charges for nonutility service provided by the utility;
(C) Failure to pay for a different type or class of utility service unless fee for such service is included on the same bill;
(D) Failure to pay the account of another customer as guarantor thereof, unless the utility has in writing the guarantee as a
condition precedent to service;
(E) Failure to pay charges arising from an underbilling occurring due to any misapplication of rates more than six (6) months
prior to the current billing;
(F) Failure to pay charges arising from an underbilling due to any faulty metering, unless the meter has been tampered with or
unless such underbilling charges are due; and
(G) Failure to pay an estimated bill other than a bill rendered pursuant to an approved meter reading plan, unless the electric
utility is unable to read the meter due to circumstances beyond its control.
(6) Unless a dangerous condition exists, or unless the customer requests disconnection, service shall not be disconnected on a day, or on
a day immediately preceding a day, when personnel of the electric utility company are not available to the public for the purpose of
making collections and reconnecting service.
(7) The electric utility company may not abandon a customer or a certified service area without written notice to its customers therein
and all similar neighboring utilities, and approval from the City Council.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.504)
Sec. 18.05.005 Advertising expenses allotted in cost of service
The City Council hereby adopts the following policy dealing with advertising by an electric utility service within the city, consistent with, and
pursuant to Texas Public Utility Commission Substantive Rule 052.02.03.032(a)(6):
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/526
(1) The actual expenditures for ordinary advertising, contributions and donations will be allowed as a cost of service; provided that the
total sum of all such items allowed in the cost of service shall not exceed three-tenths (0.3) of one (1) percent of the gross receipts of the
utility for services rendered to the public.
(2) No expenditure shall be allowed as a cost of service for the following special items:
(A) Funds expended for influencing legislation;
(B) Funds expended in support of political candidates;
(C) Funds expended in support of any political movement;
(D) Funds expended in promotion of political or religious causes;
(E) Funds expended in support of or for membership in social, recreational, fraternal or religious clubs or organizations;
(F) Funds promoting increased consumption of energy; and
(G) Additional funds expended to mail any parcel or letter containing any of the above special items.
(3) The following expenditures may be allowed:
(A) Funds expended promoting methods of conserving energy;
(B) Funds expended promoting methods by which the consumer can effect a savings in total bills;
(C) Funds expended promoting load factor improvement of off peak times; and
(D) Funds expended in support of or membership in professional or trade associations; provided such associations contribute
toward the professional standing of their membership.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.505)
Sec. 18.05.006 Conflicting regulations
To the extent of any conflict between the rules promulgated by this article and the rules established by Pedernales Electric Cooperative, or any other
electrical utility which serves customers within the city, this article shall prevail. (1998 Code, sec. 11.506)
ARTICLE 18.06 REGULATING DISCHARGE OF WASTES INTO SANITARY SEWERS
Sec. 18.06.001 Definitions
As used in this article:
Approving authority. The City Administrator or his duly authorized representative.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty degrees centigrade (20°C.).
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called the house lateral and house
connection).
Chemical oxygen demand (COD). Measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater
expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable
organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the
public sewer.
Control point. Point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, processing, storage and
sale of food products and produce.
Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or
any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater.
Industrial waste charge. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio, the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34
shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/526
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surfacewater or groundwater.
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater, excluding industrial wastewater, discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average
concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/l and 80D is not more than 200 mg/l.
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.
Person. Any individual and includes any corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association, or other legal entity.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
Public sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control
by the city.
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater,
surfacewater, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
Standard methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water
Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surfacewaters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not
intentionally passed.
Stormwater. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
Superintendent. The water and wastewater superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Suspended solids (SS). Solids measured in mg/l, that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and
which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
To discharge. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any
of these acts or omissions.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances.
Unpolluted wastewater. Water containing:
(1) No free or emulsified grease or oil;
(2) No acids or alkalis;
(3) No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water;
(4) No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution;
(5) No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
(6) Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the Texas Water Commission;
and
(7) Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods.
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities.
Wastewater. A combination of the water carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with
any ground, surface, and stormwater that may be present.
Wastewater facilities. Includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes.
Wastewater treatment plant. Any city owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial
waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers.
Wastewater service charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values
established as representative of normal wastewater.
Watercourse. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.601)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/526
Sec. 18.06.002 Prohibited discharges
(a) No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities;
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(3) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(b) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.602)
Sec. 18.06.003 Chemical discharges
(a) No discharge to public sewers may contain:
(1) Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l;
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
(5) Substances causing an excessive COD.
(b) No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
(2) Fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperature between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees
Centigrade);
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or
(4) Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of subsection (a) above.
(c) No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities.
(d) All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances, shall conform to
concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the
requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.603)
Sec. 18.06.004 Hazardous metals and toxic materials
(a) No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section.
(b) The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to inland waters, and determined on the
basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are:
Not to Exceed
Metal Average Daily Composite Grab Sample
Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/526
Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0
Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0
Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0
Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5
Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0
Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01
Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0
Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2
Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0
Note: These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated under authority of sections 5.131 and 5.132, Texas Water Code -
Hazardous Metals and in accordance with Texas Water Commission Rule 156.19.
(c) No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying
conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions.
(d) Prohibited hazardous materials include but are not limited to:
(1) Antimony;
(2) Beryllium;
(3) Bismuth;
(4) Cobalt;
(5) Molybdenum;
(6) Uranylion;
(7) Rhenium;
(8) Strontium;
(9) Tellurium;
(10) Herbicides;
(11) Fungicides; and
(12) Pesticides.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.604)
Sec. 18.06.005 Particulate size
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/526
(a) No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimensions are prohibited.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of threefourths
(¾) horsepower (0.76 hp metric or greater).
(1998 Code, sec. 11.605)
Sec. 18.06.006 Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage
(a) No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
(1) Unpolluted stormwater, surfacewater, groundwater, roof run-off or subsurface drainage;
(2) Unpolluted cooling water;
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters;
(4) Other unpolluted drainage; or make any new connections from inflow sources.
(b) In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses
into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) above may be discharged.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.606)
Sec. 18.06.007 Temperature
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150°) Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade), or
any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees (10°) Fahrenheit or
more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent to one hundred ten degrees (110°) Fahrenheit. (1998 Code, sec. 11.607)
Sec. 18.06.008 Radioactive wastes
(a) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority.
(b) The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive
wastes into public sewers.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.608)
Sec. 18.06.009 Impairment of facilities
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(b) Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including, but not limited to:
(A) Fuller's earth;
(B) Lime slurries; and
(C) Lime residues.
(2) Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l, including, but not limited to:
(A) Sodium chloride; and
(B) Sodium sulfate.
(3) Excessive discoloration including but not limited to:
(A) Dye wastes; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/526
(B) Vegetable tanning solutions; or
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess or normal plant capacity.
(c) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers;
(2) Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability
of the substance to bacterial action; or
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(d) No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(e) The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process;
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
(4) Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(f) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient
quantity or size including but not limited to:
(1) Ashes;
(2) Cinders;
(3) Sand;
(4) Mud;
(5) Straw;
(6) Shavings;
(7) Metal;
(8) Glass;
(9) Rags;
(10) Feathers;
(11) Tar;
(12) Plastics;
(13) Wood;
(14) Unground garbage;
(15) Whole blood;
(16) Paunch manure;
(17) Hair and fleshings;
(18) Entrails;
(19) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
(20) Slops;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/526
(21) Chemical residues;
(22) Paint residues; or
(23) Bulk solids.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.609)
Sec. 18.06.010 Compliance with existing authority
(a) Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging:
(1) Wastewater;
(2) Industrial waste;
(3) Polluted liquids.
(b) Unless authorized by the Texas Water Commission, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on
public or private property or into or adjacent to any:
(1) Natural outlet;
(2) Watercourse;
(3) Storm sewer;
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the
provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.610)
Sec. 18.06.011 Approving authority requirements
(a) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may:
(1) Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters;
(2) Create a hazard to life or health; or
(3) Create a public nuisance;
the approving authority shall require:
(1) Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(2) Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
(3) Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section.
(c) The approving authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge does not meet the requirements of
subsection (a) of this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.611)
Sec. 18.06.012 Approving authority review and approval
(a) If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes.
(b) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws.
(c) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in
effective operating condition at his own expense.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.612)
Sec. 18.06.013 Requirements for traps
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/526
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include:
(1) Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes; and
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority:
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority;
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and
(3) Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.613)
Sec. 18.06.014 Requirements for building sewers
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving
authority:
(1) Install an accessible control manhole;
(2) Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste;
(3) Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps...) where needed; and
(4) Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.614)
Sec. 18.06.015 Sampling and testing
(a) Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property.
Note: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composites of all
outfalls. Where applicable, 16 hour, 8 hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH and oil and grease.
(b) Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this section shall be:
(1) Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving
authority.
(c) BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges.
(d) The approving authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which is of greater strength than normal
domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be sampled for flow BOD, TSS and pH at least annually.
(e) City may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if necessary. Flow may alternately be
determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available and no other source of raw water is used.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.615)
Sec. 18.06.016 User charge system
(a) Persons making discharges of industrial waste into the city system shall pay a charge to cover all costs of collection and treatment in
accordance with the city's adopted user charge system.
(b) When discharges of any waste into the city system are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representatives shall enter
into an agreement or arrangement providing:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/526
(1) Terms of acceptance by the city;
(2) Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the user charge system as established and currently enforced by
the city;
(3) Sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with the Standard Plumbing Code as promulgated by the
Southern Building Code Congress;
(4) A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and
(5) Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city inspectors prior to sewer use.
(c) Each user of the wastewater treatment system will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular sewer bill, of the rate and that
portion of user charges or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment system.
(d) The city will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the
next year and adjust the rates accordingly.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.616)
Sec. 18.06.017 Savings clause
A person discharging wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of this article may continue without penalty so long as he:
(1) Does not increase the quantity or decrease the quality of discharge without permission of the approving authority;
(2) Has discharged the waste at least six (6) months prior to the effective date of this article; and
(3) Applies for and is granted a permit no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.617)
Sec. 18.06.018 Conditions for permits
(a) The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause provided that the person:
(1) Submit an application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this section on forms supplied by the
approving authority;
(2) Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for the facilities when required; and
(3) Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including but not limited to, provisions for:
(A) Payment of charges;
(B) Installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment facilities, if required;
(C) Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when directed by the city; and
(4) Provides a sampling point, when requested by the city, subject to the provisions of this article and approval of the approving
authority.
(b) A person applying for a new discharge shall:
(1) Meet all conditions of subsection (a) above; and
(2) Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.618)
Sec. 18.06.019 Power to enter property
(a) The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public
or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article.
(b) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire
protection.
(c) Except when caused by negligence or failure of person(s) to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the person(s) against loss or
damage to their property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
person(s) and growing out of the sampling operation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/526
(d) The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of:
(1) Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;
(2) Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and
(3) Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(e) No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.619)
Sec. 18.06.020 Authority to disconnect service
(a) The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system when:
(1) Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer, potentially causing
accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater;
(2) A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for
discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated
or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or
(3) The customer:
(A) Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority;
(B) Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater
treatment system;
(C) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or
(D) Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of sections 18.06.002 through 18.06.009 as stated
above.
(b) If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall:
(1) Disconnect the customer;
(2) Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and
(3) Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment/additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to
remove the objectionable characteristics from his wastes.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.620)
Sec. 18.06.021 Notice
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation providing a reasonable time
limit for satisfactory compliance. (1998 Code, sec. 11.621)
Sec. 18.06.022 Continuing prohibited discharges
No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided above in written notice. (1998 Code, sec. 11.622)
Sec. 18.06.023 Penalty
(a) A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine as provided for in section
1.01.009 of this code of ordinances for each act of violation and for each day of violation.
(b) In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to
which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.623)
Sec. 18.06.024 Failure to pay
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/526
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure
to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. (1998 Code, sec. 11.624)
Sec. 18.06.025 Penalty for criminal mischief
The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently,
willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. (1998 Code, sec. 11.625)
ARTICLE 18.07 WATER AND WASTEWATER IMPACT FEES*
Sec. 18.07.001 Statement of policy
It is the policy of the city to impose upon new development, impact fees to pay a portion of the cost of constructing capital improvements or facility
expansions necessary to serve new development whether within or without the corporate limits of the city, with water and wastewater service.
Pursuant to that policy, the city has updated and adopted a capital improvements plan, has updated and adopted land use assumptions and has
received from qualified professionals use estimates, cost estimates and a determination of impact fees for water and wastewater improvements in
accordance with Chapter 395, Local Government Code and all provisions hereof should be so interpreted. (1998 Code, sec. 11.701)
Sec. 18.07.002 Living unit equivalent defined
For the purposes of this article, a living unit equivalent (LUE) consumes four hundred fifty (450) gallons per day of water and produces three
hundred (300) gallons per day of wastewater. (1998 Code, sec. 11.702)
Sec. 18.07.003 Amount and assessment of water impact fee
The city shall assess and collect on all new development and new connections to be served by the city's water system a water impact fee as provided
for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code for each LUE. (1998 Code, sec. 11.703)
Sec. 18.07.004 Amount and assessment of wastewater impact fee
The city shall assess and collect on all new development and new connections to be served by the city's wastewater treatment system a wastewater
impact fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code for each LUE. (1998 Code, sec. 11.704)
Sec. 18.07.005 Time impact fees are due
The community impact fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of the building permit; provided that if water and wastewater service to a proposed
subdivision would require capacity expansion of the city's water or wastewater systems, the City Council may require payment of all or a portion of
the impact fee at the time of recording of the subdivision plat. (1998 Code, sec. 11.705)
Sec. 18.07.006 Calculation of LUE's
(a) The number of LUE's for residential uses shall be determined as follows:
Type of Residential Unit Number of LUE's
Single Family Detached 1.0 per unit
Duplex 0.9 per unit
Triplex, Four-plex 0.7 per unit
Multi-family 0.5 per unit
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/526
(b) For all non-residential uses, the number of LUE's of service shall be determined by the director of public works pursuant to certified engineer's
data furnished to the city by the applicant. The number of LUE's shall be calculated to the nearest tenth. The determination of the director of public
works shall be subject to review by the City Council, whose decision shall be final and binding.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.706)
Sec. 18.07.007 Waiver of impact fees
By majority vote of the council, a resolution or ordinance may be adopted waiving, reducing, or delaying payment of the impact fees for a certain
class of development, or for a specific development. (1998 Code, sec. 11.707)
Sec. 18.07.008 Use of funds
(a) All funds collected herein shall be deposited in interest bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital improvements or facility
expansions within the city's service area.
(b) Interest earned on impact fees is considered funds of the account on which it is earned and is subject to all restrictions placed on use of impact
fees by this code and Chapter 395 of the Local Government Code.
(c) Expenditures of impact fees shall be made only to pay the cost of constructing capital improvements or facility expansions, including the
construction contract, price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs, (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees
and expert witness fees) and the fees paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant to prepare or update the capital improvements
plan, along with the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other obligations issued to finance capital improvements, facility
expansions or other improvements identified in the capital improvements plan.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.708)
Sec. 18.07.009 Exceptions
Lots with a legal subdivided status according to the Texas Local Government Code as of December 10, 1985 and that were within the city's corporate
jurisdiction as of December 10, 1985 shall be granted one LUE of water and wastewater impact fee credit at the time a building permit is issued for
development of the lot. (Ordinance CO09-05-04-14-5A adopted 4/14/05)
Sec. 18.07.010 Credits
Persons who posted letters of credit with the city which were drawn down by the city to reserve line capacity for wastewater services shall pay the
required fees hereunder, but shall receive a credit for the line increment of the wastewater fee to the extent of such letters of credit. (1998 Code, sec.
11.710)
Sec. 18.07.011 Resubdivisions
If property was subdivided prior to the effective date hereof, and all or a portion of said property is exempt under section 18.07.009 hereof from the
payment of water and wastewater fees hereunder, and all or a portion of said property is subsequently resubdivided, community impact fees shall be
assessed to the resubdivided property if the resubdivision requires any increase in water or wastewater LUE's to serve such subdivision, to the extent
of such increase. There shall be no credit or refund, however, if the number of LUE's is decreased as a result of such resubdivision. (1998 Code, sec.
11.711)
Sec. 18.07.012 Improvements by subdivider to water and wastewater system
(a) From time to time it may become necessary or desirable for a subdivider to make improvements to the water and wastewater systems of the
city to accommodate the development plans for the subdivider's property. This may be accomplished in some instances by sizing water or wastewater
lines within the boundaries of the subdivider's property to accommodate additional system use outside those boundaries or such improvements may
entail the extension of trunk lines to the subdivider's property. In every such event, subject to the city engineer's prior approval of both the plans and
specification and the cost of construction and the city engineer's determination that such improvements correspond to the city's overall plan for its
water and wastewater systems, the subdivider shall receive a credit or reimbursement equal to the cost of such improvement to the city system
against any community impact fees he is or has previously been required to pay.
(b) The applicable line increment of the community impact fees paid from other new developments using the water or wastewater improvements
installed by a subdivider shall be reimbursed by the city to such subdivider until such subdivider receives an aggregate amount of reimbursements
and/or community impact fee credits as provided in subsection (a) above equal to the total cost of the improvements to the city's water or wastewater
systems.
(c) All reimbursements shall be paid to the record owner of the property at the time such reimbursement is made.
(1998 Code, sec. 11.712)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/526
Sec. 18.07.013 Capital improvements plan adopted
Pursuant to 395.051 Local Government Code, a capital improvements plan as set forth in Exhibit A as maintained on file in the office of the City
Secretary and incorporated herein is hereby adopted. (1998 Code, sec. 11.713)
ARTICLE 18.08 DROUGHT CONTINGENCY AND WATER EMERGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 18.08.001 Approval of the plan
The City Council hereby approves the addition of definitions, prohibiting water waste during all drought response stages, and revisions to drought
response stages to the City's drought contingency and water emergency plan (the “plan”). The City commits to implement the program changes
according to the procedures set forth in the revised plan.
Sec. 18.08.002 Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent
(a) It is hereby declared that, because of the water conditions prevailing in the City, the water resources available to the City shall be put to the
maximum beneficial use and that the waste, unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and the conservation of such
water to be extended with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the interests of the people of the City and for the public health and
welfare.
(b) Water uses regulated or prohibited under the plan are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water
shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to enforcement as
defined in section 18.08.013 of this article.
Sec. 18.08.003 Public education
All information, including updates, regarding the plan will be made available to the public at all times on the City's website.
Sec. 18.08.004 Wholesale water customer education
Information regarding the plan will be available to wholesale water customers at all times on the City's website.
Sec. 18.08.005 Coordination and compliance with regional groups
The service area of the City is located within the Lower Colorado Regional Water Planning Area (Region K) and the Brazos Region G., and the City
has provided a copy of this plan to both. Furthermore, this plan shall be altered by the City to reflect any regulations dictated by the Lower Colorado
River Authority (LCRA) or any other governmental entity authorized to promulgate water conservation regulations applicable to the City.
Sec. 18.08.006 Authorization
The service area of the City is located within the Lower Colorado Regional Water Planning Area (Region K) and the Brazos Region G., and the City
has provided a copy of this plan to both. Furthermore, this plan shall be altered by the City to reflect any regulations dictated by the Lower Colorado
River Authority (LCRA) or any other governmental entity authorized to promulgate water conservation regulations applicable to the City.
Sec. 18.08.007 Application
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the City. The terms “persons” and
“customer” as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities.
Sec. 18.08.008 Definitions
For the purpose of this plan, the following definitions shall apply:
Acre-feet. The amount of water required to cover an area of one acre to a depth of one foot. One acre-foot of water is equal to 325,851 gallons.
Auxiliary source. A source of water other than the City's public water system which may include reuse effluent, raw, ground or well water.
City. The City of Cedar Park, Texas.
City Manager. The City Manager or any designated person acting on the City Manager's behalf.
Combined storage. The amount of water stored in acre-feet in Lake Travis and Lake Buchanan according to records kept by the Lower Colorado
River Authority (LCRA).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/526
Commercial/nonresidential customer. All other customers not classified as residential customer, including but not limited to businesses, schools,
churches, large properties, athletic fields, municipally sponsored public gatherings, government entities, multifamily developments and property
management associations (e.g. homeowners associations).
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the
efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative
uses.
Customer. Any person, company, organization, or legal entity receiving water supplied by the City.
Drip irrigation. A method of irrigation which is typically installed below ground and consists of porous piping or emitters which allow the
application of water at a slow and constant rate.
Drought tolerant landscaping. A method of landscaping which conserves water through the use of specific principles of design, plant selection,
installation, maintenance, and irrigation methods.
Efficient irrigation technology. Irrigation techniques that use the latest technology with variables such as but not limited to soil moisture sensors, rain
shutoff devices, and evapotranspiration based watering system controllers.
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether privately or publicly owned, including
residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians.
Nonessential water use. Water uses that are neither essential nor required for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. These uses are
considered nonessential depending on the current severity drought stage. Such nonessential uses include:
(1) Irrigation of landscaped areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except as otherwise provided by this plan;
(2) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle;
(3) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas;
(4) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection;
(5) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(6) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools;
(7) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except if the fountain utilizes recirculated water and/or supports
aquatic life or wildlife. A person may not operate an ornamental fountain with an aerial emission of water or aerial fall of water greater
than four (4) inches other than for aeration necessary to preserve habitat for aquatic life or wildlife;
(8) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within ten (10) business days after having been given notice directing the repair of such
leak(s); and
(9) Use of water for dust control, other than for purposes of public health and safety.
Outdoor water use. Includes, but is not limited to, watering lawns, shrubs, vegetables, athletic fields, large properties, and other types of outdoor
vegetation; washing vehicles, boats, and trailers; use of landscape irrigation systems; refilling or adding water to swimming pools or wading pools or
ponds; the operation of aesthetic or recreational devices such as water slides; the watering of patios, driveways, parking areas, streets, tennis courts,
sidewalks or other paved areas; and the watering of ground foundations.
Residential customer. Any person, company, organization, or other legal type entity receiving water supplied by the City at a location where the
principal use of the property is for single- family or duplex habitation.
Soaker hose. A perforated or permeable garden-type hose or pipe that is laid above ground that provides irrigation at a slow and constant rate.
Sec. 18.08.009 Triggering and termination criteria for drought response stages
(a) The City Manager shall monitor the water supply and/or production and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of
each drought response stage of the plan.
(b) The triggering criteria described below are based on combined storage, customer water consumption and water treatment plant
production/distribution system capacity; however, the stated triggering criteria are not intended as an exhaustive or finite listing, and regardless of
whether any stated triggering criteria are present, the City Manager may initiate and/or terminate each drought response stage of the plan to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare and in the best interest of the City.
(1) Stage 1-Voluntary water conservation conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. This stage shall be considered the baseline water conservation stage for the City and will be
implemented at all times when stages 2–5 are not in effect. Customers shall be requested to adhere to a voluntary twice-per-week
outdoor watering schedule and adhere to the water restrictions on nonessential water use, defined in section 18.08.008 of this plan at
all times. This stage is designed to promote water efficiency throughout the City.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/526
(B) Target reduction goal. During this stage, the target reduction goal is 5%.
(C) Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded at any time by the City Manager.
(2) Stage 2-Moderate water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on nonessential
water uses, defined in section 18.08.008 of this plan at all times when one or a combination of such triggering criteria occurs:
(i) Total daily water demand equals or exceeds 90% of the total operating system treatment capacity for three consecutive
days;
(ii) If the combined water storage of Lakes Buchanan and Travis are less than 1,100,000 acre-feet but greater than 750,000
acre-feet;
(iii) Weather conditions are to be considered in drought classification determination. Predicted long, cold, or dry periods are
to be considered in impact analysis;
(iv) City Manager discretion.
(B) Target reduction goal. During this stage, the target reduction goal is 10%–20%.
(C) Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded by the City Manager when all of the conditions listed as
triggering events have ceased to exist for at least a period of three (3) consecutive days, or at the City Manager's discretion. Upon
termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative.
(3) Stage 3-Severe water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on nonessential
water uses, defined in section 18.08.008, for stage 3 of this plan when one or a combination of such triggering criteria occurs:
(i) Total daily water demand equals or exceeds 95% of the total operating system treatment capacity for three consecutive
days;
(ii) The combined storage of Lakes Buchanan and Travis are less than 750,000 acre-feet but greater than 600,000 acre-feet;
(iii) Water system is contaminated whether accidentally or intentionally. Severe condition is reached immediately upon
detection; and/or
(iv) City Manager discretion.
(B) Target reduction goal. During this stage, the target reduction goal is a minimum of 20%.
(C) Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded by the City Manager when all of the conditions listed as
triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes
operative.
(4) Stage 4-Emergency water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on nonessential
water uses, defined in section 18.08.008, for stage 4 of this plan when the City Manager declares it is in the best interest of the City.
(B) Target reduction goal. During this stage, the target reduction goal is a minimum of 30%, or as determined by the LCRA board.
(C) Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded by the City Manager.
Sec. 18.08.010 Drought response stages
The City shall monitor the water supply and/or production as needed and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 18.08.009 of
the plan, shall determine that a moderate, severe, or extreme condition exists and shall implement the following actions upon public notification:
(1) Stage 1-Voluntary water conservation stage. The goal for stage 1 of the plan is to maintain baseline water conservation measures
and raise public and customer awareness of water demand conditions. This stage is designed to promote water efficiency throughout the
City.
(A) Voluntary water use measures.
(i) Water customers shall voluntarily limit outdoor water use by participating in the two-day per week watering schedule for
outdoor water use. Outdoor water use shall only occur on a designated outdoor watering day, which shall be two days per
week. The two-day per week watering schedule will be determined and distributed by the City.
(ii) Residential customer watering days:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/526
a. Last digit of their street address ending in a 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8: Thursday and Sunday.
b. Last digit of their street address ending in a 1, 3, 5, 7, 9: Wednesday and Saturday.
(iii) Commercial customer watering days: Tuesday and Friday.
(iv) Outdoor water use is discouraged between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. except with handheld hoses equipped
with a positive pistol grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being used, or
handheld buckets. The following outdoor water uses are exempt from the voluntary weekly watering schedule and can be done
at any time of day:
a. The irrigation of commercial plant nurseries.
b. Irrigation using an auxiliary source.
c. Irrigation using a soaker hose or drip irrigation.
d. New landscape installation during installation and the first twenty- one (21) days.
e. The testing of new irrigation systems or existing irrigation systems being tested or under repair.
(v) All operations of the City shall adhere to nonessential water use restrictions, defined in section 18.08.008.
(vi) Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and adhere to the restrictions on nonessential water uses,
defined in section 18.08.008. The following uses constitute a waste of water and are prohibited:
a. Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, patios or other hard-surfaced areas except to
alleviate immediate health or safety hazards.
b. Allowing water to run off a property, or allowing water to pond in the street or parking.
c. Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with broken heads, with heads that are out of adjustment that
spray more than 10% of the spray on street or parking lots, or that are misting.
d. Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within ten (10) business days after having been given notice directing the
repair of such leak(s).
e. Washing an automobile, truck, trailer, boat, airplane, or other mobile equipment with a handheld hose not equipped
with a pistol grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being used.
(B) Demand management measures. The City will contact wholesale water customers to discuss water supply and/or production
conditions and will request that wholesale water customers initiate voluntary measures to reduce water use.
(2) Stage 2-Moderate water shortage conditions. The goal for stage 2 of the plan is reduce water use by 10%-20%.
(A) Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(i) Water customers shall be required to limit outdoor water use by participating in the two-day per week watering schedule
for outdoor water use. Outdoor water use shall only occur on a designated outdoor watering day. The two-day per week
watering schedule will be determined and distributed by the City. Drip irrigation and soaker hoses are permitted for use at all
times and are exempt from the weekly watering schedule and daily watering time restrictions. Soaker hoses may be used at any
time to water vegetable gardens or trees. Drip irrigation attached to an automatic sprinkler system must have spray head zones
turned off.
(ii) Residential customer watering days:
a. Last digit of their street address ending in a 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8: Thursday and Sunday.
b. Last digit of their street address ending in a 1, 3, 5, 7, 9: Wednesday and Saturday.
(iii) Commercial customer watering days: Tuesday and Friday.
(iv) Outdoor water use is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. except with handheld hoses equipped
with a positive pistol grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being used, or
handheld buckets. Handheld watering can be done on any day without time restrictions. The time restrictions do not apply to:
a. The irrigation of commercial plant nurseries.
b. Irrigation using an auxiliary source.
c. Irrigation using a soaker hose or drip irrigation.
d. New landscape installation during installation and the first twenty- one (21) days.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/526
e. The testing of new irrigation systems or existing irrigation systems being tested or under repair.
(v) Charity carwashes are allowed on any day at any time with a handheld hose equipped with a pistol grip nozzle or other
device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being used.
(vi) The washing of automobiles, trucks, motorbikes, boats, trailers, airplanes and other vehicles is allowed on any day and
can be done at any time of day. The washing shall be done with a handheld bucket or handheld hose equipped with a pistol
grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being used.
(vii) Splash pads and other commercial recreational water devices are allowed to operate during this stage.
(viii) A person may not use commercially operated cosmetic power/pressure washing equipment unless it is fitted with a
spray nozzle using no more than 3.5 gallons of water per minute and employing a working trigger shutoff with a protective
weep mechanism. Equipment fitted with this technology is exempt from the watering schedule and is permitted for use at any
time of day.
(ix) Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and activities necessary to maintain public health, safety,
and welfare. Use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special conditions
and requires a meter; a variance application must be submitted with an explanation of the special conditions.
(x) Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited except on designated watering days.
Such irrigation may not take place between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. These restrictions do not apply to the
irrigation of any golf course which uses an auxiliary source.
(B) Demand management measures.
(i) The City will initiate contact with wholesale water customers to discuss water supply and/or production conditions and
the possibility of pro-rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries.
(ii) The City will request wholesale water customers to initiate mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use (e.g.,
implement stage 2 of the customer's drought contingency plan).
(iii) The City will initiate preparations for the implementation of pro-rata water curtailment of water diversions and/or
deliveries by preparing a monthly water usage allocation baseline for the wholesale customer according to the procedures
specified in section 18.08.011 of the plan.
(iv) The City will provide a report to news media with information regarding current water supply and/or production
conditions, projected water supply and demand conditions if drought conditions persist, and consumer information on water
conservation measure and practices as needed.
(3) Stage 3-Severe water shortage conditions. The goal for stage 3 of the plan is to reduce water use by 20%.
(A) Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(i) All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3 except:
a. Water customers shall be required to participate in the one-day per week watering schedule for outdoor water use
within the designated times. Outdoor water use shall only occur on the customer's designated outdoor watering day,
which shall be one day every seven days. The one-day per week watering schedule will be determined and distributed by
the City Manager.
b. Extended variances beyond 21 days will not be granted for newly installed landscape plant material.
c. Events involving the use of water such as: festivals, parties, water slides, and other activities involving the use of
water are permitted if the water being used drains to a recirculating device, or onto a pervious surface to prevent water
waste.
(B) Demand management measures. The demand management measures for stage 2 will apply.
(4) Stage 4-Emergency water supply conditions. The goal for stage 4 of the plan is to significantly reduce water use during temporary,
emergency water shortage conditions. During stage 4 all outdoor watering is prohibited.
(A) Supply management measures. The City will cease the flushing of water mains except when necessary for reasons of health or
safety. All City departments will discontinue irrigating public landscaped areas except when such areas are irrigated with auxiliary
water.
(B) Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(i) All requirements of stage 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4 except:
a. Commercial plant nurseries may use only handheld hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle or other device
that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being used or handheld buckets.
b. Water may only be served at restaurants upon request.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/526
c. Events involving the use of water such as: festivals, parties, water slides, and other activities involving the use of
water are prohibited.
d. All irrigation of landscaped areas is prohibited, including the use of drip and soaker hoses. Outdoor water use with
handheld hose is prohibited.
e. Commercial carwashing facilities may operate for health and safety purposes only.
f. Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and activities necessary to maintain public health,
safety, and welfare only.
g. All cosmetic power/pressure washing is prohibited.
h. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited.
i. Water use at events such as: festivals, parties, water slides, and other activities is prohibited.
j. A person may not operate a splash pad or other similar aesthetic or recreational use of water.
k. A person may not use or allow the use of water to test or repair a permanently installed irrigation system or drip
irrigation system.
l. The use of ornamental fountains is prohibited unless the water is necessary to support aquatic life.
m. Filling of all new and existing swimming pools, hot tubs, wading pools, is prohibited. Replenishing to maintenance
level is permitted. Draining is permitted only onto pervious surfaces or onto a surface where water will be transmitted
directly to a pervious surface, and only if:
1. Draining excess water from pool due to rain in order to lower water to maintenance level;
2. Repairing, maintaining or replacing pool components that have become hazardous; or
3. Repair of a pool leak.
A. Single-family and commercial pools. The automatic filling, refilling, or adding of potable water to
single- family and commercial residential swimming or wading pools and hot tubs due to a leak is prohibited.
Single-family residential swimming or wading pools and hot tubs may be refilled manually on the designated
watering day before 8:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m., or may be refilled using an auxiliary source with no
restriction.
B. Public pools. Refilling of public swimming pools as needed due to a leak is permitted on the designated
watering day before 8:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m., or may be refilled using an auxiliary source with no
restriction.
(C) Demand management measures. The demand management measures for stage 3 will apply.
(i) The City Manager will contact wholesale water customers to discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and will
request that wholesale water customers initiate additional mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use (e.g.,
implement stage 3 or 4 of the customer's drought contingency plan).
(ii) The City Manager will initiate pro-rata water curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries for each wholesale
customer according to the procedures specified in section 18.08.011 of the plan.
(iii) The City Manager will provide a report to news media with information regarding current water supply and/or demand
conditions, projected water supply and demand conditions if drought conditions persist, and consumer information on water
conservation measures and practices.
(D) In the event that severe water shortage conditions persist (stage 4) for an extended period of time, the City Manager may
order water rationing and/or terminate service to selected users of the system in accordance with the following sequence:
(i) Commercial yard meters.
(ii) Commercial users.
(iii) Residential users.
(iv) Hospitals, public health and safety facilities.
(v) Additional measures. Through a contractual agreement with the Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA), the LCRA
may interrupt or curtail the water supplied to the City in accordance with the LCRA's drought management plan.
Sec. 18.08.011 Pro rata water allocation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/526
Every wholesale water contract entered into or renewed by the City after the effective date of this plan, including contract extensions, shall provide
that in case of a shortage of water resulting from drought, the water to be distributed shall be divided in accordance with Texas Water Code section
11.309 and the provisions of this plan.
Sec. 18.08.012 Variances
(a) The City Manager may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that
failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, primary business, or fire protection for
the public or the person requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition
for which the plan is in effect.
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use.
(b) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this article shall file a petition for variance with the City Manager after the plan or a
particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the City Manager and shall include the
following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s);
(2) Purpose of water use;
(3) Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief;
(4) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to
the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this plan;
(5) Description of the relief requested;
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought;
(7) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the
compliance date; and
(8) Other pertinent information.
(c) Variances granted by the City Manager shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the City Manager:
(1) Variances granted shall include a start and end date for compliance;
(2) Variance requests must be submitted no more than two (2) months prior to the requested start date, and no less than 48 hours prior to
the requested start date; and
(3) Variances granted shall expire on the date set at the time when the application was granted.
(d) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance.
(e) Additionally, variances may be granted when a customer is using efficient irrigation technology for outdoor irrigation purposes. In order to
receive this variance the requestor must have a master valve or flow sensor, the irrigation controller must have a cycle and soak capability, and will
be subject to annual random irrigation checks by the City Manager.
Sec. 18.08.013 Enforcement
(a) No person or entity shall use or benefit from the use of water from the City for any purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan,
or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the City, in accordance with
provisions of this plan.
(b) Any person or entity in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof
that the violation occurred on the person or entity's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person or entity in apparent control of
the property committed the violation, but any such person or entity shall have the right to show that he/she/it did not commit the violation. Parents
shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property
within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if
he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan and that the parent could not
have reasonably known of the violation. Each day that one or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate
violation/offense.
(c) Administrative violation. Except as otherwise stated herein, each violation of this plan may be enforced as an administrative violation, pursuant
to the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/526
Residential Customer
1st Violation 2nd Violation 3rd Violation 4th Violation
Warning letter $50.00 fee $100.00 fee $200.00 fee
Commercial Customer
1st Violation 2nd Violation 3rd Violation 4th Violation
Warning letter $200.00 fee $400.00 fee $1,000.00 fee
(1) First violation. If the City Manager or their designee reasonably believes that a person or entity has violated this plan, he/she may
forward to the person or entity alleged to be in violation of this plan a notice of first violation. The notice of first violation shall be in
writing, contain the name and address of the alleged violator (if known), provide a location and brief description of the alleged violation,
provide a warning for this first violation and inform him/her of the administrative fees and consequences for subsequent violations, and be
forwarded to the alleged violator's utility billing address via first class mail.
(2) Second (and/or subsequent) violation(s). If the City Manager or their designee reasonably believes that a person or entity has
violated this plan again within the 12- month calendar year immediately following the date of a preceding violation, he/she shall forward
to the person or entity alleged to be in violation of this plan a notice of second (or subsequent) violation. The notice of second (or
subsequent) violation shall be in writing, contain the name and address of the alleged violator (if known), provide a location and brief
description of the alleged violation, inform him/her of the administrative fee that will be added to the alleged violator's next monthly
utility bill and the administrative fees and consequences for subsequent violations, and be forwarded to the alleged violator's utility billing
address via first class mail.
(3) Each day that one or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate violation. Any person, including one
classified as a water customer of the City, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates, shall be presumed to
be the violator. Any such person, however, shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation.
(d) Appeal of administrative violation; effect on payment, hearing procedure.
(1) Any alleged violator shall be entitled to appeal an administrative violation under this article as set forth in this subsection. The
request or pendency of an appeal under this subsection shall not suspend or delay an alleged violator's obligation to pay current
outstanding utility fees and/or administrative fines assessed under this article. Upon successful appeal of an alleged administrative
violation, the City shall refund all administrative fines paid by or on behalf of an alleged violator pursuant to this article.
(2) At the alleged violator's discretion, any appeal or final review hearing hereunder this subsection may be conducted via scheduled
telephone conference involving the alleged offender, hearing officer(s), City Manager or their designee, and any testifying witnesses. Prior
to the commencement of any telephone conference under this subsection, each testifying witness' name, address, telephone number, and
relationship to the alleged violator shall be submitted to the City Manager or their designee prior to commencement of such telephone
conference, along with any documentary or physical evidence to be presented in such telephone conference. No unidentified witness or
unsubmitted evidence shall be considered at the hearing.
(3) If the alleged violator shall fail to attend a scheduled appeal or final review hearing for any reason, it shall be the alleged violator's
responsibility to contact the City Manager or their designee to reschedule within three (3) working days of the unattended hearing; failure
to do so, or failure to attend the rescheduled hearing for any reason shall constitute a default, render final the pending administrative
violation and any assessed administrative fines, and waive the alleged violator's right to appeal.
(4) Within fifteen (15) business days of the date of a notice of violation, an alleged violator may appeal the administrative violation and
fee by submitting a written request to the City Manager or their designee. Within ten (10) business days of the City Manager's receipt of
such request, the City Manager or their designee shall appoint one or more hearing officers and an appeal hearing (“appeal hearing”) shall
be held. At the appeal hearing, the alleged violator shall present relevant evidence and bear the burden of proof to show by the majority of
the evidence why he/she should not be held in violation of the plan or the administrative fee should not be assessed. The hearing officer(s)
shall consider all relevant evidence presented and render a decision in writing within five (5) business days of the conclusion of the appeal
hearing (“appeal hearing decision”). A copy of the appeal hearing decision shall be forwarded to the alleged violator's utility billing
address via first class mail and email.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/526
(5) The alleged violator may appeal the appeal hearing decision by submitting a written request to the City Manager or their designee
within five (5) business days of forwarding the appeal hearing decision. Within five (5) business days of receipt of the alleged violator's
timely appeal of the appeal hearing decision, the City Manager or their designee shall conduct a final review hearing (“final review
hearing”). At the final review hearing, the alleged violator shall present relevant evidence and bear the burden of proof to show by the
majority of the evidence why he/she should not be held in violation of the plan or the administrative fee should not be assessed. The City
Manager or their designee shall consider all relevant evidence presented and render a decision in writing within five (5) business days of
the conclusion of the final review hearing (“final review hearing decision”). A copy of the final review hearing decision shall be
forwarded to the alleged violator's utility billing address via first class mail and email. The final review hearing decision by the City
Manager or their designee is final and binding.
(e) Notices. All notices regarding alleged administrative violations under this article, including without limitation notices of violation, appeal
hearing decisions, and final review hearing decisions, shall be in writing and forwarded to the alleged violator via first class mail and/or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the alleged violator's current billing address. All notices forwarded in such manner shall be deemed received by the
alleged violator within three (3) days of the mailing's postmark. At an appeal hearing and/or final review hearing under this article, an alleged
violator may present evidence that a required notice was not received.
(f) Class C misdemeanor. Alternatively, and at the discretion of the City Manager or their designee, third and subsequent violations within the 12-
month period from the date of the alleged violator's immediately preceding violation may be treated as class C misdemeanor offenses. Any person or
entity alleged to have violated this plan may be cited to appear in municipal court for such offense, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine
in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this Code.
(g) Termination of service. Upon a person or entity's second or subsequent violation within the 12-month period immediately following the date of
the preceding violation and upon due notice to the person or entity as set forth herein, the City shall be authorized to discontinue water service to the
premises where such violations occur. The City shall be so authorized regardless of whether such violation is being simultaneously enforced
administratively, under subsection (c), or criminally, under subsection (f). Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only
upon payment of a reconnection charge and all other costs incurred by the City in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given
to the City that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive
relief in a court of proper jurisdiction. This subsection shall not be construed to reduce, diminish, or in any manner restrict the City's right to
terminate utility service for nonpayment of fees and fines.
(Ordinance CO33-15-08-13-C1 adopted 8/13/15)
ARTICLE 18.09 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Sec. 18.09.001 Declaration of policy
It is hereby declared the policy of the city to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by:
(1) Implementing the rules for drinking water standards governing drinking water quality and reporting requirements for public water
supply systems promulgated by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) Chapter
290.44, 290.46, TAC Chapter 344.75, Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 341, Subchapter C, and the Federal Safe Drinking Water
Act, 42 U.S.C.A. 300f et seq.
(2) Establishing a cross-connection control program of uniform regulations governing the installation, testing and certification of
backflow prevention assemblies and testers.
(3) Establishing requirements to permit and control the installation, routine maintenance and inspection of backflow prevention
assemblies.
Sec. 18.09.002 Purposes
This article shall be construed so as to achieve the following objectives:
(1) To protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating, within the
customer's internal water distribution system(s) or the customer's private water system(s), such contaminants or pollutants that could
backflow into the city's public water system;
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the customer's potable water
system(s) and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and process piping systems in conjunction with the currently adopted
plumbing ordinance;
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent
the contamination or pollution of the city's potable water by requiring the certification and operational testing of all testable backflow
prevention assemblies located on a premises, and by the currently adopted plumbing ordinance; and
(4) To comply with the commissions rules and regulations for public water systems (30 TAC 290.38 through 290.49).
Sec. 18.09.003 Interpretation
This article shall be liberally interpreted to achieve the policy and purposes stated above.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/526
Sec. 18.09.004 Applicability
This article shall apply to the city's water service area and all cross-connection and installations of backflow prevention assemblies within:
(1) Any area where the city provides potable water;
(2) Areas where water is purchased from the city for the purpose of resale; and
(3) Any plumbing outside the city requiring a plumbing inspection pursuant to an interlocal agreement between the city and a political
subdivision, a water sales contract or applicable ordinance.
Sec. 18.09.005 Rulemaking
The director is hereby authorized to promulgate reasonable regulations to achieve the purposes of the ordinance that are not in conflict with this
article, the currently adopted plumbing ordinance or code, the city charter, the laws of the State of Texas, Texas Health and Safety Code, 341.031 et
seq., as amended, and the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C.A. 300f et seq., as amended.
Sec. 18.09.006 Definitions
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or
term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its definition may be shown in the plumbing code found in section 3.01.001(c) of
chapter 3 of the city's Code of Ordinance. Other technical terms used shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the latest edition of the Manual
of Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California.
Air gap separation or AG. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline or faucet and an open or
non-pressure receiving vessel. An “approved air gap separation” shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the
overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device, and shall not be less than one (1) inch in any case. An air gap shall be used to protect
against backpressure or, backsiphonage of a health or nonhealth hazard.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or AVB. A nontestable assembly consisting of an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air
inlet port(s). A shutoff valve immediately upstream may be an integral part of the assembly. The AVB is designed to allow air to enter the
downstream waterline to prevent backsiphonge. This unit may never be subjected to a backpressure condition or have a downstream shutoff valve, or
be installed where it will be in continuous operation for more than 12 hours. The AVB may only be used to protect against backsiphonage from a
health or nonhealth hazard.
Auxiliary water supply. A water supply on or available to the premises from a source other than the city's public water system. These auxiliary waters
may include water from another water purveyor's public water system or any natural source(s), such as, but not limited to, a well, spring, river,
stream, lake, used waters, industrial fluids or other water source over which the city does not have sanitary control.
Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of
the city's public water system from any source(s).
Backflow prevention assembly. An aggregation of devices designed to prevent backflow into the potable water system, including but not limited to
types such as the following: reduced pressure zone backflow prevention assembly (RPZ), double-check valve backflow prevention assembly (DCV),
pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly (PVB), spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly (SRVB),
atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly (AVB) or an air gap separation (AG).
Backflow prevention assembly tester. A tester certified in writing by the commission as capable and licensed to test, repair and certify in writing the
operational status of a backflow prevention assembly. Testers classification shall be general tester or fireline tester. Only a fireline tester shall test and
repair an assembly on a fireline.
Backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report (BPAT&MR). A city approved form completed by a registered certified backflow
prevention assembly tester that documents the operational condition of a testable backflow prevention assembly. Any form that varies from the
format specified in 30 TAC Chapter 290 Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems Appendix F, or amended, must be approved by the
commission and the director prior to being placed in use.
Backpressure. Hydraulic or atmospheric pressure higher than the supply pressure caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, air/stream pressure, or any
other means, which may cause backflow into a public or private water system.
Backsiphonage. A type of backflow caused by a reduction in hydraulic system pressure that causes a negative or sub-atmospheric pressure to exist at
a site in any water system.
Commission. The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) or its successor agency.
Containment. The installation of the appropriate type or method of backflow prevention protection at the service connection.
Contaminant. Any used water, industrial fluid, foreign material, solid, liquid or gas, not common to the potable water supply that may cause the
water to be poisonous for human or animal consumption or impair the usefulness of the water.
Contamination. An impairment of the quality of any public or private potable water supply by the introduction or admission of any foreign substance
that degrades the quality to impair the usefulness and/or which creates an actual health hazard to the public health through poisoning or though the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/526
spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, or wastes.
Cross-connection. An actual or potential connection or structural arrangement including, but not limited to, bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removal sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent devices to a public or private water system through
which it is possible to introduce a contaminate, pollutant or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied.
Customer. The person, company, entity, governmental entity or political subdivision contracting to receive potable water service from the city or a
water purveyor.
Customer potable water system. That portion of the privately owned potable water system lying between the service connection and the point of use.
This system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, store or utilize the
potable water.
Customer service inspection. A detailed inspection of a location and disposition of the water lines, including without limitation, establishing water
lines on the premises, the existence of cross-connections, the availability of auxiliary or used water supplies, the use of or availability of pollutants,
contaminants and other liquid, solid or gaseous substances which may be used for stabilization of water supplies, and such other processes necessary
to determine degree of hazard. Inspection may include review of records required by this article. This inspection can only be conducted by:
(1) Plumbing inspectors;
(2) A master or journeyman plumber who holds a water supply protection specialist endorsement issued by the Texas State Board of
Plumbing Examiners.
(3) Other persons as approved by the commission, Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners and the director.
Degree of hazard. The type of classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross-connections.
(1) Health hazard. The classification assigned to a customer who has an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could
allow a substance that may cause illness or death, spread disease, or has a high probability of causing such effects, to backflow into the
city's public water system.
(2) Nonhealth hazard. The classification assigned to a customer who has an actual or potential cross-connection that could allow a
substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to health to backflow into the city's public water system.
(3) Zero hazard. The classification assigned to a customer who has an extremely low possibility of any backflow condition occurring
into the city's public water system.
Director. The director of the Public Works Department for the city, or the director's authorized representative or designee. The director is vested with
the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of
this section.
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or DCV. A testable assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves,
including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test
cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against backsiphonage or backpressure from a nonhealth hazard (i.e. pollutant).
Fire line tester. A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester who is certified by the commission and employed by an approved fireline
contractor with the state fire marshal's office.
General tester. A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester who is certified by the commission to test a backflow prevention assembly on any
domestic, commercial, industrial, or irrigation service except firelines.
Isolation. The installation of the appropriate type or method of backflow prevention protection within the customer's potable water system at the
point at which the actual or potential cross-connection exists.
Mobile unit. Any operation that may have the potential to introduce pollutants or contaminants into a potable water system from a mobile source.
These include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash
operations and pest-control vehicles.
Non-potable water. Water that does not comply with the rules of the commission for human consumption and other domestic use.
Person. A customer, individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association, firm, club, utility district, tester and other legal entity, but does not include the city.
Plumbing inspector. Any person employed by the city for the purpose of inspecting plumbing work and installations in connection with health and
safety laws and ordinances, who has no financial or advisory interest in any plumbing company, and who has successfully fulfilled the examinations
and requirements of the Texas Sate Board of Plumbing Examiners, or as amended.
Plumbing ordinance. The city's adopted and approved plumbing code, as may be amended.
Pollutant. Any foreign material, solid, liquid, or gas, not common to the potable water supply that makes or may make the water aesthetically
undesirable for human or animal consumption.
Pollution. An impairment of the quality of the city's potable water supply to a degree that does not create a health hazard to the public health but does
create a nonhealth hazard that adversely and unreasonably affects the aesthetic quality of such potable water for domestic use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/526
Potable water. Water that complies with the rules of the commission for human consumption and other domestic uses.
Premise. Any piece of property to which potable water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on the
property.
Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or PVB. A testable assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check
valve and an independently operation loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be equipped with
properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly shall
only be used to protect against backsiphonage from a health or nonhealth hazard.
Private plumbing system. The plumbing located between the service connection and the point of use including pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles,
fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, recycle, store, or use potable water on a customer's premises.
Public water system. Any publicly or privately owned water system operated as a public utility under the commission's rules and regulations to
supply water for domestic purpose. This system will include sources, facilities and appurtenances between the source and the point of delivery such
as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, treat or store potable water for
public consumption or use.
Reduced pressure zone backflow prevention assembly or RPZ. A testable assembly consisting of two independently acting approved check valves
together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the
first check valve. These units are located between two tightly closing resilient-seating shutoff valves and are fitted with properly located resilient
seated test cocks. This assembly can be used to protect against backsiphonage or backpressure of a health or nonhealth hazard.
Service connection. The point of connection between the city's public water system and the customer's private water system where the water
purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection
shall mean the downstream end of the meter.
Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or SVB. A testable assembly containing an independently operating, internally
loaded check valve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be
equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock, a properly located bleed/vent valve, and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves
attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly shall only be used to protect against backsiphonage for a health or nonhealth hazard.
Thermal expansion. Heated water that does not have the space to expand.
Used water. Water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water system to a customer's water system that has passed through the service
connection and is no longer controlled by the water purveyor. Used water shall not be returned to the city's public water system.
Water purveyor. A private owner, political subdivision, or other operator of a potable water system that supplies a minimum of fifteen (15) service
connections or serves a minimum of twenty-five (25) individuals for at least sixty (60) days during a calendar year.
Water supply protection specialist. Any person who holds a license endorsement issued by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners to engage
in the inspection, in connection with health and safety laws and ordinances of the plumbing work or installation of a public water system distribution
facility or of customer owned plumbing connected to that system's water distribution lines.
Sec. 18.09.007 Cross-connection prohibited
A person shall not:
(1) Install a potable water supply, piping, or part thereof shall be made in such a manner that allows contaminated, used or polluted
water, mixtures, or gases, or other substances to enter potable water by backsiphonage or backpressure.
(2) Connect to the city's public water system an auxiliary water supply, water operated equipment or mechanism, or water treating
chemical or substance that may cause pollution or contamination of the public potable water supply unless the equipment or mechanism is
equipped with an approved backflow prevention assembly installed in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(3) Bypass an approved backflow prevention assembly.
(4) Connect to the city's public water system a mechanism, equipment, or system designed to return used water to the city's public
water system.
(5) Connect to the city's public water system an auxiliary water supply system except as allowed by the currently adopted plumbing
code, as may be amended and the commission and director give written approval.
(6) Connect a reclaimed water system to the city's public water system or to a private plumbing system of the customer who receives
water service from the city's public water system.
Sec. 18.09.008 Determination of type of cross-connection control
(a) The city shall have the authority to conduct a customer service inspection at any premise:
(1) Prior to providing water service to new construction;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/526
(2) On any existing service connected to the potable water supply as necessary to determine compliance with this article;
(3) After any material improvement, correction or addition to private plumbing facilities has occurred.
(b) The type of specific potential hazard and backflow prevention assembly required shall be determined by:
(1) 30 TAC Chapter 290.47(i) Appendix I, as may be amended.
(2) 30 TAC Chapter 344.75, Landscape Irrigators, as maybe amended.
(3) By the city's:
(A) Cross-connection program; and
(B) City's plumbing ordinance.
(c) Other sources used to determine hazard classification may be:
(1) Manual of Cross-Connection Control from the University of Southern California's Foundation for Cross-Control and Hydraulic
Research.
(2) American Water Works Association.
(3) American Backflow Prevention Association.
(4) A customer's potential probability and compliance history for cross-connection.
(Ordinance CO-02-01-24-7.B. adopted 1/24/02)
Sec. 18.09.009 Determination of location of cross-connection control
(a) Any customer where an actual or potential hazard exists shall be required to install containment cross-connection control at the service
connection in the form of a backflow prevention assembly approved for the applicable degree of hazard. A customer may be allowed to install
isolation cross-connection control in locations other than the service connection if in compliance with the currently adopted plumbing ordinance and
such installation locations are approved by the director.
(b) Isolation cross-connection control for a health hazard shall require annual inspection and testing for each backflow prevention assembly.
(Ordinance CO22-02-04-25-9.A. adopted 4/25/02)
Sec. 18.09.010 Customer installation and maintenance responsibilities
(a) A customer shall install a new, replacement, or reconditioned backflow prevention assembly in a private plumbing system, fire protection
system, process water system, irrigation system, or other private water distribution system connected to the city's public water system in accordance
with the city's plumbing ordinance. The assembly shall be:
(1) Designed, manufactured, and tested in accordance with the standards adopted by the American Water Works Association.
(2) Tested and listed as an approved backflow prevention assembly by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research; and
(3) Installed in compliance with the manufacturers and industry approved standards.
(b) A customer shall obtain a plumbing permit prior to new installation, replacement or reconditioning a backflow prevention assembly.
(c) The customer is responsible for:
(1) Replacing a backflow prevention assembly that:
(A) Does not comply with this article and the city's plumbing ordinance;
(B) Is removed, relocated or substituted without the approval of the director;
(C) Requires more than minimum maintenance; or
(D) Does not meet the minimum “Degree of Hazard” protection.
(2) Installing and/or testing of a backflow prevention assembly at a schedule determined by the director after the customer has received
notification.
(3) General maintenance and upkeep of a backflow prevention assembly.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/526
(4) Installation of a backflow prevention assembly in a location where the assembly is safely accessible for visual inspection, testing
and maintenance.
(5) Paying the cost associated with the installation, maintenance, testing, upkeep, and replacement of any approved backflow
prevention assembly.
(d) Where an owner of property leases or rents the same to any person, tenant, or lessee, the owner or tenant or both may be held financially
responsible for any of the requirements of this article.
Sec. 18.09.011 Customer's inspection, testing and reporting duties
(a) It shall be the duty of the customer at any premise to have a certified inspection and operational test conducted:
(1) As required by 30 TAC Chapter 290.44(h)(4), as amended.
(2) Upon installation of a backflow prevention assembly.
(3) At a minimum, on an annual basis, where a testable “health hazard” backflow prevention assembly is installed.
(4) Upon re-certification of any backflow prevention assembly deemed necessary by the director.
(b) A customer shall have any approved backflow prevention assembly tested for operation by a city registered accredited backflow prevention
assembly tester.
(c) A customer shall repair, overhaul, or replace any assembly that fails a test.
(d) A customer shall submit to the city the completed original backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report form for any approved
backflow prevention assembly to be installed and/or tested as required in subsection (a)(1-4) above.
(1) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any new connection requiring a testable backflow prevention assembly. Written
documentation of an approved air gap separation can be substituted where applicable.
(2) Prior to distribution of a fire hydrant meter with an approved backflow prevention assembly attached.
(3) Within ten (10) days of having approved backflow prevention assembly installed.
(e) A customer shall keep records of tests, repairs, and overhauls and make the records available to the director within ten (10) days of installation,
test, repair, or overhaul of a backflow prevention assembly.
Sec. 18.09.012 Mobile unit requirements
A person operating a mobile unit for the purpose of obtaining water from a city's public potable water system connection shall:
(1) Permanently install an approved backflow prevention assembly on the mobile unit, fire hydrant or other connection to the city's
public water system.
(2) Register the mobile unit with the city, if required.
Sec. 18.09.013 Special hazards
(a) A customer who connects to the city's public water system the one of the following systems which adds chemicals or additives shall install a
RPZ:
(1) Automatic fire protection system.
(2) Standpipe system.
(3) Privately owned or maintained fire hydrant(s).
(b) A customer who connects to the city's public water system from a fire hydrant for use at a construction site and has the actual or potential to be
a “health hazard” shall install a RPZ after the fire hydrant meter.
(c) A customer who has reuse or auxiliary water available on site shall install a RPZ at each potable water service connection.
(d) A customer who purchases water for the purpose of resale or distribution shall:
(1) Install appropriate cross-connection protection for a “health hazard” at the service connection or location where the city no longer
has jurisdiction; or
(2) Implement a plumbing inspection and cross-connection control program which is not less restrictive than that of the city and have
the program approved by the director; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/526
(3) Provide annual program records to the director for review and audit.
(e) Any premises owned, operated, or occupied by a state, federal, county, city, school district or foreign government or agency refusing to comply
with the provisions of this article shall install a RPZ at each service connection and comply with all other applicable sections of this article.
(f) The director may require a secondary backflow prevention assembly, if deemed necessary to protect the city's public water supply from the
failure of or allow testing and maintenance of a primary backflow prevention assembly.
(Ordinance CO-02-01-24-7.B. adopted 1/24/02)
(g) A customer who connects to the city's public water system a fire protection system and/or private fire hydrant shall be required to install an
applicable backflow prevention assembly which shall be located as near as possible to the customer's side of the property line and outside the public
utility easement. (Ordinance CO22-02-04-25-9.A. adopted 4/25/02)
Sec. 18.09.014 Cross-connection survey
(a) The director shall conduct a cross-connection survey of the customer's potable water system before providing service to prevent actual or
potential cross-connections between the customer's potable water system and sources of contamination or pollution.
(b) The director shall review:
(1) The location of buildings and water lines, for potential cross-connection;
(2) The availability of auxiliary or used water sources or supplies;
(3) The use of pollutants, contaminants and other liquids, solid, or gaseous substances used for stabilization of water supplies;
(4) Backflow prevention assembly installation; and
(5) Backflow prevention assembly operational certification and test records.
(c) The director shall require the elimination any actual or potential cross-connections between the customer's potable water system and the city's
public potable water supply as provided in section 18.09.024 - 18.09.030 of this article.
Sec. 18.09.015 Thermal expansion
It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property subject to this article to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed
system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly.
Sec. 18.09.016 Pressure loss
Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the city.
Sec. 18.09.017 Residential service connections
Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross-connection will be required
to eliminate the actual or potential cross-connection or have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this article.
Sec. 18.09.018 Recognized backflow prevention assembly tester
(a) An applicant may apply to the director for registration as a recognized backflow prevention assembly technician. The director shall determine
whether an applicant is eligible for registration.
(b) Registration shall be approved upon submittal of:
(1) Completed backflow prevention assembly tester application.
(2) Model and serial number of test gauge(s).
(3) Annual calibration results for test gauge(s).
(4) Current commission certification.
Sec. 18.09.019 Requirements for maintaining active tester registration
(a) For each registered gauge, a tester shall:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/526
(1) Annually test for accuracy.
(2) Calibrate to the manufacture's accuracy factor.
(3) Submit the annual calibration results to the city.
(b) A registered tester shall also:
(1) Perform competent and accurate certification of all backflow prevention assemblies tested with a registered test gauge.
(2) Submit a signed, dated and complete BPAT & MR Form:
(A) Original copy to the director for record keeping purposes.
(B) Copy to customer.
(C) Copy to tester.
(c) Pay any applicable fees.
Sec. 18.09.020 Quality control
The city may take the following quality control measures relating to a registered tester:
(a) Retest a certified backflow prevention assembly; and
(b) Notify the registered tester who has certified a backflow prevention assembly of test discrepancies.
Sec. 18.09.021 Revocation
(a) The director may revoke a tester's registration for:
(1) Failure to register the serial number or calibrate gauges annually;
(2) False, incomplete, or inaccurate reporting of test completion or operational certification of a backflow prevention assembly;
(3) Use of inaccurate gauges;
(4) Improper operational certification methods;
(5) Submittal of incomplete backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report forms; or
(6) Failure to pay any applicable fees or penalties.
(b) A registration remains in effect unless:
(1) The tester fails to maintain eligibility for registration; or
(2) The director revokes the registration.
(c) A tester must re-establish eligibility if the tester's commission certification expires.
Sec. 18.09.022 Design changes
(a) A certified tester may not change the design or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly during repair or maintenance
unless the director approves the change.
(b) A certified tester shall report to the director any identified unprotected cross-connections or bypasses at a customer's premise.
Sec. 18.09.023 Fees
The city may authorize the collection of fees related to the following:
(1) Approved backflow prevention assemblies.
(A) Installation.
(B) Operational test report submittal.
(2) Registration.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/526
(A) Approved backflow prevention assembly testers.
(B) Approved mobile units, if required.
(3) City provided.
(A) Customer surveys.
(B) Backflow prevention assembly retest.
Sec. 18.09.024 Enforcement authority
(a) The director and the City Attorney, and each of them, are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article by any one or more of the
enforcement mechanisms set forth in this article.
(b) Inspection and enforcement is a governmental function. The inspectors, agents or representatives of the city charged with enforcement of this
article shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public and neither the city, the director nor the
individual inspector, agent, or representative of the city engaged in inspection or enforcement activities under this article when acting in good faith
and without malice shall never be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been caused as a result of the
performance of such governmental function.
Sec. 18.09.025 Right of entry
(a) As a condition of the city providing water service, directly or indirectly, to property, whether within or outside the city limits, and as a condition
of connection to or continued service from the public potable water system by customers under the conditions hereinafter set forth, any authorized
officer or employee of the city may enter, inspect, monitor or conduct enforcement activities with respect to any part of the public or private potable
water system servicing such premises, and shall have a right to enter without delay, to, upon, or through any premises to gain access to a potential
cross-connection, backflow prevention assembly or piping.
(b) A city employee may inspect a customer's potable water system, piping, or the records required under this article or the rules of a governmental
entity with which the city has in interlocal agreement for wholesale water services. The right of entry extends to public streets, easements, and private
property on which public or private potable water systems are located.
(c) A customer connected to the public potable water system must remove, at the customer's sole expense and without delay, security barriers or
other obstacles to access to the customer's property or facilities.
Sec. 18.09.026 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if:
(1) The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation of this article;
(2) The person is the owner, occupant, agent, lessee, or manager of property or facilities determined to be the source of a violation of
this article; or
(3) The person obstructs or delays a city employee's access to a customer's premise, property or facilities.
(b) A person who violates any provision of this article is violating a city ordinance that governs health and sanitation and shall be guilty of a class
“C” misdemeanor for each day or portion of a day the violation continues. An offense under this article is punishable by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(c) Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for conviction of an offense under this article.
Sec. 18.09.027 Notice of violation
(a) The director may serve a written notice of violation on a person who has violated the conditions of registration as a registered backflow
prevention assembly tester, a plumbing permit, installation requirements of a backflow prevention assembly, or other requirements of this article.
(b) The written notice of violation may include:
(1) A description of the violation;
(2) Action required correcting the violation;
(3) A requirement for providing the director a written explanation of the violation and a corrective plan that includes a time frame for
specific corrective actions.
(c) Submission of a proposed corrective plan does not relieve the person of criminal or civil liability for violations of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/526
(d) The director may take other enforcement action without first issuing a notice of violation.
Sec. 18.09.028 Administrative search warrants
If the director has been refused access to a premise connected to the public potable water system and if the director has demonstrated probable cause
to believe that a violation of this article, a plumbing permit, or other order issued hereunder exists or that there is a need to inspect as part of the city's
routine inspection program designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then upon application by the director, who is designated as the code enforcement official pursuant to section
18.05, Code of Criminal Procedure, a judge of the municipal court may issue an administrative search warrant describing therein the specific location
subject to search and the property or items subject to seizure. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours in the presence of a uniformed police
officer. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, such inspection shall be made without the necessity of a warrant.
Sec. 18.09.029 Civil remedies
(a) The City Attorney is hereby authorized to enforce this article by civil court actions in accordance with the procedures provided by state or
federal law; including, without limitation, actions for injunction, damages, declaratory relief, or other remedies that the City Attorney shall deem
appropriate to pursue.
(b) If a person has received actual notice of the provisions of this article and such person has committed or continues acts in violation of this article
or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this article, the City Attorney may initiate a suit against the owner, occupant, agent, tenant,
manager or lessee of premises that are the source of a violation of this article, to recover a civil penalty, pursuant to section 54.017, Texas Local
Government Code, not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each such violation. Each day or fractional part thereof that such a violation continues
constitutes a separate violation for which civil penalties shall accrue under this article.
A suit for civil penalties hereunder shall not prevent nor be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a person in violation of this article. Such
suit may also include therein a request for such other and further relief as the City Attorney shall deem advisable including, without limitation, an
action for injunction or claim for damages to recover for expenses, loss, or damage city property occasioned by reason of such violation.
In lieu of taking other enforcement actions, the city and the person may agree to civil penalties of any amount.
(c) All remedies authorized under this article are cumulative of all others unless otherwise expressly provided. Accordingly, the filing of a criminal
action shall not preclude the pursuit of a civil or administrative action for violation of this article nor shall the filing of a civil action preclude the
pursuit of any other action or remedy, administrative or criminal.
(d) The director may discontinue water service if the owner, tenant, or lessee does not correct the violation within five (5) days.
(e) Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be liable to the city for all expenses, loss, or damage incurred by the city by reason of
such violation.
Sec. 18.09.030 Termination of service
(a) When the director believes that an emergency cross-connection condition affecting public health or safety exists, such as an approved backflow
prevention assembly not being installed or an actual cross-connection between the public and private water system, the director may immediately
discontinue water service. The temporary disconnection will continue until the cross-connection is eliminated as required by this article.
(b) The director may refuse or discontinue water service if a backflow prevention assembly is not installed, certified for operation, repaired or
replaced as required by this article.
(c) The director may require submission of the original copy to the city of a backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report form before
the final release of the issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(d) The director may terminate service to a customer who does not pay a retesting charge by the due date.
(e) Reasonable advance notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided to the customer prior to termination of water service if it is not an
emergency. If it is an emergency, notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided to the customer as soon as possible after the disconnection
of such water service.
(Ordinance CO-02-01-24-7.B. adopted 1/24/02)
ARTICLE 18.10 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FRANCHISE
Sec. 18.10.001 Authorized
(a) The City Manager is hereby authorized to grant nonexclusive franchises to operate solid waste collection services in the City pursuant to the
terms of this article. The franchised companies (“franchisees”) may solicit customers anywhere in the City and may serve customers anywhere in the
City. Franchisees may, at their option, limit their operations to any parts of the City, in order to provide more efficient operation.
(b) Exclusive solid waste collection franchises may be granted by the City Council pursuant to the terms of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/526
Sec. 18.10.002 Disposal of refuse
Franchisees shall dispose of collected solid waste in compliance with all City ordinances, State laws and regulations and all Federal laws and
regulations pertaining to the disposal of trash and garbage. No trash or garbage shall be burned, except in an incinerator complying with all City
ordinances pertaining to incinerators, and complying with all applicable State and County laws and regulations and all Federal laws and regulations.
Sec. 18.10.003 Terms of franchise
(a) Franchise fees.
(1) Each franchisee providing solid waste collection service within the City shall pay the City a franchise fee as follows:
(A) For nonexclusive franchises, an amount not to exceed ten (10) percent of the gross receipts of the franchisee for services
provided by that franchisee within the City.
(B) For exclusive franchises, the amount specified in the franchise agreement with the City.
(2) Franchise fees shall be paid each quarter, not less than thirty (30) days after the end of the quarter. The City may inspect the books
of the franchise, with or without previous notice, at any time during regular business hours.
(b) The franchise shall be in full force and effect for a period not to exceed five (5) years and may be renewed thereafter by mutual agreement of
the parties.
(c) A franchise may be terminated by the City under the following circumstances:
(1) Franchisee's failure to cure any violation of this article or the granted franchise within 30 days of the City's written notice to of such
violation;
(2) Immediately, for any misrepresentation, fraud, or deceit by franchisee to the City or the franchisee's customers; or
(3) Upon 60 days written notice of the City's decision to initiate a municipal waste collection and removal service or recycling or to
grant an exclusive franchise for those services in the zoned areas for multifamily, industrial or commercial use.
Sec. 18.10.004 Unlawful to operate without franchise
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a garbage and refuse collection business in the City without first having obtained a franchise from the
City for that purpose.
Sec. 18.10.005 Refuse collection
The collection of garbage, waste, or refuse between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any area zoned residential or within three hundred (300)
feet of an area zoned residential is prohibited.
Sec. 18.10.006 Residential monthly rates and charges for residential refuse
The monthly rates and charges for refuse rendered by the City to customers either outside or within the corporate limits of the City shall reflect the
City's actual expense of providing such residential refuse collection service and are established, fixed and prescribed as stated in appendix A section
8.1000.
(Ordinance CO42-15-09-17-C1 adopted 9/17/15)
ARTICLE 18.11 WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
Sec. 18.11.001 Utility profile
(a) The city obtains its raw water supply from Lake Travis through a water supply agreement with the Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA).
The city's utility department is the managing municipal entity that owns and operates the surface water treatment facility that withdraws raw water
from Lake Travis, treats and disinfects the utility's drinking water supply, and delivers the potable water to its retail and wholesale service area
customers. In 2005, the cities of Cedar Park, Leander, and Round Rock established the Brushy Creek Regional Utility Authority (“BCRUA”) to
develop a three-phase regional water system for treatment and delivery of water from Lake Travis to their respective principal jurisdictions for the
next 50 years. The city's water utility operates as Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (“TCEQ”) Public Water Supply system 246009 and
serves the area defined by TCEQ Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (“CCN”) 10160.
(b) The service area of the city's water utility is bordered by Texas Highway 620 to the south and by the City of Leander to the north and lies to the
north and northwest of the City of Austin. The city's water utility service area extends to the east past Parmer Lane (FM 734) to Sam Bass Road and
to the west along Texas FM 1431 to its intersection with Trails End Road. The city's water utility service area covers more than 36 square miles and
served an estimated 2013 population of 84,642 customers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/526
(c) The city's utility department estimates the year 2014 water service area population at 86,820 and estimates the year 2019 water service area
population at 99,000. The city's water utility currently provides about 21,078 service connections (19,759 residential, 1,128 nonresidential, 13
wholesale, 3 reclaimed water and 1 raw water) for its estimated 83,887 water customers. The water utility supplies the following four treated
wholesale customers: Williamson-Travis County Municipal Utility District (“MUD”) No. 1 with 11 system connections, Blockhouse MUD with 1
system connection, and Indian Springs with 1 system connection. The 13 wholesale system connections account for 4,113 residential and commercial
individual connections.
(d) Water system data compiled from 2013 indicated an average daily water use of 11.58 million gallons and a peak daily demand of 20.9 million
gallons. The city's water treatment plant has a current capacity to treat 26 million gallons per day (“MGD”) of raw surface water from Lake Travis
while the BCRUA water plant has a capacity to treat 4.35 MGD. The city's water utility presently has 10.97 million gallons capacity of ground and
elevated storage tanks, operates 2 booster pump stations, and has about 324 miles of transmission and distribution system delivery lines.
(e) The city-owned and operated water reclamation facility (“WRF”) has a wastewater treatment capacity of 2.5 MGD. The city is also part of the
Brushy Creek Wastewater System which has a capacity of 3.58 MGD. The city's wastewater service area (CCN #20580) includes 18 pump stations
and about 292 miles of collection system service mains.
Sec. 18.11.002 Conservation goals
(a) The city's annual average water use over the past five years is 164.7 gpcd. The city's annual average water loss over the past five years is 14.5%
of water delivered or 24 gpcd. The city's annual average residential water use over the past five years is 104.5 gpcd. Presented below are the city's
five year and ten year goals for reducing the annual average water use and water loss.
(1) Five-year conservation goals.
(A) Reduce the average per capita day water usage by 2.5% by 2019 with a goal of achieving 160.6 gpcd. Reduce the average
residential per capita day water usage by 2.5% by 2019 with a goal of achieving 101.9 gpcd.
(B) Reduce water loss by 2.5% by 2019 so that water loss is no more than 14.2% of delivered water or 22.8 gpcd.
(2) Ten-year conservation goals.
(A) Reduce the average per capita day water usage by 2.5% between 2019 and 2024 with a goal of achieving 156.5 gpcd by 2024.
Reduce the average residential per capita day water usage by 2.5% by 2024 with a goal of achieving 99.3 gpcd.
(B) Reduce water loss by 2.5% between 2019 and 2024 so that water loss is no more than 13.8% of water delivered or 21.6 gpcd
by 2024.
(b) The continuation of an on-going public education program, a leak detection monitoring program, a universal metering program, and the
staffing of a water conservation coordinator position and other programs described below serve to ensure that the water treatment capacity and
distribution system are capable of meeting the growing potable water demands that are expected within the service area, based on the city's projected
population growth. This water conservation plan has been adopted and established by the city to meet these objectives.
Sec. 18.11.003 Best management practices
During the 80th Texas Legislative Session, SB3, HB4 and HB3 were all passed and involve state water planning and conservation. TCEQ and the
Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) jointly adopted these rules requiring the submission of a water conservation plan from public utilities that
provide service to 3,300 or more connections. These utilities must also make annual progress reports to the TWDB, describing how they are
implementing the conservation plans. Previously, TWDB-approved water conservation plans were only required from utilities making water rights
applications or receiving funding from the TWDB. The TWDB Report 362 Water Conservation Best Management Practices Guide is the reference
manual for water conservation practices discussed herein. The best management practices (BMPs) that the city currently utilizes and plans on
utilizing to meet their annual water conservation goals are as follows:
BMP Category BMP Cedar Park Program Description
Utility practices Water audit and loss
The city performs a detailed water audit
annually to track unaccounted water (ref.
section 18.11.006).
Water conservation
pricing
The city has a conservation-oriented
(inclining block) water rate schedule with
increasingly higher rates after consumption
of 2,000 gallons (ref. section 18.11.008 and
appendix A, article 8.000).
Prohibition on wasting In the city's drought contingency and water
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/526
water emergency plan (section 18.08.010), the
city prohibits wasting of water under
various drought response stages.
Metering and retrofit
Raw water is metered along with all treated
water connections. There is a program in
place to monitor and replace meters (ref.
sections 18.11.004 and 18.11.005).
Rebates and
incentive programs
Showerhead, aerator &
toilet flapper
replacement program
The city periodically offers incentive or
rebate programs such as toilet replacement
and rain barrel sales.
Public outreach Public information
Water conservation public education
inserts are provided in utility billing, direct
mailings, on the city website, pamphlets
and in newspaper articles and
advertisements (ref. section 18.11.007).
The city works with local businesses,
residents, and HOA's through individual
meetings and other events to inform them
of the city's watering schedule.
Water smart
The city is initiating the launch of the
water smart program which will provide
residents with detailed information about
their household water use and how they
can take steps to conserve water.
Outdoor programs Water reuse
In 2013 the city delivered 164 million
gallons of reclaimed water for Avery
Ranch Golf Course (ref. section
18.11.013).
Other Water conservation
coordinator
Water conservation coordinator assesses
conservation efforts, reports on an annual
basis and monitors five-year conservation
efforts (ref. sections 18.11.016 and
18.11.017).
Sec. 18.11.004 Source supply metering devices
The city meters Lake Travis raw water withdrawals from the LCRA through two (2) meters. These meters are calibrated and tested annually to an
accuracy of plus or minus two percent (2%). The BCRUA has one (1) meter.
Sec. 18.11.005 Universal metering and meter maintenance
(a) All water customers of the city water utility, including city offices and public facilities are metered. The city has installed remote metering
throughout the service area.
(b) Meter replacement and maintenance program. Every residential meter shall be changed out approximately every ten years. Every meter that
will be changed out is tested and, if possible, rebuilt. The city is equipped with a meter test bench where all meters two inches (2") and smaller are
tested before being put into service. Meters are tested to ensure they meet the American Water Works Association (AWWA) criteria for accuracy.
Meters two inches (2") and larger are scheduled to be tested once per year. At any time, a customer may request their meter to be tested. Guidelines
for such requests are established in article 18.01, water rates, charges, and service regulations, of this code.
Sec. 18.11.006 Control measures for unaccounted water
The city performs annual water system audits to track unaccounted for water using the following monthly data: billing data (gallons sold), treated
water data (gallons pumped), number of repaired leaks (and estimated gallons lost through leakage), and estimated gallons used for line flushing and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/526
fire hydrant testing. Additionally, the city performs a detailed water system audit annually as required by the Texas Water Development Board.
Sec. 18.11.007 Public education
(a) Education materials. The city will make available water conservation education materials for its customers on an on-going basis. Such
information shall be provided to customers through various mediums including but not limited to: utility bill inserts, pamphlets provided at public
facilities, direct mailings, school presentations, and periodic articles published in a local newspaper. When appropriate, the city shall also coordinate
education efforts with local water suppliers, agencies, and regulators to promote water conservation education. The city has also recently partnered
with the water smart program to provide residents with detailed information regarding their household water use.
(b) New customers. Water conservation information will be available to new water customers when applying for service. This information is made
available at City Hall and at other designated public buildings.
Sec. 18.11.008 Water rate structure
(a) The city's water rate charges and service regulations are contained in article 18.01, water rates, charges, and service regulations. The inclined
user rate structure is contained in appendix A, article 8.000, utility related fees. The residential user rate in place is a minimum monthly base rate for
the first two thousand (2,000) gallons used. After residential consumption of the first 2,000 gallons per month, an inclined rate is applied for each of
the following volumetric categories: 2,001 gallons to 10,000 gallons, 10,001 gallons to 15,000 gallons and greater than 15,000 gallons. The
nonresidential user rate is a minimum base rate based on meter size for the first 2,000 gallons used. After nonresidential consumption of 2,000
gallons, the rate is based on a charge per each additional thousand (1,000) gallons. This rate structure is conservation-oriented as it charges a
nominally higher water rate following a customer's consumption of the first 2,000 gallons.
(b) Service regulations that address the conservation of water include the following:
(1) Requirements that there be no free service.
(2) All city departments that use water service pay the same user rates set out in the ordinance.
(3) All usage through city fire hydrants shall be authorized by the city and that usage shall be charged for at a metered rate.
Sec. 18.11.009 Leak detection/repair program
The city investigates all reported leaks, performs periodic visual inspections, and schedules leak detection surveys of the water distribution lines.
Reports are prepared and incorporated into the annual system audits; see section 18.11.006 of this article. Work orders are generated and prioritized
by this program.
Sec. 18.11.010 Record management system
(a) The city administers a comprehensive record management system that accounts for its water use characteristics. The record management
system is maintained by the city's water utility and is configured to provide the following water use information:
(1) Water diversions;
(2) Water production;
(3) Water deliveries;
(4) Water sales; and
(5) Water losses.
(b) The city's record management system further allows for the separation of aggregate water sales and water usage characteristics into four
customer-specific categories that include:
(1) Residential (single-family);
(2) Residential (multifamily);
(3) Commercial; and
(4) Other (wholesale).
(c) The cities record management even further allows for the tracking and quantification of water conservation. The following water conservation
programs are tracked or proposed for tracking:
(1) Water audits;
(2) Metering of new connections and retrofit and replacement of existing connections;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/526
(4) Annual water conservation reporting by water conservation coordinator.
(d) The record management system will serve as the accounting and records repository for the city's water utility.
Sec. 18.11.011 Water wholesale agreements
This plan shall require that any future or amended wholesale water supply contract that the water utility negotiates with a wholesale customer shall
contain a “pass-through” clause that requires direct compliance with article 18.08, drought contingency and water emergency plan. In turn, should a
wholesale customer sell water to another wholesale water entity, then the article 18.08 rules will convey to any additional water utilities and their
customers that are served, directly or indirectly, by the water utility.
Sec. 18.11.012 Retrofit/replacement program
The city shall continue to encourage the retrofit or replacement of water efficient plumbing fixtures with the following programs:
(1) Providing water saving devices such as faucet aerators and shower heads to water customers at a discounted price.
(2) Encouraging the use of water efficient devices through the availability of public education materials (see section 18.11.007 of this
article).
Sec. 18.11.013 Water reuse program
(a) The city's water reclamation facility (“WRF”) currently provides treated effluent, up to 1.0 million gallons per day (“MGD”), for the irrigation
of the Avery Ranch Golf Course. In 2012, the city completed two projects that use treated effluent and reclaimed water, in place of treated potable
water, for irrigation.
(b) With the expansion of the city's field operations center, an irrigation system was installed that uses reclaimed water for the irrigation of
surrounding landscape and turf grass, which averages about 60,000 gallons per month. The city also installed an irrigation system that uses treated
effluent for irrigation water at one of the city's largest parks, Brushy Creek Sports Park. This water is used to irrigate all of the athletic fields and
other landscaping at the park and averages about 1.3 million gallons per month.
(c) The city will continue to look for ways to replace treated potable water with reclaimed water for irrigation purposes. As part of a 2014 utility
capital improvement project, the city is installing a pipeline that will be able to deliver reclaimed water for irrigation to other parks and landscaped
areas within the city.
Sec. 18.11.014 Drought resistant landscape (xeriscape) program
The city shall encourage customers to utilize drought resistant landscaping techniques through education materials and landscape examples made
available to the public (see section 18.11.007 of this article). The city provides program examples and guidance by maintaining the drought resistant
plant demonstration garden at City Hall, by encouraging the use of drought resistant landscaping principals in the city's landscape and tree
regulations (chapter 15 of this code), by encouraging the use of drought tolerant landscaping principals at all city public facilities, and by providing
public information on efficient irrigation methods.
Sec. 18.11.015 Reservoir systems operations program
The city obtains its raw water from Lake Travis through a withdrawal contract with LCRA. The city uses floating dock pump stations that are able to
withdraw surface water at various stage elevations as the lake's conservation pool varies in response to flooding and drought conditions. The city,
along with the BCRUA, is in the planning stages of a project that will allow for it to be prepared to establish a deeper stage intake than is currently
capable that would provide it the ability to withdraw raw water at a lake elevation of about 570 feet (above mean sea level). Such action would
provide the city with the ability to secure reservoir withdrawals based upon a lake elevation that is set to the historical extreme conditions caused by
the 1950's drought of record. This additional component to the city's reservoir operations plan should allow the water utility to provide a reliable,
long-term, raw water supply to the city even during the most serious drought conditions.
Sec. 18.11.016 Water conservation coordinator
The city has budgeted and staffed a water conservation coordinator position that is responsible for implementing and maintaining the city's water
conservation program since the late 1990's. The city's water conservation coordinator is an individual who is designated to oversee and coordinate
water conservation efforts within the water utility's service area. This position will further document the annual water conservation program
implementation status report as it relates to the 30 TAC section 288 reporting requirements that indicate the performance of adopted best
management practices (BMPs) described by this plan.
Sec. 18.11.017 Conservation assessment and proposed five-year efforts
Conservation efforts will be monitored and assessed annually over the next five years. The city is evaluating the following water conservation
strategies and will implement additional water conservation programs by year 2019.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/526
BMP Category BMP Cedar Park Program Description
Rebates and
incentive programs
Toilet replacement
program
The city will evaluate rebates for
installation of low flush toilets for homes
built prior to 1992.
Public outreach School education
The city will evaluate making water
conservation presentations to school age
children.
Water IQ
The city will evaluate growing its water IQ
public awareness campaign through multimedia
approaches.
Outdoor programs
Landscape irrigation
conservation and
incentives
The city will evaluate offering free irrigation
audits to residential and commercial customers
and offering incentives for water-saving
equipment upgrades such as rebates on new
controllers, pressure-reducing valves and rain
shut-off devices. The city is also revising our
landscape ordinance to emphasize the use of
more drought tolerant landscaping.
Irrigation system
analysis
The city will evaluate requiring annual
submittal of an annual irrigation system
analysis for major irrigators and major water
users.
Rain barrels
The city will evaluate selling water
conservation rain barrels to the public and
marketing them in pamphlets and mailers.
(Ordinance CO56-14-07-10-C1 adopted 7/10/14)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE 1.000 ANIMAL CONTROL RELATED FEES
Sec. 1.100 Registration fees
(a) Registration fees.
(1) Annual:
(A) Altered: $5.00.
(B) Unaltered: $10.00.
(2) Triennial:
(A) Altered: $15.00.
(B) Unaltered: $30.00.
(3) Penalty: $1.00 for each month owner fails to pay registration fee, in addition to any fine and court costs for a class C misdemeanor
violation as provided by section 2.01.003(f) of this chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/526
(4) Dangerous dog or cat:
(A) Annual: $50.00.
(B) New registration: $25.00.
Code reference–Chapter 2, Article 2.09, Section 2.09.007
(b) Duplicate registration tags: $1.00/tag.
(Ordinance CO20-11-12-22-C1 adopted 12/22/11)
Sec. 1.200 Impoundment fees
The animal control officer shall charge a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each animal impounded.
Sec. 1.300 Boarding fees
The owner of any animal impounded shall be charged a boarding fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each day the animal is impounded.
Sec. 1.400 Rabies fees
The owner of any animal impounded shall be charged a rabies deposit of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if said animal is not currently vaccinated.
(Ordinance CO-01-12-20-7.C. adopted 12/20/01)
ARTICLE 2.000 DEVELOPMENT SERVICE RELATED FEES
Sec. 2.100 General requirements
(a) Applicable utility related fees including community impact, tap and deposit fees must be paid prior to issuance of a building permit. Refer
therein to Article 8.000 herein for fee information. Please allow seven (7) calendar days (excluding holidays) for processing of utility service
applications.
(b) Building inspection fees are paid at time of issuance of permit with exception of application fee and professional recovery fee which are paid
at time of application submittal.
(c) Public works and planning fees are paid at time of application submittal with exception of subdivision construction inspection review which is
paid prior to approval of plans and some miscellaneous fees.
(d) Any unpaid or uncollected fees required herein shall be paid prior to city issuance of any final inspections or certificates of occupancy or
acceptance of any subdivision improvements by the city.
(e) All costs incurred by the city in lawfully abating or authorizing abatement of conditions which are a hazard to public safety, health or welfare
for properties requesting permits or approvals for development shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits or accepting applications for
subdivision platting or other development approvals.
(f) Unless otherwise provided for in this code of ordinances, fees shall be collected in the amounts provided for in the schedule contained in this
section. Any reference to fees contained in any code adopted by reference in this code or contained in any chapter of this code shall be superceded by
the following fee schedule. All fees provided for in this section shall be non-refundable.
Sec. 2.200 Building inspection fees
(a) Building permits.
(1) Residential .
(A) Application (for new construction) $100 - Credit applied to
building permit fee upon
issuance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/526
(B) New construction $.10 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area
including porches and patios,
minimum $25
(C) Remodel $50
(D) Penalty $100 per day of occupancy
prior to obtaining building
final
(2) Commercial.
(A) Professional recovery fee $200
(B) Application (for new construction) $200 - Credit applied to
building permit fee upon
issuance.
(C) New construction $.10 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area,
minimum $35
(D) Remodel $50
(E) Lease space finish outs $.10 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area,
minimum $35
(F) Shell building $.10 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area,
minimum $35
(G) Foundation only $100 for up to 2,500 sq. ft.
plus $0.04/sq. ft. for over
2,500 sq. ft.
(H) Penalty $100 per day of occupancy
prior to obtaining building
final
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/526
(b) Plumbing permits.
(1) Residential.
(A) New construction $.10 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area,
minimum $25
(B) Remodel $50
(C) Water heater install/changeout $25
(D) Water softener installations $25
(2) Commercial.
(A) New construction $.10 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area,
minimum $35
(B) Remodel $50
(C) Lease space finish outs $.05 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area,
minimum $35
(D) Shell building $0.05 per lin. ft. (excluding
fire sprinkler system lines)
(E) Foundation only $100 for up to 2,500 sq. ft.
plus $0.04/sq. ft. for over
2,500 sq. ft.
(F) Outside utility lines (water, fire line
and sewer)
$.10 per lin. ft. for all lines
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/526
(c) Electrical permits.
(1) Residential.
(A) New construction $.10 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area
including porches and patios,
minimum $25
(B) Remodel $50
(2) Commercial.
(A) New construction $.15 per sq. ft.
(B) Remodel $50
(C) Lease space finish out $.05 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area,
minimum $35
(D) Shell building $.10 per sq. ft. for total
foundation/floor area,
minimum $35
(E) Foundation only $100 for up to 2,500 sq. ft.
plus $0.04/sq. ft. for over
2,500 sq. ft.
(3) Temporary meter loops/electrical service
upgrade.
(A) Residential $25 for up to 100 amp, $40
for over 100 amp
(B) Commercial $50 for up to 200 amp, $100
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/526
for over 200 amp
(Ordinance CO08-03-03-27-13A adopted 3/27/03)
(C) Plan review service third party review Not to exceed ICC plan
review rate. Paid directly to
plan review service (plus
$100 base fee)
(Ordinance CO09-06-02-09-3D adopted 2/9/06)
(d) Mechanical permits.
(1) Residential.
(A) New construction $100 per living unit plus $25
per floor above 1st floor.
(B) Remodel $50
(C) HVAC changeout/addition $25
(2) Commercial.
(A) New construction $100 for 1st 2,500 sq. ft.,
$75/ea add'l 2,500 sq. ft.
(B) Remodel $50
(C) Coolers/Freezers $25
(e) Sign permits (new/temp).
(1) New and temporary $2.00 per sq. ft., $50.00
minimum
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/526
(2) Advertising search light $100
(f) Building plan review.
(1) Residential. $25 w/master, $35 w/o
master, $35 for master
(Ordinance CO08-03-03-27-13A adopted 3/27/03)
(2) Commercial.
(A) Lease space build-out/remodel $35.00 each
(B) New building construction, 3rd party
review service
Paid directly to 3rd party
service (not to exceed ICC
plan review fees plus
$100.00 base fee)
(C) New building construction: In-house
structural review
Paid directly to I.C.C. (plus
$100 base fee)
Valuation* < $3,000,000.00 = Valuation X .0012
Valuation* $3,000,000.00–
$6,000,000.00
= $3,600.00 for 1st
$3,000,000.00 valuation plus
amount in excess of
$3,000,000.00 X .0005
Valuation* > $6,000,001.00 = $5,100.00 for 1st
$6,000,001.00 valuation plus
amount in excess of
$6,000,001.00 X .00035
(D) New building construction: In-house
mechanical code review
25% of building review fee
(E) New building construction: In-house 25% of building review fee
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/526
electrical code review
(F) New building construction: In-house
plumbing code review
25% of building review fee
(G) New building construction: In-house
energy conservation code review
25% of building review fee
(H) New building construction: In-house
shell building review
60% of total plan review fee
as calculated under
subsections (C) through (G)
above
*Valuation to be calculated using the most current
ICC Building Valuation Table as published on
www.iccsafe.org.
(Ordinance CO15-13-01-10-C5 adopted 1/10/13)
(g) Licenses.
(1) Master $300 (license term increased
to 3 years)
Renewal $225 (license term increased
to 3 years)
(2) Journeyman $150 (license term increased
to 3 years)
Renewal $75 (license term increased to
3 years)
(3) Apprentice
Renewal $15 (license term increased to
3 years)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/526
(4) Examination
Master City does not conduct
examinations anymore
Renewal City does not conduct
examinations anymore
(5) Penalty for late renewals 2 X's annual license fee (if
over 12 months, must reapply)
(h) Gasoline storage permits.
(1) Gas pumps and tanks $50
(2) Underground bulk storage $100
(i) Miscellaneous building permits.
(1) Irrigation systems.
(A) Residential $25
(B) Commercial $50 plus $25 per each addit.
backflow preventer
(2) Temp. construction trailer permit.
(A) Building permit $.10 per sq. ft., minimum $35
(B) Electrical permit $25
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/526
(C) Plumbing permit $25
(D) Mechanical permit $25
(3) Flat work permit (excludes single-family).
(A) Driveways, sidewalks, ADA ramps $35
(4) Temp. structures/other membrane structure
permit.
(A) Building permit: $50.00.
(B) Plan review: $35.00.
(5) Certificate of occupancy (commercial only): $35.00.
(6) Reinspection: $25.00 each.
(7) Administrative change: $25.00.
(8) Mobile home permit:
(A) Building permit: $0.10 per sq. ft., minimum $25.00.
(B) Mechanical tie in: $25.00.
(C) Plumbing tie in: $25.00.
(D) Electrical tie in: $25.00.
(E) Plan review: $25.00.
(9) Swimming pool permit (above and in ground):
(A) Building permit: $0.10 per sq. ft., minimum $25.00.
(B) Plumbing (if gas heated): $25.00.
(C) Electrical: $25.00.
(D) Plan review: $25.00.
(10) Accessory structure permit:
(A) Garage: $0.10 per sq. ft., minimum $35.00.
(B) Storage shed/work shop: $0.10 per sq. ft., minimum $35.00.
(C) Deck/patio/carport: $0.10 per sq. ft., minimum $35.00.
(D) Gazebo/pavilion: $0.10 per sq. ft., minimum $35.00.
(E) Plan review: $25.00.
(11) Demolition permit: $50.00 (commercial and residential).
(12) Water, gas, sewer line not in plumbing permit: $25.00 each.
(13) Moving permit: $50.00.
(Ordinance CO-08-03-03-27-13A adopted 3/27/03)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/526
(14) Special event permit: $100.00. (Ordinance CO20-15-12-17-C2 adopted 12/17/15)
Sec. 2.300 Public works fees
(a) Subdivision plat review.
(1) Preliminary plan: $750.00 plus $10.00 per acre or lot (whichever is greater).
(2) Final plat: $500.00 plus $5.00 per acre or lot (whichever is greater).
(3) Short form plat: $50.00.
(4) Resubdivision: Same as new subdivision.
(b) Subdivision construction plan review. $500.00 plus $10.00 per acre or lot (whichever is greater).
(c) Subdivision construction inspection.
(1) Construction cost est. btwn $0–$15,000: $500.00.
(2) Construction cost est. btwn $15,000–$250,000: 3.50% of total construction cost.
(3) Construction cost est. btwn $250,000–$450,000: 3.00% of total construction cost.
(4) Construction cost est. btwn $450,000–$750,000: 2.25% of total construction cost.
(5) Construction cost est. btwn $750,000 and up: 1.75% of total construction cost.
(d) NPS pollution control permit.
(1) Type 1 permit: $250.00 plus $25.00/acre up to 100 acres; $5.00/acre over 100.
(2) Master plan review: $25/acre up to 100; $5/acre over 100.
(e) Industrial pre-treatment plan review.
(1) Building permit plans (commercial only): $25.00.
(2) Site development permit: $25.00.
(Ordinance CO08-03-03-27-13A adopted 3/27/03)
(f) Network nodes, node support poles, and transport facilities in public right-of-way. These amounts are pursuant to Texas Local Government
Code Chapter 284 and shall automatically be amended in accordance with any amendment to that Chapter.
(1) Application fee. The lesser of:
(A) The actual, direct, and reasonable costs the municipality determines are incurred in granting or processing an application that
are reasonably related in time to the time the costs of granting or processing an application; and
(B) $500.00 per application covering up to five (5) network nodes, $250.00 for each additional network node per application, and
$1,000.00 per application for each pole.
(2) Public right-of-way rate.
(A) Network node: $250.00 per year multiplied by the number of network nodes installed in the public right-of-way. This amount
shall adjust annually by an amount equal to one-half the annual change, if any, in the consumer price index.
(B) Transport facility rental rate: $28.00 per network node per month, unless an equal or greater amount is paid the City (e.g.,
under Texas Local Government Code chapter 283 and/or Texas Utilities Code chapter 66).
(C) Collocation of network nodes to service poles: $20.00 per year per service pole.
(g) Miscellaneous public works fees.
(1) Permit for construction within flood hazard areas: $500.00.
(2) Right-of-way use permit (i.e., street-cut): $100.00.
(3) Easement vacation: $50.00.
(4) Rough-cut permit: $100.00.
(5) LOMR/CLOMR review: $500.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/526
(6) Drainage study review (outside of plat process): $250.00 + professional recovery fee.
(Ordinance CO47-17-08-24-E1 adopted 8/24/17)
Sec. 2.400 Planning fees
(a) Subdivision plat review.
(1) Residential and non-residential (all developments).
(A) Preliminary plat $500 + $48 per lot or acre,
whichever is greater
(B) Final plat $700 + $8 per lot or acre,
whichever is greater
(C) Short form plat $500
(D) Resubdivision Same as new subdivision
(2) Professional recovery fee $200
(b) Site development permit.
(1) Construction plan review.
(A) Imp. cover up to 50,000 sf $0.04/sf
(B) Imp cover 50,000-100,000 sf $0.02/sf + (A)
(C) Imp cover 100,000-200,000 sf $0.01/sf + (A) + (B)
(D) Imp cover over 200,000 sf $0.002/sf + (A) + (B) + (C)
(2) Construction inspection.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/526
(A) Imp. cover up to 50,000 sf $125
(B) Imp cover 50,000-100,000 sf $150
(C) Imp cover 100,000-200,000 sf $250
(D) Imp cover over 200,000 sf $500
(3) Certificate of completion inspection 1st insp free, reinspection
$50/dept (planning, parks,
pw)
(4) Professional recovery fee $200
(c) Zoning request (original or re-zoning).
(1) Up to 3 acres $300
(2) Above 3 acres $300/1st 3 acres, $25/acre
thereafter, maximum $2,000
(3) Planned unit development.
(A) New $2,000 + $75/acre, maximum
$10,000
(B) Amendment one-half original fee
(4) Professional recovery fee $200
(d) Copies.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/526
(1) Computer print out $.40/page
(2) Photocopies $.55/first page, $0.15/ea add'l
page
(e) Miscellaneous planning fees.
(1) Subdivision vacation instrument review $100.00
(2) Subdivision Variance $100.00 per variance
(3) GIS digitizing fee $25.00 per application
(4) Annexation by petition (voluntary) $400.00
(5) Traffic impact analysis (TIA) processing and
review.
(A) 2,000-5,000 trips per day $1,500.00
(B) 5,001-10,000 trips per day $2,400.00
(C) 10,001-15,000 trips per day $3,300.00
(D) 15,001 plus trips per day $3,700.00
(E) TIA revision ½ of current TIA fee
(6) Verification letter (e.g., zoning, housing, etc.) $50.00
(7) Legal lot determination $100.00
(8) Street name change application $250.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/526
(9) Subdivision approval extension $300.00
(10) Zoning postponement $200.00
(11) Board of adjustment fees: $500.00 + professional recovery fee for engineer and legal review.
(Ordinance CO08-03-03-27-13A adopted 3/27/03)
(12) Legal notification of property owners:
(A) $150.00 per newspaper notification + $2.00/notice;
(B) $10.00 per sign per roadway < 45 mph; or
(C) $25.00 per sign per roadway > 45 mph.
(Maximum 3 signs per roadway.)
(Ordinance CO50-09-05-14-C4 adopted 5/14/09)
(13) Appeal of Development Services Committee determination: $100.00. (Ordinance CO60-09-09-10-C1, sec. 1, adopted 9/10/09)
ARTICLE 3.000 BUSINESS RELATED FEES
Sec. 3.100 Food establishment permit fees
(a) Food establishments.
No. of
employees
Fees
1–15 $150.00
16–30 $250.00
31+ $350.00
1/2 of application fee due after
June 30
(b) Penalty fees for follow-up inspections. $75.00 – each additional follow-up increases by $25.00.
(c) Daycares.
Licensed no. of
children
Fees
13–40 $150.00
41–100 $250.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/526
101+ $300.00
(Ordinance CO01-03-01-09-10.A adopted 1/9/03)
(d) Mobile food units.
(1) 1st establishment: $100.00.
(2) Additional: $75.00.
(Ordinance CO03-14-11-20-C1 adopted 11/20/14)
(e) Sanitation inspection. Includes daycares with fewer than 13 children, daycares with more than 12 children but no food preparation,
foster/adoptive homes: $60.00.
(f) Food handler classes, remote class, train the trainer class, train the trainer video. No change
(g) Seasonal permits. Valid for 6 months: $60.00.
(h) Change of name/ownership. No charge.
(i) Establishment plan review.
(1) $125.00 - includes actual plan review and 2 pre-opening inspections.
(2) $60.00 - each additional pre-opening inspections.
(Ordinance CO01-03-01-09-10.A adopted 1/9/03)
(j) Permit reinstatement fee. A reinstatement fee of $100.00 will be paid to the WCCHD Environmental Division located at 303 Main,
Georgetown, TX 78626. (Ordinance CO23-03-07-10-9.A. adopted 7/10/03)
Sec. 3.200 Peddler permit fee
There is hereby fixed a permit fee $50.00 per ninety (90) calendar days, which shall be collected from any peddler. In no event shall there be any
refund or proration of any fee paid under this section. (Ordinance CO30-15-07-23-C2 adopted 7/23/15)
Sec. 3.300 Towing fees
(a) The following maximum allowable fees may be charged for wrecker operations originating within the City's corporate limits or any roadway
subject to the City's jurisdiction and subject to article 4.04 of this Code:
(1) Incident management tows:
(A) Light duty tows: $175.00.
(B) Medium duty tows: $400.00.
(C) Heavy duty tows: $800.00.
(2) Storage: $20.00 per day.
(3) Dollies: $35.00 supplementary wheel system for disabled vehicles.
(4) Winching: $35.00 mechanical extraction of off-road vehicles.
(5) Waiting time at scene: $35.00 per hour, after the first hour on scene.
(6) Private property tows:
(A) Light duty tows: $125.00.
(B) Medium duty tows: $300.00.
(C) Heavy duty tows: $400.00.
(7) Drop fees:
(A) Light duty drops: $75.00.
(B) Medium duty drops: $125.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/526
(C) Heavy duty drops: $175.00.
(b) An inspection fee of $50.00 per truck per year shall be paid annually. Should any truck fail its annual inspection, a reinspection fee of $25.00
shall be charged for each reinspection.
(Ordinance CO21-15-12-17-C3 adopted 12/17/15)
Sec. 3.400 Reserved
Editor's note–Section 3.400, wrecker service fees, was superseded by Ordinance O2000-44 adopted 12/21/00.
Sec. 3.500 Sign permit fees
Fees for sign permits shall be the greater of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or one dollar ($1.00) per square foot per face including decorative trim and
border, and excluding supports; except when otherwise specified in article 3.01 of this code. (Ordinance 96-009 adopted 3/28/96)
Sec. 3.600 Advertising searchlight permit fees
The permit shall be effective for a maximum period of five (5) days per calendar year any business or group. The permit fee shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Ordinance 96-009 adopted 3/28/96)
Sec. 3.700 Sexually oriented business permit fees
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); provided, that the City Manager shall make an annual
report to the City Council detailing the costs of enforcement of this section. (1998 Code, sec. 3.700)
Sec. 3.800 Massage business permit fees
(a) The permit fee for a massage business shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
(b) Should any massage business have more than one location where the business of massage is pursued, then a permit, stating both the address of
the principal place of business and of the other location(s), shall be issued by the chief of police upon the tender of a permit fee of seventy-five
dollars ($75.00). Permits issued for other locations shall terminate on the same date as that of the principal place of business, regardless of the date of
issuance.
(1998 Code, sec. 3.800)
Sec. 3.900 Shooting gallery permit fee
A non-refundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the city with each application for issuance or renewal of a commercial or
private shooting gallery permit. (1998 Code, sec. 3.900)
Sec. 3.1000 Farmers market permit fee
Farmers market permit fee: $150. (Ordinance CO60-09-09-10-C1, sec. 2, adopted 9/10/09)
ARTICLE 4.000 FIRE PROTECTION RELATED FEES
(a) Fire code plan review.
(1) Building permit plans.
(A) New construction: $50.00.
(B) Remodel/repair: $50.00.
(C) Lease space/finish out: $50.00.
(D) Fire sprinkler system review: $50.00.
(E) Fire alarm review: $25.00.
(F) Hood suppression system review: $25.00.
(2) Subdivision plats (preliminary and final plats): $50.00 .
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/526
(3) Site development permit plans: $50.00.
(b) Compliance tests.
(1) Fire sprinkler systems (2 hr).
(A) Underground test: $25.00.
(B) Aboveground test: $25.00.
(2) Natural gas system (approx 30 min): $25.00.
(3) Fixed suppression system (Ansul, etc.): $25.00/system.
(4) Fuel tank storage system.
(A) Tank pressure test: $25.00.
(B) Line pressure test: $25.00.
(5) Fire alarm system (1st 30 min): $25.00/system.
(6) Other fire code required tests: $25.00.
(c) Fire code permit.
(1) Explosive permit fees by class.
(A) Class A: $50.00/permit.
(B) Class B: $100.00/permit.
(C) Class C: $200.00/permit.
(D) Class D: $400.00/permit.
(2) Fireworks display permit: $100.00/permit.
(3) Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies: $50.00/permit.
(4) Other fire permits as required by fire code: $50.00/permit.
(d) Annual inspections.
(1) Daycare center: $35.00.
(2) Group daycare: $35.00.
(3) Registered family home: $35.00.
(4) Nursing home: $125.00.
(5) Hospital/clinic: $150.00.
(6) Foster: $35.00.
(7) Cutting and welding: $50.00.
(8) Dry cleaning plants: $50.00.
(9) Hazardous materials: $50.00.
(10) Lumberyards and woodworking plants: $50.00.
(11) Repair garages and service stations: $50.00.
(12) Spraying and dipping: $50.00.
(13) Other fire inspections as required by fire code: $35.00.
(e) Certificate of occupancy inspection.
(1) 1st inspection: $35.00;
(2) Each reinspection: $25.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/526
(Ordinance C008-03-03-27-13A adopted 3/27/03)
ARTICLE 5.000 LIBRARY FEES
Sec. 5.100 Room rental fees
(a) Rental rates.
Facility Group Type Resident Nonresident
Refundable
Cleaning/Damage
Deposit
Kitchen
Community room General use
$100.00 per first 2
hours, $50.00 per
additional hour
$150.00 per first 2
hours, $75.00 per
additional hour
$150.00 $20.00
Community room Nonprofit
$50.00 per first 2 hours,
$25.00 per additional
hour
$75.00 per first 2
hours, $37.50 per
additional hour
$150.00 $20.00
Community room
Youth oriented and
senior groups
$10.00 per first 2 hours,
$5.00 per additional
hour
$15.00 per first 2
hours, $7.50 per
additional hour
$150.00 $20.00
Conference room General use $40.00 per 4 hours $60.00 per 4 hours $150.00 N/A
Conference room Nonprofit $20.00 per 4 hours $30.00 per 4 hours $150.00 N/A
Conference room
Youth oriented and
senior groups
$10.00 per 4 hours $15.00 per 4 hours $150.00 N/A
(b) Group types.
(1) General use. All uses not included in subsections (2) and (3) below, including, but not limited to: private lesson groups, private
educational institutions, or any individual, organization or business which stands to receive personal or corporate gain from use of the
facility.
(2) Nonprofit. Organizations meeting the definition of “nonprofit corporation” in accordance with the Texas Business Organizations
Code section 22.001(5), as amended.
(3) Youth oriented and senior groups. Organizations serving a member constituency of children, adolescents or seniors including Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts, 4-H, AARP, Family Eldercare, etc.
Sec. 5.200 Removal and use of library materials
(a) Annual membership. Nonresidents wishing to borrow library materials may purchase a nonresident library membership which will expire one
year after its issuance. The charge for such membership shall be $35.00 annually.
(b) Six-month membership. Nonresidents wishing to borrow library materials may purchase a nonresident library membership which will expire
six months after its issuance. The charge for such memberships shall be $20.00.
(c) Three-month membership. Nonresidents wishing to borrow library materials may purchase a nonresident library membership which will expire
three months after its issuance. The charge for such memberships will be $10.00.
Sec. 5.300 Library material replacement fees
(a) Lost, damaged, or unreturned library materials.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/526
Replacement
(entire item)
Replacement (single
part)
Replacement
processing fee
Books
Manufacturer's suggested
retail price (MSRP)
N/A $5.00
Magazines MSRP N/A N/A
Audiobook CDs, DVDs and
music CDs
MSRP $8.00/disc $5.00
Book club kits
MSRP of each item and $8.00
for container
MSRP $5.00
Interlibrary loan materials Per lending library N/A Per lending library
eReaders, laptops, and tablets
MSRP for item and all
accessories
Cost of repair or
replacement
$5.00
(1) The $5.00 replacement processing fee will be assessed only for replacement of items with a manufacturer's suggested retail price of
more than $7.00.
(2) If the library material is out of print or the MSRP is no longer available, the library charges a flat fee of $30.00 for a hardbound
book; $8.00 for a paperback book; $20.00 per DVD; or $8.00 per CD; plus a $5.00 replacement processing fee.
(3) The library reserves the right to determine the extent of damage to an item and whether an item is repairable.
(b) Notice regarding collection of outstanding fees. The Library may report any patron accounts with outstanding fee balances totaling $50.00 or
more for more than 60 days to an independent collection agency.
Sec. 5.400 Miscellaneous
The Library Director will set reasonable fees for interlibrary loan, copying, scanning, faxing and miscellaneous services, not to exceed $10.00 per
service, to be posted on the Library website.
(Ordinance CO05-18-12-13-E1 adopted 12/13/18)
ARTICLE 6.000 MUNICIPAL COURT FEES
Sec. 6.100 Municipal court building security fund
The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the “fee”) in the amount of three
dollars ($3.00) against all defendants convicted in a trial of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be
subject to a separate assessment of the fee. (1998 Code, sec. 6.100)
Sec. 6.200 Defensive driving administrative fee
Any defendant in a traffic offense being prosecuted in Cedar Park Municipal Court who requests and is granted dismissal of the charges against him
by taking defensive driving pursuant to Article 6701(d), Section 143, V.T.C.S., shall pay a fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the
appendix of this code to the court to cover administrative and handling costs incurred by the court. (1998 Code, sec. 6.200)
Editor's note—The fee referenced in this section is not included in the appendix of this code.
Sec. 6.300 Miscellaneous court costs
(a) Local court costs of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be collected from any offender convicted of:
(1) A violation of V.A.C.S., Article 6701d which occurs within a school crossing zone;
(2) A violation of Article 6701d, Section 104 (overtaking and passing a school bus); or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/526
(3) A violation of Education Code, Section 4.25 (thwarting compulsory attendance).
(b) Local court cost of five dollars ($5.00) shall be collected upon conviction of any city parking ordinance.
(c) Additional local court costs of three dollars ($3.00) shall be collected from any offender convicted of an offense under V.A.C.S., Article 6701d
except those where a higher cost is provided by this section.
(d) Except in those instances in which higher court costs are provided by this section, court costs of five dollars ($5.00) shall be collected on Penal
Code Class C misdemeanors punishable by fine only of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less and court costs as provided for in this article shall be
collected on such misdemeanors punishable by fine in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(e) A court cost of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be assessed upon conviction of an offense under V.A.C.S., 6687b-2, the Texas Commercial Driver's
License Act. The fee shall be divided with the State of Texas as provided by state law. All interest earned on such fee shall be retained by the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 6.300)
Sec. 6.400 Municipal court technology fund
The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court technology fee (the “fee”) in the amount of four dollars
($4.00) against all defendants convicted by the municipal court in a trial of any misdemeanor offense committed on or after the effective date hereof.
Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. (Ordinance 99-034 adopted 10/14/99)
ARTICLE 7.000 SUBDIVISION RELATED FEES
Reserved.
ARTICLE 8.000 UTILITY RELATED FEES
Sec. 8.100 Monthly rates and charges for water sales and services
The monthly rates and charges for water sales and services rendered by the city to customers either outside or within the corporate limits of the city
(excluding wholesale customers) are established, fixed and prescribed as follows:
(1) Residential.
(A) Minimum charges for first 2,000 gallons: $17.77.
(B) Volume charge on water use over 2,000 gallons:
(i) 2,001–10,000: $3.63 per 1,000 gallons.
(ii) 10,001–15,000: $4.36 per 1,000 gallons.
(iii) > 15,000: $5.23 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Nonresidential.
(A) Minimum charges per meter size for first 2,000 gallons:
(i) 3/4" meter: $20.73.
(ii) 1" meter: $33.79.
(iii) 1-1/2" meter: $76.68.
(iv) 2" meter: $132.63.
(v) 3" meter: $300.47.
(vi) 4" meter: $524.25.
(vii) 6" meter: $1,195.58.
(viii) 8" meter: $2,128.02.
(ix) 10" meter: $3,321.52.
(B) Volume charge on water use, over 2,000 gallons: $3.24 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) Municipal. The water rate assessed for water service provided to city buildings, institutions, and facilities owned and operated by
the city shall be a volume charge equal to the raw water rate per 1,000 gallons as established by the Lower Colorado River Authority and
charged to the city as amended from time to time.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/526
Sec. 8.200 Monthly rates and charges for water sales and services during drought response stage 3
The monthly rates and charges for water sales and services during drought response stage 3, as described in article 18.08 drought contingency and
water emergency plan, rendered by the city to customers either outside or within the corporate limits of the city (excluding wholesale customers) are
established, fixed and prescribed as follows:
(1) Residential.
(A) Minimum charges for first 2,000 gallons: $19.37.
(B) Volume charge on water use over 2,000 gallons:
(i) 2,001–10,000: $3.96 per 1,000 gallons.
(ii) 10,001–15,000: $4.75 per 1,000 gallons.
(iii) > 15,000: $5.70 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Nonresidential.
(A) Minimum charges per meter size for first 2,000 gallons:
(i) 3/4" meter: $22.60.
(ii) 1" meter: $36.83.
(iii) 1-1/2" meter: $83.58.
(iv) 2" meter: $144.57.
(v) 3" meter: $327.51.
(vi) 4" meter: $571.43.
(vii) 6" meter: $1,303.18.
(viii) 8" meter: $2,319.54.
(ix) 10" meter: $3,620.46.
(B) Volume charge on water use, over 2,000 gallons: $3.53 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) Municipal. The water rate assessed for water service provided to city buildings, institutions, and facilities owned and operated by
the city shall be a volume charge equal to the raw water rate per 1,000 gallons as established by the Lower Colorado River Authority
(LCRA) and charged to the city as amended from time to time, and such rate shall be increased by nine (9) percent during drought
response stage 3.
Sec. 8.300 Additional water department fees and charges
In addition to the monthly rates above scheduled, the city may assess the following fees and charges in connection with utility service to its
customers:
(1) Deposit fees.
(A) Residential: $100.00.
(B) Residential from previous utility: $50.00 reduced deposit fee with letter of credit.
(C) All other customers: Two times the minimum monthly charge for the meter size for which application is made.
(D) Temporary fire hydrant: $700.00.
(E) Meter test fee: $40.00.
(F) Meter tampering fee: $50.00 (individuals who restore services without city supervision or approval).
(G) Reconnect fee: $50.00.
(H) Returned check or returned direct draft fee: $25.00.
(I) Monthly delinquent payment charge: 10% of the delinquent amount.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/526
(2) Reread fee. The city will reread any customer's water meter at the customer's request. If the reread meter was correctly read and
there was no error on the part of the city, the customer shall be charged $10.00. If the reread meter was read incorrectly, there shall be no
charge to the customer.
(3) Transfer fee. The city will transfer water service from one location to another for a fee of $25.00. A fee of $50.00 will be charged to
move a fire hydrant meter from one location to another for the same customer. Any outstanding bill on the current amount must be paid
prior to transfer even if it is not yet past due. The final bill for the original account will be transferred to and be payable on the due date of
the new account.
(4) Temporary service fee. Temporary water service is available for five (5) days for a fee of $35.00. The fee must be paid prior to
service. Water consumption is not to exceed 2,000 gallons.
(5) Illegal diversion fee. A fee will be imposed for the detection and confirmation of any utility diversion based upon the estimated cost
of utility service not recorded on the meter, using the city's best estimated data, with a minimum charge being $500.00. In addition, the
customer shall pay the reconnect fee, the actual cost including labor for repairing damage to or replacement of the city's equipment. These
charges are in addition to any that are imposed in criminal proceedings.
(6) Tap fees.
(A) Where service lines must be installed and a water meter set by the city the water tap fee shall be:
(i) 3/4" meter: $425.00.
(ii) 1" meter: $675.00.
(iii) 1-1/2" meter: $1,100.00.
(iv) 2" meter: $1,300.00.
(v) 3" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(vi) 4" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(vii) 6" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(viii) 8" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(ix) 10" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(B) If service lines have been installed and the city is only required to inspect the connection and install a meter, the tap shall be:
(i) 3/4" meter: $100.00.
(ii) 1" meter: $175.00.
(iii) 1-1/2" meter: $400.00.
(iv) 2" meter: $500.00.
(v) 3" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(vi) 4" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(vii) 6" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(viii) 8" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(ix) 10" meter: $300.00 + actual cost.
(7) Unauthorized operation. Any unauthorized operation of city utilities shall result in a fine of $1,000.00 for the first offense and
$1,500.00 for each subsequent offense. These charges are in addition to any that are imposed in criminal proceedings.
(8) Lost or stolen meter. There will be a charge of $500.00 to replace any meter that is lost, stolen or moved from its original location.
This fee is intended for builders, contractors, and sub-contractors who intentionally move meters from one location to another to avoid the
cost of setting up service at each location where they are working as called for in section 18.01.005. Water service will not be restored
until this fee has been paid.
Sec. 8.400 Water deposits
(a) Generally. Security deposits in the amount set forth in this section shall be required of all customers upon application for water and sewer
service. This deposit may be paid by cash, check, credit card or direct draft. The deposit shall be held by the city, without payment of interest, as long
as such service is continued; provided, that if all bills are paid on a timely basis, one year after service begins; upon application by the customer, the
city shall refund one-half of such security deposit to the customer. The remainder of the security deposit shall be held and refunded upon termination
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/526
of service in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. If a customer's account becomes delinquent more than two (2) times during any twelvemonth
period, the full security deposit may be required as a condition of continued water or sewer service to that customer.
(b) Former customers. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary herein, any customer receiving water from the city's water supply corporation
at the time of the passage of this section, shall have their membership fee credited as their deposit, as set out under section 8.300 above. If said
customer paid in excess of the amount specified for deposit, then the excess shall be returned by way of credit to said customer's water statement in
such increments, and over such period of time, as the city may deem, in order to prevent undue financial disruption of the system. Should the
membership fee be less than the amount specified for deposit, no further deposit will be required.
(c) Refund. Upon termination of water service (and wastewater service if such service is provided by the city), such portion of the deposit as is not
required to pay for damages to the water meter, accrued service charges, penalties, library fines, city property taxes, and court- imposed fines for
which a final judgment has been issued, shall be refunded to the customer. Normal wear and tear in the ordinary course of use shall not be construed
to be damage to the water meter under this section.
Sec. 8.500 Permit for fire hydrant use
(a) The City Manager may issue permits authorizing companies or individuals to take water from city fire hydrants. The annual fee for such
permits shall be ten dollars ($10.00). The minimum monthly charge to permit holders shall be the current rate for a 3" nonresidential meter. The City
Manager shall establish rules and regulations for the measurement of consumption and the methods of connection of the fire hydrants.
(b) Persons taking water from a fire hydrant must have a permit and an approved fire hydrant wrench in their possession and must display such
permit or wrench for inspection by city employees upon request. In order to protect the city's water system from pressure loss, before taking water
from any fire hydrant, the permittee must notify the city water department and receive approval for such taking at a specific time and location.
(c) The failure to display the above-mentioned permit or wrench upon request by a city employee and the failure to obtain city approval prior to
each instance of taking water at a specific time and location shall be offenses punishable by a fine and/or revocation of the permit.
Sec. 8.600 Monthly rates and charges for sanitary sewer service
The monthly rates and charges for sewer sales and services rendered by the city to customers either outside or within the corporate limits of the city
below are established, fixed and prescribed as follows:
(1) Residential.
(A) 0–2,000 gallons per month: $21.70 minimum.
(B) Over 2,000 gallons per month: $3.99 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Nonresidential.
(A) 0–2,000 gallons per month: $25.32 minimum.
(B) Over 2,000 gallons per month: $3.10 per 1,000 gallons.
Note: Monthly charges shall be based on the average metered water usage for the prior year's winter months (December, January and
February). Once per year, customers may request, in writing, an additional reaveraging.
(3) Large nonresidential. Yearly average water use over 25,000 gallons per month:
(A) 0–2,000 gallons per month: $25.32 minimum.
(B) Over 2,000 gallons per month: $3.10 per 1,000 gallons.
Flow charge =
Actual monthly water use (gal)-2,000 gallons
$2.88
Note: For large nonresidential users, flow shall be based on the actual metered water sales for each month or on actual metered flow
to the sewer system.
(4) Municipal. The sewer rate assessed for sewer service provided to city buildings, institutions, and activities operated by the city shall
be as follows:
(A) Gallons per month: $0.42 per 1,000 gallons.
Sec. 8.700 Sewer connection regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/526
The owner of record of the property shall upon connection, pay seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) connection fee; provided, that the community
impact fees have been paid for the property in accordance with section 8.800 below and the city is not required to install sewer taps and service
laterals. The owner shall pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) sewer tap inspection fee instead of the seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) connection fee.
Sec. 8.800 Amount and assessment of water impact fee
The city shall assess and collect on all new development and new connections to be served by the city's water system a water impact fee of $2,250.00
for each LUE.
Sec. 8.900 Amount and assessment of wastewater impact fee
The city shall assess and collect on all new development and new connections to be served by the city's wastewater treatment system a wastewater
impact fee of $2,000.00 for each LUE.
(Ordinance CO09-14-12-11-B2 adopted 12/11/14)
Sec. 8.1000 Residential monthly rates and charges for residential refuse
The City shall assess and collect on all residential refuse accounts as follows plus any applicable taxes:
(1) Monthly disposal fee: $14.83.
(2) Monthly solid waste cart reimbursement fee: $1.12.
(3) Monthly additional cart disposal fee: $5.50 per additional cart.
(4) Monthly administrative fee: $2.00.
(Ordinance CO41-16-04-28-C5 adopted 4/28/16)
Sec. 8.1100 Utility debt service fee
The city shall assess and collect a monthly utility debt service fee to be charged in the amounts as specified below on each residential unit or
equivalent within the subdivisions listed below for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) years from the effective dates of the annexation of Williamson-
Travis County Water Control and Improvement District No. 1G, Williamson-Travis County Water Control and Improvement District 1F and Bella
Vista Municipal Utility District for the purpose of servicing that portion of utility infrastructure debt not normally incurred by the city for other
residential subdivisions within the city and assumed by the city upon these annexations.
(1) $44.00 per residential unit within the subdivisions, including any future resubdivisions, as follows:
(A) Twin Creeks Country Club section 1.
(B) Twin Creeks Country Club section 2A.
(C) Twin Creeks Country Club section 2B.
(D) Twin Creeks Country Club section 3.
(E) Twin Creeks Country Club section 4.
(F) Twin Creeks Country Club section 5.
(G) Twin Creeks Country Club section 6A.
(H) Twin Creeks Country Club section 6B.
(I) Twin Creeks Country Club section 6C.
(J) Twin Creeks Country Club section 7.
(K) Twin Creeks Country Club section 8.
(L) Twin Creeks Country Club section 9.
(M) Twin Creeks Country Club section 10A.
(N) Twin Creeks Country Club section 10B.
(O) The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 12.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/526
(P) Twin Creeks Country Club Maintenance Area.
(2) $22.00 per residential unit within the subdivisions, including any future resubdivisions, as follows:
(A) The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 13.
(B) The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 13, amended plat of lots 1–6 block “V.”
(C) Amended plat of lots 38 and 39, block “V” of The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 13.
(D) The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 14.
(E) The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 15.
(F) The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 16.
(G) The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 16, amended plat of lots 1–2, 7–8 block “W.”
(H) The Reserve at Twin Creeks section 17.
(3) $22.50 per residential unit within the subdivisions, including any future resubdivisions, as follows:
(A) Bella Vista section 1.
(B) Bella Vista section 1, lot 10, block “F” and Bella Vista section 3A, lot 9, block “F” amended plat.
(C) Bella Vista section 2.
(D) Bella Vista section 3A.
(E) Bella Vista section 3B.
(F) Bella Vista section 4.
(G) Bella Vista section 5.
(4) $670.00 for 15.23 residential unit equivalents in Twin Creeks Country Club section 11, resubdivision of lot 10, block S otherwise
known as the Twin Creeks golf course, country club and activity center.
(Ordinance CO09-14-12-11-B2 adopted 12/11/14)
ARTICLE 9.000 SITE DEVELOPMENT FEES
Reserved
ARTICLE 10.000 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FEES
Sec. 10.100 Permit fee for recreational vehicles parked on public street
The permit that allows an owner to park a recreational vehicle on a public street shall be effective for a maximum period of not more than seven (7)
consecutive days and not more than fifteen (15) days per calendar year. The permit fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day. (Ordinance CO32-16-02-
25-C2 adopted 2/25/16)
ARTICLE 11.000 ALARM SYSTEMS
(a) No fee will be charged to the owner of a burglar alarm system or other type of alarm system unless five other false alarms have occurred from
such system during the preceding twelve (12) month period.
(b) The sixth and any subsequent false alarm which is emitted from a burglar alarm system or other type of alarm system within a twelve (12)
month period shall result in a service fee to the owner of $50.00 per event.
(1998 Code, sec. 4.1205)
ARTICLE 12.000 PARK RELATED FEES
Sec. 12.100 Pool related fees
(a) Daily swim entry.
(1) Milburn and Buttercup Pools.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/526
(A) Adult (age 18 and older): $3.00.
(B) Students (age 9–17): $2.00.
(C) Students (age 4–8)/senior citizens (age 60+): $1.00.
(D) Children (age 3 and under): Free.
(E) Lap swimming (everyone): Daily rate.
(2) Veterans Memorial Pool.
(A) Adult (age 18 and older): $5.00.
(B) Students (age 9–17): $4.00.
(C) Students (age 4–8)/senior citizens (age 60+): $2.00.
(D) Children (age 3 and under): Free.
(E) Lap swimming (everyone): Daily rate.
(F) Veterans: $2.00 (with valid military ID)
(3) Veterans, Milburn and Buttercup Pools. Complimentary admission for veterans (with valid military ID) on Memorial Day,
Independence Day and Labor Day.
(b) Swim pass.
(1) Milburn year round swim pass.
(A) Family: $150.00; Non Res. $300.00.
(B) Adult: $75.00; Non Res. $150.00.
(C) Student: $60.00; Non Res. $120.00.
(D) Child/senior citizen: $50.00; Non Res. $100.00.
(2) Milburn and Buttercup summer swim pass.
(A) Family: $100.00; Non Res. $200.00.
(B) Adult: $50.00; Non Res. $100.00.
(C) Student: $35.00; Non Res. $70.00.
(D) Child/senior citizen: $25.00; Non Res. $50.00.
(3) All pools swim pass.
(A) Family: $125.00; Non Res. $250.00.
(B) Adult: $75.00; Non Res. $150.00.
(C) Student: $55.00; Non Res. $110.00.
(D) Child/senior citizen: $50.00; Non Res. $100.00.
(c) Milburn Pool rental: $275.00; Non Res. $425.00.
(d) Milburn Pool. Pavilion and umbrella rental (3 hrs.)
(1) Large umbrellas: $35.00; Non Res. $65.00.
(3) Small umbrellas: $25.00; Non Res. $45.00.
(e) Buttercup Pool rental: $100.00; Non Res. $150.00.
(f) Veterans Memorial Pool rental: $450.00; Non Res. $675.00.
(g) Veterans Memorial Pool. Pavilion and umbrella rental (3 hrs.)
(1) Pavilion: $50.00; Non Res. $90.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/526
(2) Large umbrellas: $35.00; Non Res. $65.00.
(3) Small umbrellas: $25.00; Non Res. $45.00.
(h) Swim team pool rental.
(1) May through September: $2.25 per lane, per hour.
(2) October through April: $2.75 per lane, per hour.
(Ordinance CO04-16-12-15-E1 adopted 12/15/16)
Sec. 12.200 Instructional related fees
(a) Swim lessons:
(1) Resident: $40.00 per session.
(2) Nonresident: $70.00 per session.
Sec. 12.300 Pavilion and building related fees
(a) Community and recreation center.
(1) Rental rates.
Facility Square Foot Resident Nonresident Deposit
During Business Hours:
Community room (1/3 room) 1,010 $35.00 $70.00 $100.00
Gymnasium (1/2 court) 2,100 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
Kitchen 210 $10.00 $15.00 $100.00
Gymnasium (1 full court) 4,200 $150.00 $200.00 $100.00
Gymnasium (2 full courts) 8,400 $225.00 $275.00 $100.00
After Hours:
Community room (1/3 room) 1,010 $60.00 $90.00 $100.00
Kitchen 210 $15.00 $20.00 $100.00
(b) Milburn Park Pavilion.
(1) Resident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $75.00; no deposit required.
(2) Nonresident rental times.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/526
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $100.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $100.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $150.00; no deposit required.
(c) Nelson Ranch Park Pavilion.
(1) Resident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $25.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $25.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $50.00; no deposit required.
(2) Nonresident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $75.00; no deposit required.
(d) Riviera Springs Clubhouse.
(1) Resident: $175.00/day + $100.00 deposit.
(2) Nonresident: $350.00/day + $100.00 deposit.
(e) Brushy Creek Lake Park–Live Oak and Redbud Pavilions.
(1) Resident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $75.00; no deposit required.
(2) Nonresident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $100.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $100.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $150.00; no deposit required.
(f) Brushy Creek Lake Park–Cedar and Cypress Pavilions.
(1) Resident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $75.00; no deposit required.
(2) Nonresident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $100.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $100.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $150.00; no deposit required.
(g) Peggy Garner Park Pavilion.
(1) Resident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $25.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $25.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $50.00; no deposit required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/526
(2) Nonresident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $75.00; no deposit required.
(h) Rosemary Denny Park Pavilions.
(1) Resident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $25.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $25.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $50.00; no deposit required.
(2) Nonresident rental times.
(A) 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(B) 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.: $50.00; no deposit required.
(C) All day: $75.00; no deposit required.
Sec. 12.400 Recreational court and field related fees
(a) Tennis courts; per key basis.
(1) Resident:
(A) $18.00/year or a pro-rated fee $1.00/month.
(B) $5.00/hour for leagues and tournaments.
(2) Nonresident:
(A) $36.00/year or a pro-rated fee $2.00/month.
(B) $10.00/hour for leagues and tournaments.
(b) Sand volleyball court. Everyone; no private rental, first come first serve basis.
(c) Basketball court. Everyone; no private rental, first come first serve basis.
(d) Sports fields rental rates.
(1) Softball/baseball field.
(A) Resident:
(i) Per 2 hours: $25.00.
(ii) Lights per hour: $25.00.
(B) Nonresident:
(i) Per 2 hours: $50.00.
(ii) Lights per hour: $25.00.
(2) Soccer/football field.
(A) Resident:
(i) Per 2 hours: $25.00.
(ii) Lights per hour: $25.00.
(B) Nonresident:
(i) Per 2 hours: $50.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/526
(ii) Lights per hour: $25.00.
(e) Wiffle ball and T-Ball fields (unlighted).
(1) Residents: $25.00/day or $5.00/hour.
(2) Nonresidents: $50.00/day or $10.00/hour.
Sec. 12.500 Recreational program fees
(a) Camp Timberwolf.
(1) Resident: $120.00/week.
(2) Nonresident: $180.00/week.
(b) Milburn Community Garden.
(1) 10x10:
(A) Resident: $8.00/year.
(B) Nonresident: $16.00/year.
(2) 10x20:
(A) Resident: $15.00/year.
(B) Nonresident: $30.00/year.
(3) Accessible 2.5x24:
(A) Resident: $5.00/year.
(B) Nonresident: $10.00/year.
(c) Community and recreation center membership rates.
(1) Family.
(A) Annual: $240.00; Non Res. $360.00.
(B) Quarter: $70.00; Non Res. $85.00.
(C) Month: $25.00; Non Res. $35.00.
(2) Individual.
(A) Annual: $120.00; Non Res. $240.00.
(B) Quarter: $35.00; Non Res. $70.00.
(C) Month: $15.00; Non Res. $25.00.
(D) Day: $5.00; Non Res. $10.00.
(3) Seniors (60+).
(A) Annual: $60.00; Non Res. $120.00.
(B) Quarter: $20.00; Non Res. $35.00.
(C) Month: $10.00; Non Res. $15.00.
(D) Day: $5.00; Non Res. $10.00.
(4) Youth (18 and under).
(A) Annual: $60.00; Non Res. $120.00.
(B) Quarter: $20.00; Non Res. $35.00.
(C) Month: $10.00; Non Res. $15.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/526
(D) Day: $5.00; Non Res. $10.00.
(5) Couple.
(A) Annual: $200.00; Non Res. $300.00.
(B) Quarter: $55.00; Non Res. $80.00.
(C) Month: $20.00; Non Res. $30.00.
(6) Senior couple.
(A) Annual: $110.00; Non Res. $200.00.
(B) Quarter: $30.00; Non Res. $65.00.
(C) Month: $15.00; Non Res. $25.00.
(Ordinance CO23-16-01-07-C2 adopted 1/7/16)
Sec. 12.600 Unmanned aircraft system permit fee
The fee for a permit to operate an unmanned aircraft system at a special event shall be $10.00. (Ordinance CO46-17-08-10-E1 adopted 8/10/17)
ARTICLE 13.000 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES
Sec. 13.100 Amount and assessment of credit card fees
The city shall assess and collect on all credit card transactions throughout the city greater than $25.00 a credit card processing fee of $2.00 for each
transaction.
Sec. 13.200 Notary fees
As allowed by Section 406.024 of the Government Code for non-city business. See attached Fee Schedule per Section 406.024 of the Government
Code.
Sec. 13.300 Map fees
(a) Fee for 11" X 17" maps shall be $10.00 each, which includes:
(1) ETJ Map 1" = 4000' scale.
(2) Roadway Plan (with ETJ shown) Map: 1" = 4500'.
(3) Zoning Map: 1" = 4000' scale.
(4) Planning Map: 1" = 4100' scale.
(5) Hike and Bike Trail Map.
(b) Fee for larger maps shall be $35.00, which includes:
(1) Roadway Plan Map with ETJ shown 1" =1300'scale
(2) Subdivision Activity Map with Index 1" = 1300' scale
(3) Wastewater Map – Special Order Only 1" = 750' scale
(4) Water Map – Special Order Only 1" = 750' scale
(5) Zoning Map: 1" = 1250' (No Addresses/Shows entire city limits)
(6) Zoning Map: 1" = 750' (No Addresses/Shows entire city limits)
(7) Planning Map: 1" = 1250' (No Addresses/Shows entire city limits)
(8) Park Map
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/526
(c) Fee for any special request map shall be $35.00.
(d) Mailing/Postage Fee for large maps shall be $10.00.
(e) Fee for 18"x24" Plat Copy (From Map Copier) shall be $10.00.
(f) Fee for 24"x36" Plat Copy (From Map Copier) shall be $15.00.
Sec. 13.400 Miscellaneous fees
(a) Fee for Copies:
(1) 1st Sheet $.55.
(2) After 1st sheet $.15.
(b) Fee for Comprehensive Plan – Hard Copy shall be $75.00.
(1) Fee for Mailing/Postage Comprehensive Plan shall be $10.00.
(c) Fee for Development Guide shall be $75.00.
(1) Yearly update shall be $25.00.
(2) Mailing/Postage fee shall be $10.00.
(d) Fee for Ordinances
(1) Subivision – shall be $15.00.
(2) Zoning – shall be $15.00.
(e) Fee for Street Index shall be $10.00.
(Ordinance CO28-03-09-11-10.A adopted 9/11/03)
ARTICLE 14.000 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES FOR LOT CLEANING/MOWING
The fee for administrative work and associated costs is set at $150.00. (Ordinance CO16-04-03-25-11A adopted 3/25/04)
ARTICLE 15.000 SPECIALIZED BILLING: FIRE DEPARTMENT AND FIRST RESPONDER EMS
Sec. 15.100 Fire department list
CODE CHARGE DESCRIPTION PRICE MEDICARE
1 APPARATUS
2 CLASS A PUMPER 500.00
3 AERIAL APPARATUS 650.00
4 TANKER APPARATUS 400.00
5 BRUSH TRUCK 300.00
6 HEAVY RESCUE TRUCK 500.00
28 COMMAND UNIT 250.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/526
102 EQUIPMENT TRUCK 300.00
132 SQUAD TRUCK 125.00
2 PERSONNEL
7 FIRE FIGHTERS, PER HOUR 35.00
8 HAZ-MAT TECHNICIAN 40.00
9 HAZ-MAT OPERATIONS 35.00
10 HAZ-MAT SPECIALIST 65.00
34 FIRE INSPECTORS 100.00
35 FIRE INVESTIGATORS 125.00
143 PERSONNEL OVERTIME 0.00
170 DIVE TEAM 200.00
190 HAZ-MAT INCIDENT COMMAND 75.00
Sec. 15.200 Fire and rescue EMS list
CODE CHARGE DESCRIPTION PRICE MEDICARE
1 NOT USED
2 E.BLS/ALS/MICU
RESCUE/EMS SERVICES FEE $200.00
200 NO TRANSPORT/RESPONSE
FEE
$150.00
(Ordinance CO59-14-07-24-C1, exh. B, adopted 7/24/14)
ARTICLE 16.000 PUBLIC INFORMATION RELATED FEES
Sec. 16.100 Fees for providing copies of public information
(a) Established by the Texas Administrative Code, Title 1, Part 3 Chapter 70 Rule §70.3. These charges cover the cost of materials onto which
information is copied and do not reflect any additional charges that may be associated with a particular request.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/526
(b) The charges in this section to recover costs associated with providing copies of public information are based on estimated average costs to
governmental bodies across the state. When actual costs are 25% higher than those used in these rules, governmental bodies other than agencies of
the state, may request an exemption in accordance with §111.64 of this title (relating to requesting an exemption).
(c) Copy charge.
(1) Standard paper copy. The charge for standard paper copies reproduced by means of an office machine copier or a computer printer
is $0.10 per page or part of a page. Each side that has recorded information is considered a page.
(2) Nonstandard copy. The charges in this subsection are to cover the materials onto which information is copied and do not reflect any
additional charges, including labor, that may be associated with a particular request. The charges for nonstandard copies are:
(A) Diskette: $1.00;
(B) Magnetic tape: actual cost;
(C) Data cartridge: actual cost;
(D) Tape cartridge: actual cost;
(E) Rewritable CD (CD-RW): $1.00;
(F) Nonrewritable CD (CD-R): $1.00;
(G) Digital video disc (DVD): $3.00;
(H) JAZ drive: actual cost;
(I) Other electronic media: actual cost;
(J) VHS videocassette: $2.50;
(K) Audio cassette: $1.00;
(L) Oversize paper copy (e.g.: 11 inches by 17 inches, greenbar, bluebar, not including maps and photographs using specialty
paper–See also §111.69 of this title): $0.50;
(M) Specialty paper (e.g.: Mylar, blueprint, blueline, map, photographic): actual cost.
(d) Labor charge for programming. If a particular request requires the services of a programmer in order to execute an existing program or to
create a new program so that requested information may be accessed and copied, the governmental body may charge for the programmer's time.
(1) The hourly charge for a programmer is $28.50 an hour, which includes fringe benefits. Only programming services shall be charged
at this hourly rate.
(2) Governmental bodies that do not have in-house programming capabilities shall comply with requests in accordance with §552.231
of the Texas Government Code.
(3) If the charge for providing a copy of public information includes costs of labor, a governmental body shall comply with the
requirements of §552.261(b) of the Texas Government Code.
(e) Labor charge for locating, compiling, and reproducing public information.
(1) The charge for labor costs incurred in processing a request for public information is $15.00 an hour, which includes fringe benefits.
The labor charge includes the actual time to locate, compile, and reproduce the requested information.
(2) A labor charge shall not be billed in connection with complying with requests that are for 50 or fewer pages of paper records, unless
the documents to be copied are located in:
(A) Two or more separate buildings that are not physically connected with each other; or
(B) A remote storage facility.
(3) A labor charge shall not be recovered for any time spent by an attorney, legal assistant, or any other person who reviews the
requested information:
(A) To determine whether the governmental body will raise any exceptions to disclosure of the requested information under the
Texas Government Code, subchapter C, chapter 552; or
(B) To research or prepare a request for a ruling by the attorney general's office pursuant to §552.301 of the Texas Government
Code.
(4) When confidential information pursuant to a mandatory exception of the act is mixed with public information in the same page, a
labor charge may be recovered for time spent to redact, blackout, or otherwise obscure confidential information in order to release the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/526
public information. A labor charge shall not be made for redacting confidential information for requests of 50 or fewer pages, unless the
request also qualifies for a labor charge pursuant to Texas Government Code, §552.261(a)(1) or (2).
(5) If the charge for providing a copy of public information includes costs of labor, a governmental body shall comply with the
requirements of Texas Government Code, Chapter 552, §552.261(b).
(6) For purposes of subsection (e)(2)(A) of this section, two buildings connected by a covered or open sidewalk, an elevated or
underground passageway, or a similar facility, are not considered to be separate buildings.
(f) Overhead charge.
(1) Whenever any labor charge is applicable to a request, a governmental body may include in the charges direct and indirect costs, in
addition to the specific labor charge. This overhead charge would cover such costs as depreciation of capital assets, rent, maintenance and
repair, utilities, and administrative overhead. If a governmental body chooses to recover such costs, a charge shall be made in accordance
with the methodology described in subsection (f)(3) of this section. Although an exact calculation of costs will vary, the use of a standard
charge will avoid complication in calculating such costs and will provide uniformity for charges made statewide.
(2) An overhead charge shall not be made for requests for copies of 50 or fewer pages of standard paper records unless the request also
qualifies for a labor charge pursuant to Texas Government Code, §552.261(a)(1) or (2).
(3) The overhead charge shall be computed at 20% of the charge made to cover any labor costs associated with a particular request.
Example: if one hour of labor is used for a particular request, the formula would be as follows: Labor charge for locating, compiling, and
reproducing, $15.00 x 0.20 = $3.00; or Programming labor charge, $28.50 x 0.20 = $5.70. If a request requires one hour of labor charge
for locating, compiling, and reproducing information ($15.00 per hour); and one hour of programming labor charge ($28.50 per hour), the
combined overhead would be: $15.00 + $28.50 = $43.50 x 0.20 = $8.70.
(g) Microfiche and microfilm charge.
(1) If a governmental body already has information that exists on microfiche or microfilm and has copies available for sale or
distribution, the charge for a copy must not exceed the cost of its reproduction. If no copies of the requested microfiche or microfilm are
available and the information on the microfiche or microfilm can be released in its entirety, the governmental body should make a copy of
the microfiche or microfilm. The charge for a copy shall not exceed the cost of its reproduction. The Texas State Library and Archives
Commission has the capacity to reproduce microfiche and microfilm for governmental bodies. Governmental bodies that do not have inhouse
capability to reproduce microfiche or microfilm are encouraged to contact the state library before having the reproduction made
commercially.
(2) If only a master copy of information in microform is maintained, the charge is $0.10 per page for standard size paper copies, plus
any applicable labor and overhead charge for more than 50 copies.
(h) Remote document retrieval charge.
(1) Due to limited on-site capacity of storage of documents, it is frequently necessary to store information that is not in current use in
remote storage locations. Every effort should be made by governmental bodies to store current records on site. State agencies are
encouraged to store inactive or noncurrent records with the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. To the extent that the retrieval
of documents results in a charge to comply with a request, it is permissible to recover costs of such services for requests that qualify for
labor charges under current law.
(2) If a governmental body has a contract with a commercial records storage company, whereby the private company charges a fee to
locate, retrieve, deliver, and return to storage the needed record(s), no additional labor charge shall be factored in for time spent locating
documents at the storage location by the private company's personnel. If after delivery to the governmental body, the boxes must still be
searched for records that are responsive to the request, a labor charge is allowed according to subsection (e)(1) of this section.
(i) Computer resource charge.
(1) The computer resource charge is a utilization charge for computers based on the amortized cost of acquisition, lease, operation, and
maintenance of computer resources, which might include, but is not limited to, some or all of the following: central processing units
(CPUs), servers, disk drives, local area networks (LANs), printers, tape drives, other peripheral devices, communications devices,
software, and system utilities.
(2) These computer resource charges are not intended to substitute for cost recovery methodologies or charges made for purposes other
than responding to public information requests.
(3) The charges in this subsection are averages based on a survey of governmental bodies with a broad range of computer capabilities.
Each governmental body using this cost recovery charge shall determine which category(ies) of computer system(s) used to fulfill the
public information request most closely fits its existing system(s), and set its charge accordingly. Type of System–Rate: Mainframe–$10
per CPU minute; Midsize–$1.50 per CPU minute; Client/Server–$2.20 per clock hour; PC or LAN–$1.00 per clock hour.
(4) The charge made to recover the computer utilization cost is the actual time the computer takes to execute a particular program times
the applicable rate. The CPU charge is not meant to apply to programming or printing time; rather, it is solely to recover costs associated
with the actual time required by the computer to execute a program. This time, called CPU time, can be read directly from the CPU clock,
and most frequently will be a matter of seconds. If programming is required to comply with a particular request, the appropriate charge
that may be recovered for programming time is set forth in subsection (e) of this section. No charge should be made for computer print7/
13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/526
out time. Example: If a mainframe computer is used, and the processing time is 20 seconds, the charges would be as follows: $10/3 =
$3.33; or $10/60 x 20 = $3.33.
(5) A governmental body that does not have in-house computer capabilities shall comply with requests in accordance with the §552.231
of the Texas Government Code.
(j) Miscellaneous supplies. The actual cost of miscellaneous supplies, such as labels, boxes, and other supplies used to produce the requested
information, may be added to the total charge for public information.
(k) Postal and shipping charges. Governmental bodies may add any related postal or shipping expenses which are necessary to transmit the
reproduced information to the requesting party.
(l) Sales tax. Pursuant to Office of the Comptroller of Public Accounts' rules sales tax shall not be added on charges for public information (34
TAC, part 1, chapter 3, subchapter O, §3.341 and §3.342).
(m) The commission shall reevaluate and update these charges as necessary.
(Ordinance CO67-07-12-06-3B, sec. 4, adopted 11/6/07)
ARTICLE 17.000 NOISE RELATED FEES
Sec. 17.100 Special exception fees
The City shall assess and collect a fee in the amount of $50.00 per special exception application processed by the City. (Ordinance CO26-17-03-09-
H4 adopted 3/9/17)