CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CARRIZO SPRINGS, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
CARRIZO SPRINGS OFFICIALS\ 
____________ 
Dina Ojeda-Balderas (Mayor) 
Sandra C. Little (Mayor Pro Tem) 
Sofia Morones (Councilmember) 
Oscar E. Puente (Councilmember) 
Jesse Johnson (Councilmember) 
City Council 
____________ 
Nora G. Flores 
City Manager 
____________ 
Bobby Maldonado 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Melissa M. Guerra 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code, as supplemented through January 11, 1994, and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1992 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Jean B. Lindsay, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Bobby Maldonado, City Attorney, and Ms. Melissa M. Guerra, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. 791 
AN ORDINANCE BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CARRIZO SPRINGS ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CARRIZO SPRINGS, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CARRIZO SPRINGS, TEXAS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Carrizo Springs, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 40, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 10, 2018, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: (i) Pursuant to Texas Penal Code § 6.02(f), the city hereby dispenses with requirement of a culpable mental state for a violation of this Code; (ii) A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00; (iii) As to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense; and (iv) As to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act of violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 10, 2018, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective September 27, 2018. 
READ, PASSED AND APPROVED on this 27 th the day of September, 2018. 
/s/ Dina Ojeda-Balderas 
      Mayor 
      City of Carrizo Springs   ATTEST: 
/s/ Melissa M. Guerra 
      City Clerk 
      City of Carrizo Springs   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 778  4-11-2018 Omitted 1 779  8-14-2018 Omitted 1 780  8-14-2018 Omitted 1 782  9- 6-2018 Omitted 1 783  8-22-2018 Omitted 1 784  9- 6-2018 Omitted 1 785  9-11-2018 Omitted 1 786  9-11-2018 Omitted 1 787  9-11-2018 Omitted 1 788  9-25-2018 Omitted 1 789  9-25-2018 Included 1 790  9-25-2018 Included 1 791  9-27-2018 Included 1  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted by the voters on May 6, 2017. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

PREAMBLE 
    We the people of the City of Carrizo Springs, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, in order to secure the benefits of local self-government and to provide for an honest and accountable council-manager government, do hereby adopt this Charter and confer upon the city the following powers, subject to the following restrictions, and prescribed by the following procedures and governmental structure. By this action, we secure the benefits of home rule and affirm the values of representative democracy, professional management, strong political leadership, citizen participation, and regional cooperation. 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; CORPORATE AND GENERAL POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Carrizo Springs, Dimmit County, Texas, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by this Charter, shall continue to be and are hereby constituted a municipal body politic and corporate, in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of Carrizo Springs," hereinafter referred to as "the city," with such powers, privileges, rights, duties, and immunities as are herein provided. 
Sec. 1.02. - Form of government. 
a.  The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "council-manager form of city government." 
b.  All powers of the city shall be vested in an elective city council, hereinafter referred to as "the city council" or "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. 
c.  All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by law. 
Sec. 1.03. - General powers of the city. 
    The city shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. 
Sec. 1.04. - Eminent domain. 
a.  The city shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter, or by the Constitution or general laws of the state. 
b.  In all cases where the city seeks to exercise the power of eminent domain, it may be controlled, as nearly as practicable, by the laws governing the condemnation of property by railroad corporations in this state, the city taking the position of the railroad corporation in any such case. 
c.  The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the city to take the fee in the lands so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. 
d.  The city shall have and possess this power of condemnation for any municipal or public purpose, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this Charter. 
Sec. 1.05. - Annexation. 
    The city council shall have the power, by ordinance, to fix and change the bounds and limits of the city and to provide for the extension of said bounds and limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the city with or without the consent of the territory and the inhabitants thereof annexed; provided, however, that such an ordinance, or any amendment thereto, shall be published one time, prior to passage, in the newspaper of record and such ordinance shall not be passed until at least thirty days have elapsed after publication. The city shall have power to annex additional territory, lying adjacent to the city, and the inhabitants thereof, as may be authorized by, and in the manner and form prescribed by the Texas constitution and state law. 
Sec. 1.06. - Enumerated powers. 
    All powers of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
a.  Appoint and remove the city manager; 
b.  Establish administrative departments; 
c.  Distribute the work of departments and divisions; 
d.  Adopt the budget of the city; 
e.  Authorize the issuance of bonds and calling the elections therefor; 
f.  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency; 
g.  Investigate municipal affairs; 
h.  Provide for boards and commissions as deemed necessary, which shall have all powers and duties conferred by ordinance; 
i.  Adopt plats; 
j.  Adopt and modify a master plan for the city; 
k.  Adopt, modify and carry out plans for improvement or redevelopment; 
l.  Provide for regulations as permitted by law; 
m.  Appoint representation to the Dimmit Central Appraisal District; 
n.  Establish utilities and set rates for those utilities as permitted by law; 
o.  Lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, dispose of, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, squares, libraries, public places and bridges and regulate the use thereof; 
p.  Fix departmental salaries; 
q.  Establish and maintain a free public library within the city and to cooperate with another entity under such terms as the city council may agree to or prescribe for the establishment of such free public library; or 
r.  Purchase, own, construct, maintain, and operate utilities and to manufacture and distribute water, electricity, gas, or anything else that may be needed or used by the public. 
Sec. 1.07. - Effect of this Charter on existing laws. 
a.  All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force under the government of the City of Carrizo Springs and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended or repealed by the council after this Charter takes effect; and all rights and obligations of the city under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect. 
b.  All suits, taxes, penalties, forfeitures, and all other rights, claims and demands, which have accrued under the laws heretofore in force governing the City of Carrizo Springs shall belong to and be vested in and shall be prosecuted by and for the use and benefit of the municipal corporation hereby created, and shall not in anywise be diminished affected or prejudiced by the adoption and taking effect of this Charter. 
Sec. 1.08. - Amending the Charter. 
    Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the qualified voters of the city by a Charter commission in the manner provided by law for framing and submitting a new Charter. 
Sec. 1.09. - Separability clause; construction. 
    If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
ARTICLE II. - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2.01. - Number, selection, term; mayor. 
a.  The city council shall be composed of four council members and a mayor. 
b.  Each of the council members and the mayor shall be elected at-large and for a two-year term. 
Sec. 2.02. - Qualifications. 
    Only registered voters who are legal residents of the city for six months prior to the filing deadline are eligible to hold the office of council member or mayor. 
Sec. 2.03. - Compensation of members of city council. 
    No member of the city council or any appointed board or commission shall be compensated, but city council members and board or commission appointees shall be entitled to all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties or officially representing the city when such expenses are authorized and approved by the city council. 
Sec. 2.04. - Presiding officer; mayor; mayor pro tem. 
a.  The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. 
b.  The mayor shall be entitled to vote upon all matters considered by the council, but he shall have no veto power. 
c.  The mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. 
Sec. 2.05. - Vacancies in council. 
a.  The office of a council member or the mayor shall become vacant upon the member's death, resignation or removal from office in any manner authorized by law. 
b.  A council member or the mayor shall forfeit his or her office if the council member fails to meet residency requirements, violates any express prohibition of this Charter, is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the council without being excused by council. 
c.  A vacancy in the city council shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, at the next practicable regular election following the occurrence of the vacancy. 
d.  The council shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy until the person elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired term takes office. 
Sec. 2.06. - Limitation on city manager appointment. 
    No council member shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of his or her term. 
Sec. 2.07. - Appointment and removal of city manager. 
    The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term. Three (3) affirmative votes shall be required for appointment or removal of the city manager. 
Sec. 2.08. - Council not to interfere in appointment or removals. 
a.  Appointment of department heads shall be subject to the approval of the council. 
b.  City council members shall not request or direct the appointment of any person to their position, or their removal from office or employment, by the city manager or by any of his or her subordinates. 
c.  Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.09. - City clerk. 
a.  The city council shall designate an officer of the city who shall be recommended by the city manager to serve as city clerk. 
b.  The city clerk shall give notices of council meetings, shall keep the journal of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a book kept for the purpose of all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign to him or her. 
Sec. 2.10. - Municipal court. 
a.  There is hereby established a municipal court. 
b.  A municipal judge shall be appointed by the city council to serve for a term of two years. 
c.  A municipal judge may be removed for incompetency, misconduct, or malfeasance. 
d.  The municipal judge shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the council. 
e.  The municipal court shall also have jurisdiction over violations of any ordinance as permitted or authorized by law. 
f.  In the event the municipal judge is unable to act for any reason, the city council shall appoint someone to act in his or her place. 
g.  All costs and fines imposed by the court shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city as permitted by law. 
h.  The clerk of the said court and his or her deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by clerks of courts in issuing processes of said courts and conducting the business thereof. 
i.  The city council shall have the power to adopt ordinances related to the administration of the affairs of the municipal court. 
Sec. 2.11. - Induction of council into office; meetings of council. 
    Newly-elected members shall be inducted into office at the meeting in which the election results are canvased and shall qualify and assume the duties of office. Thereafter, the council shall meet regularly at such time and place as may be prescribed by the council. 
Sec. 2.12. - Council to be judge of qualifications of its members. 
    The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and for such purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records, but the decision of the council in any such case shall be subject to review by the courts. 
Sec. 2.13. - Rules of procedure; journal. 
    The council shall determine its own rules and order of businesses. It shall keep a journal of its proceedings and the journal shall be open to public inspection in accordance with state law. 
Sec. 2.14. - Ordinances. 
a.  In addition to such acts of the council as are required by statute or by this Charter to be by ordinance, every act of the council establishing a fine or other penalty or providing for the expenditure of funds or for the contracting of indebtedness, shall be by ordinance. 
b.  Ordinances shall be passed using a procedure to be established by council that is consistent with state law. 
Sec. 2.15. - Council investigation. 
a.  The council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, officer, board or commission of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. 
b.  Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one hundred dollars. 
Sec. 2.16. - Independent annual audit. 
    Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the council shall designate a public accountant who, as of the end of each fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the city government and shall submit his report to the council. Notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper in the city that the annual audit is on file at the city hall for inspection. Such accountants shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government. They shall not maintain any accounts or record of the city business, but, within specifications approved by the council, shall audit the books and documents kept by the department of finance and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the city government. 
ARTICLE III. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTION 

Sec. 3.01. - Municipal election; regular and special. 
a.  The regular elections to elect members of the city council shall be held on the state uniform election day in May. 
b.  At the regular elections to be held each odd-numbered year there shall be elected two council members and the mayor, and at the regular elections to be held each even-numbered year there shall be elected two council members. 
c.  Each council member and the mayor shall be elected from the city at-large and shall hold their respective offices for a term of two years. 
d.  The council may by appropriate ordinance or resolution order special elections, fix dates and give notice of same, and provide all means for holding such special election. 
Sec. 3.02. - Regulation of elections. 
    Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election officials, who shall also have power to make such regulations not inconsistent with this Charter, with any regulations made by ordinance or the laws of the state of Texas. 
Sec. 3.03. - How to get name on ballot. 
    Any qualified voter of the city who is otherwise qualified to hold elective office under this Charter may have his or her name printed upon the official ballot for the particular office at any election by filing his or her sworn application as required by the election code of the state of Texas with the city clerk at least thirty days prior to the election date. 
Sec. 3.04. - Council ballots. 
a.  The full names of all candidates for the council, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designations. 
b.  If two candidates with the same surnames, or with names so similar as to be likely to cause confusion have made application to have a place on the ballot, the addresses of their places of residence shall be placed with their names on the ballot. 
c.  The order of the names on the ballot shall be determined by lot. 
Sec. 3.05. - Election of council member by plurality; tie votes. 
a.  At the regular election, the candidates who have received the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. 
b.  In the event of a tie vote, the respective candidates so tied shall have the option to cast lot to determine who shall be the duly elected council member. If either of the respective candidates does not agree to cast lot, a runoff election shall be ordered. 
Sec. 3.06. - Canvassing elections. 
    The city council shall canvass and declare the results of all elections at a meeting on the Tuesday following each election. 
ARTICLE IV. - THE CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 4.01. - The city manager; qualifications. 
a.  The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her actual experience in, or his or her knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his or her office as hereinafter set forth. 
b.  At the time of his or her appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or State of Texas, but during his or her tenure of office he shall reside within the city. 
Sec. 4.02. - The city manager; powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end, he shall have power and be required to: 
a.  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by this Charter and except as he may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department. 
b.  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
c.  Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
d.  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him or her desirable. 
e.  Establish divisions with administrative departments for the purpose of efficient operations. 
f.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him or her by the council, not inconsistent with this Charter. 
Sec. 4.03. - Absence of city manager. 
a.  The city manager may designate an acting city manager by letter filed with the city clerk if the city manager is unavailable for a temporary period. 
b.  In the event of failure of the city manager to make such designation, the council shall by resolution appoint an acting city manager until the city manager returns. 
Sec. 4.04. - Directors of departments. 
a.  Each administrative department shall have a director, who shall be an officer of the city with supervision and control over the department subject to the city manager. 
b.  Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual. The city manager may head one or more departments. 
ARTICLE V. - LEGAL DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 5.01. - City attorney; appointment. 
    There shall be a legal department, the head of which shall be the city attorney, who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city council may engage special counsel as necessary. 
Sec. 5.02. - City attorney; qualifications. 
    The city attorney shall be a qualified attorney-at-law who is licensed to practice in the State of Texas. 
Sec. 5.03. - City attorney; powers and duties. 
a.  The city attorney shall be the chief legal adviser of the council, of all offices, departments and agencies and of all officers and employees in matters relating to their official powers and duties. 
b.  The city attorney shall represent the city in all legal proceedings. 
c.  It shall be the city attorney's duty to perform all services incident to his or her position as may be required by statute, by this Charter or by ordinance. 
d.  The city attorney and the city manager shall not be the same individual. 
ARTICLE VI. - THE BUDGET 

Sec. 6.01. - Fiscal year. 
a.  The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of the next following calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
b.  As used in this Charter, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. 
c.  The council shall have the power to change the dates of the fiscal year, after notice and public hearing. 
Sec. 6.02. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
    The city manager, at least twenty days prior to the beginning of each budget year, shall submit to the council a proposed budget and an explanatory budget, message, supporting schedules and exhibits, and a proposed property tax rate. 
Sec. 6.03. - Budget a public record. 
a.  The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city clerk open to public inspection. 
b.  The city manager shall cause sufficient copies of the proposed budget and budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested persons. 
Sec. 6.04. - Publication of notice of public hearing. 
    At the meeting of the council at which the budget and budget message are submitted, the council shall determine the place and time of the public hearing on the budget, and shall cause to be published a notice of the place and time, not less than seven days after date of publication, at which the council will hold a public hearing. 
Sec. 6.05. - Public hearing on budget. 
    At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
Sec. 6.06. - Vote required for adoption. 
    The budget shall be adopted by a minimum of three (3) favorable votes of the council, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.07. - Date of final adoption; failure to adopt. 
a.  The budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be finally adopted by ordinance not later than the last day of the last month of the current fiscal year. 
b.  Should the council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget of the preceding fiscal year shall be applicable automatically for the first month of the ensuing fiscal year, under the presumption that action will be taken during that time. 
c.  The budget shall be amended by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.08. - Effective date of budget; certification; copies made available. 
a.  Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the city clerk, the county clerk, and as otherwise provided by state law. 
b.  The final budget shall be reproduced and sufficient copies shall be made available for the use of all interested parties. 
Sec. 6.09. - Budget establishes appropriations. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named. 
Sec. 6.10. - Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purpose of the city in the corresponding tax year. 
Sec. 6.11. - Budget contents. 
    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year. It shall contain the following: 
1)  A budget message. 
2)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures for all funds. 
3)  An analysis of property valuations. 
4)  An analysis of anticipated tax rate. 
5)  Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least ten years. 
6)  General fund resources in detail. 
7)  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department and activity. 
8)  Summary of proposed expenditures by character and object. 
9)  Detailed estimates for expenditures shown separately for each activity to support the summaries mentioned in [subsections] (7) and (8) above. Such estimates of expenditures are to include an itemization of positions showing the number of persons having each title and the rate of pay. 
10)  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds. 
11)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued, and amount outstanding. 
12)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest on each issue of bonds. 
13)  A special funds section. 
14)  The appropriation ordinance. 
15)  A copy of the form of the proposed tax-levying ordinance. 
The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt service fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund (prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions will permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the national committee on municipal accounting or some other nationally accepted classification. 
Sec. 6.12. - Anticipated revenues compared with other years. 
    In parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue, there shall be placed the actual amount of such items for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year. 
Sec. 6.13. - Proposed expenditures compared with other years. 
a.  The proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, maintenance and capital outlay of each office, department or agency of the city shall be itemized by character and object. 
b.  In parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures, there shall be placed the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year. 
Sec. 6.14. - Contingent appropriation. 
    Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriate ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount not more than three percent (3%) of the total general fund expenditure, and like amounts of the utility funds, to be used in the case of unforeseen items of expenditures. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the city manager and distributed by him or her after approval by the city council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported. The proceeds of the contingent appropriation shall be disbursed only by transfer to other departmental appropriations, the spending of which shall be charged to the departments or activities for which the appropriations are made. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 7.01. - Director of finance; appointment. 
a.  There shall be a department of finance, the head or director of which shall be the city manager or be appointed by the city manager subject to the city council's approval. 
b.  The director of finance shall be selected only after the solicitation of qualified applicants. 
Sec. 7.02. - Director of finance; powers and duties. 
    The director of finance shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city and to that end he shall have authority and shall be required to: 
1)  Compile the estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget as directed by the city manager. 
2)  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all monies and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded. 
3)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over such office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient. 
4)  Submit to the council through the city manager a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the day. 
5)  Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report. 
6)  Supervise and be responsible for the collection of all taxes, special assessment, license fees and other revenues of the city or for whose collection the city is responsible and receive all money receivable by the city from the state or federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the city. 
7)  Shall[sic] have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city, or any office, department or agency of the city government, and deposit all funds coming into his or her hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the council, or by the city manager, if no such resolution be adopted, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits, but all such interest shall be the property of the city and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account. 
8)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange. 
9)  Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the city government. 
10)  Approve all proposed expenditures; and unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds, no appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be made. 
11)  Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the city. 
12)  Examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the city incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that monies have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations shall become due and payable. 
13)  Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidence of claims, demands or charges against the city government and with the advice of the city attorney determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges. 
14)  Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the city apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his or her office. 
Sec. 7.03. - Director of finance; surety bond. 
    The director of finance shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the council may require, except that such bond shall be in an amount of not less than $10,000.00. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 7.04. - Accounting supervision and control. 
    The director of finance shall have power and shall be required to: 
1)  Prescribe a purchase order system to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the city. 
2)  Examine and advise the city manager on all contracts, orders and other documents by which the city incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that monies have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations shall become due and payable. 
3)  Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payroll and other evidence of claims, demands or charges against the city government and with the advice of the city attorney determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges. 
4)  Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions that may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the city apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his or her office. 
5)  Establish a purchasing division, which shall contract for the purchase, storage, and distribution of all supplies, materials, and equipment required by any office department or agency of the city. The division of purchases shall also: 
a.  Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials, and equipment required by the city; and 
b.  Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, and equipment, and determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
Sec. 7.05. - Appropriations lapse at end of year. 
    All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
Sec. 7.06. - Fees shall be paid to city. 
    All fees and charges for city services received by any officer or employee shall belong to the city and shall be paid to the department of finance at such times as required by the director of finance. 
Sec. 7.07. - Sale of city personal property; procedure. 
a.  Before the city makes any sale or contract for the sale of any personal property belonging to the city, having an estimated value of $1,000.00 or less, opportunity shall be given for open competition under such rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe. 
b.  In the sale of any such property valued at more than $1,000.00 the property shall be advertised for sale and bids in the local newspaper of record, and the contract of sale shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed, provided the city council shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. These same procedures shall be used whenever the city acts as transfer agent. 
c.  The city manager shall advise city council and seek approval before any such sale of city property, regardless of the price. 
Sec. 7.08. - Procurement. 
    All purchases or contracts for any supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services shall follow a procurement procedure to be established by city council in accordance with state law. 
Sec. 7.09. - Disbursement of funds. 
a.  All checks, vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depository shall be prepared and signed by two separate authorized signatories. 
b.  The city manager, finance director, and mayor are automatically authorized signatories. 
c.  The council may designate authorized signatories by resolution. 
Sec. 7.10. - Borrowing. 
    The city shall have the right and power to borrow money on the credit of the city for any purpose authorized by law. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Sec. 8.01. - Power of initiative. 
a.  The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose any ordinance not in conflict with this Charter or with state law, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes. This power shall be known as the power of initiative. 
b.  Any initiative ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election. The city clerk shall provide an exact number of the required signatures to any party who requests that number. 
Sec. 8.02. - Power of referendum. 
a.  The qualified voters of the city shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance, such power being known as the referendum. Ordinances submitted to the council by initiative petition and passed by the council without change shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. 
b.  Within twenty days after the enactment by the council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least 25 percent of the number of votes cast at the last preceding regular municipal election may be filed with the city clerk requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the qualified voters. The city clerk shall provide an exact number of the required signatures to any party who requests that number. 
Sec. 8.03. - Form of petitions; committee of petitioners. 
a.  Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. 
b.  Each signer of any petition paper shall sign his or her name in ink or indelible pencil and shall indicate after his or her name his or her place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. 
c.  There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of five qualified voters, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. 
d.  Attached to each separate petition paper then shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all signatures appended thereto were made in his or her presence, and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
Sec. 8.04. - Filing, examination and certification of petitions. 
a.  All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the city clerk as one instrument. 
b.  Within twenty days after a petition is filed, the city clerk shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified voters. 
c.  The city clerk shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have attached thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. 
d.  If a petition paper is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified by the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number certified shall be disregarded. If a petition paper is found to be signed by fewer persons than the number certified, the signatures shall be accepted unless void on other grounds. 
e.  After completing his or her examination of the petition, the city clerk shall certify the result thereof to the council at its next regular meeting. If he shall certify that the petition is insufficient, he shall set forth in his or her certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of his or her findings. 
f.  An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the city clerk, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided in case of an original petition. 
g.  The city clerk shall, within five days after such an amendment is filed, examine the amended petition. If the petition is still insufficient, he shall file his or her certificate to that effect and notify the committee of the petitioners of his or her findings. No further action on the insufficient petition shall be taken, but a finding of insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Sec. 8.05. - Referendums; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
a.  When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk, the ordinance proposed for reconsideration shall be suspended from taking effect. 
b.  Such suspension shall terminate when: 
i)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; 
ii)  The committee of petitioners withdraws the petition; 
iii)  The council repeals the ordinance; or 
iv)  Thirty days have elapsed after a vote of the city on the ordinance. 
Sec. 8.06. - Consideration by council. 
a.  The city council shall consider a certified initiative or referendum petition at the next practicable regular meeting of the city council after certification of the petition. 
b.  There shall be a public hearing held on the proposed ordinance. 
c.  The council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than sixty days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted to the council by the city clerk. 
d.  A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the council, and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question, "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?" 
Sec. 8.07. - Submission to qualified voters. 
    A proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted at the next practicable uniform election date, if: 
a.  The city council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition; 
b.  The city council shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefor; or 
c.  The city council fails to repeal a referred ordinance. 
Sec. 8.08. - Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances. 
a.  Ordinances submitted to vote of the qualified voters in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the city attorney. 
b.  The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance, if a paper ballot, shall have below the ballot title and following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." 
c.  Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting thereon shall be for that purpose only. 
d.  If voting machines are used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall have below it the same two propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the qualified voter shall be given an opportunity to vote for either of the two propositions and thereby to vote for or against the ordinance. 
Sec. 8.09. - Results of election. 
a.  If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the city. 
b.  A referred ordinance that is not approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. 
c.  If conflicting ordinances are approved by the qualified voters at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
Sec. 8.10. - Repealing ordinances; publication. 
    Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by a majority of the qualified voters shall be published as provided elsewhere in this Charter, and may be amended or repealed by the council, as in the case of other ordinances. 
Sec. 8.11. - Recall; generally. 
    The mayor or any member of the city council may be removed from office by recall. 
Sec. 8.12. - Recall procedure. 
a.  Any qualified voter of the city may make and file with the city clerk an affidavit containing the name or names of the officer or officers whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. 
b.  The city clerk shall thereupon deliver to the qualified voter making such affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. The city clerk shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. 
c.  Such blanks when issued by the city clerk shall bear the signature of that officer and be addressed to the city council, and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued and the name of the officer whose removal is sought. The city clerk shall enter in a record to be kept in his or her office the name of the qualified voter to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to said person. 
Sec. 8.13. - Recall petitions. 
a.  The recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the city clerk within thirty days after the filing of the affidavit required, and it must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least 30 percent of the total number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election at which council members were elected. 
b.  No petition papers shall be accepted as part of a petition unless it bears the signature of the city clerk as required therein. 
Sec. 8.14. - Recall election. 
a.  The city clerk shall at once examine the recall petition and if he finds it sufficient and in compliance with the provisions of this article of the Charter, he shall within five days submit it to the city council with his or her certificate to that effect and notify the officer sought to be recalled of such action. 
b.  If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within five days after such notice, the city council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall election on the next practicable uniform election date. 
Sec. 8.15. - Ballots in recall election. 
    Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
1)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question to be submitted shall be: "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?" 
2)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
a.  "For the recall of (name of person)." 
b.  "Against the recall of (name of person)." 
Sec. 8.16. - Results of recall election. 
a.  If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her unexpired term, subject to recall as before. 
b.  If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled by the city council as in other vacancies. 
Sec. 8.17. - Limitations on recalls. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against the mayor or a council member within six months after he takes office nor in respect to an officer subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six months after such election. 
Sec. 8.18. - District judge may order election. 
    If the city council fails or refuses to order an election provided for in this article, and if all the requirements for such election have complied with this article, then the district judge shall have the duty, upon proper application being made, to order such election and to enforce the provisions of this article. 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9.01. - Oath of office. 
    Every person elected or appointed to office in the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, take and subscribe the official oath prescribed by the state constitution and shall give such bond and security for the faithful discharge of his or her duties as may be required by ordinance. 
Sec. 9.02. - Execution and garnishment. 
    No execution shall be issued or levied by virtue of any judgment that may be recovered against the city, but the council shall provide for the payments of judgments in the levying of taxes next after the final recovery of such judgments from the city. All assets of the city, including lands, houses, moneys, debts due the city, personal and real property, and assets of every description belonging to the city, shall be exempt from execution and sale; but the city shall make provisions, by taxation or otherwise, for the payment of any and all indebtedness incurred by the city. No writ of garnishment shall issue against the city to subject or seize any debt to any person or corporation, or any claim or demand upon any fund in the hands of said city or any of its officers; nor shall the city or any of its officers or agents, be required to answer any writ of garnishment. 
Sec. 9.03. - Conflicts of interest; board of ethics. 
a.  Conflicts of interest. The use of public office for private gain is prohibited. The city council shall implement this prohibition by ordinance, the terms of which shall include, but not be limited to: acting in an official capacity on matters in which the official has a private financial interest clearly separate from that of the general public; the acceptance of gifts and other things of value; acting in a private capacity on matters dealt with as a public official; the use of confidential information; and appearances by city officials before other city agencies on behalf of private interests. This ordinance shall include a statement of purpose and shall provide for reasonable public disclosure of finances by officials with major decision-making authority over monetary expenditures and contractual and regulatory matters and, insofar as permissible under state law, shall provide for fines and imprisonment for violations. 
b.  Board of ethics. The city council shall, by ordinance, establish an independent board of ethics to administer and enforce the conflict of interest and financial disclosure ordinances. No member of the board may hold elective or appointed office under the city or any other government or hold any political party office. Insofar as possible under state law, the city council shall authorize the board to issue binding advisory opinions, conduct investigations on its own initiative and on referral or complaint from officials or citizens, subpoena witnesses and documents, refer cases for prosecution, impose administrative fines, and to hire independent counsel. The city council shall appropriate sufficient funds to the board of ethics to enable it to perform the duties assigned to it and to provide annual training and education of city officials and employees, including candidates for public office, regarding the ethics code. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table shows the location of the amendments to the Charter. The Charter was approved by the voters on May 6, 2017. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
in Charter  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Carrizo Springs, Texas," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1971, § 1-1; Code 1992, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, Texas Local Government Code § 53.001. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction, interpretation and definitions. 
    The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction shall tend to further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular mischiefs for which the provisions were enacted. Words shall be construed in their common and usual meaning unless the contrary is clearly indicated. In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Carrizo Springs, in the County of Dimmit and the State of Texas. 
    City council, council. The terms "council" and "city council" mean the city council of Carrizo Springs, constituting the governing body of the city. 
    City officers, departments, boards, committees, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officers, departments, boards, committees, commissions, etc., the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas." 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, printed as part II of this volume. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall not be counted for any purpose in any time period of five days or less. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 4; Texas Government Code § 311.014. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Dimmit, Texas. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend to and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Where criminal prosecution may lie, the officers of any corporation shall jointly and severally be subject to prosecution as being included within the term "person." 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
    Standard time. All hours of time mentioned in this Code refer to and shall be determined by Central Standard Time, or Central Daylight Saving Time, as the case may be, except that, if at any future time any different standard of time is established by the state for an area which includes this city, all such hours shall be determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as it remains in effect. 
    State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Texas codes, statutes and rules. All references to Texas codes, statutes and rules are to such codes, statutes and rules as now are hereafter amended. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1971, § 1-3; Code 1992, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Texas Government Code § 311.005. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1971, § 1-2; Code 1992, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1992, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1992, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the town relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of Code on prior offenses, rights, uses of property. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, that section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1971, § 1-4; Code 1992, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-10. - Additions and amendments deemed incorporated in Code. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(Code 1992, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ ," (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting the Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or adopting an annual budget or prescribing salaries for city officers and employees; 
(3)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(4)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance granting any franchise; 
(6)  The zoning ordinance included in appendix A to this Code; 
(7)  Any ordinance awarding or granting any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(8)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances establishing speed limits or designating one-way streets, no-parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing or amending zoning or land use regulations or the zoning map or rezoning property; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(14)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending personnel rules or regulations; 
(16)  Any ordinance prescribing subdivision regulations; 
(17)  Any ordinance adopting sales and use taxes; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing taxicab passenger rates; 
(19)  Any ordinance calling municipal elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law; 
(20)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(21)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect; 
(22)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect; 
(23)  Any ordinance containing any administrative provisions. 
(b)  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1971, § 1-5; Code 1992, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-13. - Effect of repeal of an ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1992, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1971, § 1-8; Code 1992, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-15. - Responsibility for violations by firms, corporations or associations. 
    In case of a violation of any of the terms or provisions of this Code or other ordinance by any firm, corporation or association, the officers and agents actively in charge of the business of such firm, corporation or association shall be responsible for such violation and subject to prosecution therefor. 
(Code 1971, § 1-7; Code 1992, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-16. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  Pursuant to Texas Penal Code § 6.02(f), the city hereby dispenses with requirement of a culpable mental state for a violation of this Code. 
(2)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(3)  As to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(4)  As to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act of violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, Texas Local Government Code § 54.001. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities generally, Texas Local Government Code § 5.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Notice to mayor and city council required for property damage or personal injury claims. 
(a)  The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within 60 days or within six months for good cause shown from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount of which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(b)  No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall ever prove that previous to the filing of the original petition, the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(c)  All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary, city clerk or city manager at the following location: 308 West Pena Street, Carrizo Springs, Texas 78834, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of one of the persons named above. 
(d)  The written notice requirements in subsection (c) of this section shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have knowledge unless the knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the city. 
(e)  The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Code 1992, § 2-1; Ord. No. 528, §§ 1-5, 9-8-1992) 
State Law reference- Notice provisions ratified, Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101. 
Sec. 2-2. - Collection fee for fines, court costs, etc. 
    In accordance with Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 103.0031, there is hereby imposed an additional fee of 30 percent on all debts and accounts receivable (i.e., fines, fees, court costs, restitution, and other debts that are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to a private firm (Perdue) for collection). 
(Ord. No. 706, § 2, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 2-3. - City marshal. 
    There is hereby created the position of city marshal. The city marshal shall be certified as a law enforcement officer in the state; shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to the approval of the city council; and shall serve under the direction and control of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 716, arts. 1, 2, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 2-4. - Records management. 
(a)  Definition of records. All documents, papers, letter, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(b)  Records declared public property. All records as defined in subsection (a) of this section are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No official or employee of the city has, by virtue of his position, any persona] or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(c)  Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all records of this office through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(d)  Records management officer. The city clerk will serve as records management officer for the city as provided by law and will ensure that the maintenance, destruction, electronic storage, or other disposition of the records of this office are carried out in accordance with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act. 
(e)  Records control schedules. Appropriate records control schedules issued by the state library and archives commission shall be adopted by the records management officer for use in city will be in accordance with these schedules and the Locals Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 777, §§ 1-5, 4-10-2018) 
Secs. 2-5-2-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-15-2-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-42-2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-66. - Created; composition. 
    The city hereby joins in the creation of a regional planning commission pursuant to Texas Local Government Code § 391.003 to be known as the Middle Rio Grande Development Council and comprising the area of Dimmit, Edwards, Frio, Kinney, LaSalle, Maverick, Medina, Real, Uvalde, Val Verde and Zavala counties and their constituent cities, plus such other adjoining counties and cities as may from time to time voluntarily choose to become members of such commission. The mayor is authorized by this section to sign the articles of agreement forming such planning commission. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1; Code 1992, § 2-66) 
State Law reference- Regional planning commissions, Texas Local Government Code § 311.001 et seq. 
Secs. 2-67-2-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning commission required, Texas Local Government Code § 211.007. 

Sec. 2-77. - Subject to council jurisdiction. 
    The planning and zoning commission (also referred to as the "commission"), created and established, in accordance with Texas Local Government Code ch. 211, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 767, intro, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-78. - Number of members. 
    The commission shall consist of seven members who are resident citizens, taxpayers and qualified voters. Furthermore, commission member's properties must be and must remain in compliance during their tenure. Failure to do so shall result in the commission member's automatic vacation of office. 
(Ord. No. 767, § 1, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-79. - Appointment. 
    Members shall be nominated for appointment by the mayor or by a member of the city council, and each person so nominated must be approved by a simple majority vote of the city council before becoming a member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 767, § 2, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-80. - Term of office. 
    All appointments to the commission shall be for terms of two years and expiration of terms shall be staggered so that an overlapping of terms occurs. In July 2017, the city council will name the members of the planning and zoning commission. The city shall draw lots to determine three members who shall serve a one-year term and four members who shall serve a two-year term. Terms will end on September 30 of the appropriate year. Thereafter, terms shall run from October 1 through September 30. Each September, the city council shall appoint members to the commission (should they be re-appointments or new appointments) to take office on October 1. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall regularly attend commission meetings and public hearings and shall serve without compensation. Commission members shall not hold any other full-time office or position with the city while serving on the commission. 
(Ord. No. 767, § 3, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-81. - Vacancies. 
    When vacancies occur on the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall appoint, by majority vote a replacement to serve the remainder of that term. 
(Ord. No. 767, § 4, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-82. - Officers. 
    The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its membership and each officer will hold office for one year. the city clerk shall serve as secretary to the commission (but will not serve as a voting member of the commission) and shall keep minutes of all meetings held by the planning and zoning commission as well as the full record of all recommendations made by the commission to the city council. The minutes and other records maintained by the city clerk for the planning and zoning commission are public records. 
(Ord. No. 767, § 5, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-83. - Meetings and attendance. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have its regular meeting on the first Monday of each month and/or at such times as the planning and zoning commission and/or city council deem necessary. Failure to attend three consecutive scheduled meetings shall be deemed as neglect and cause for automatic vacation of office, unless such absence were due to unusual circumstances beyond the member's control such as sickness of the member or someone within the member's immediate family. The commission shall meet a minimum of once per month. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 767, § 6, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-84. - Removal from office. 
    Member of the commission may be removed without cause by an affirmative vote of the majority of the full membership of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 767, § 7, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-85. - Quorum and voting. 
    Four members of the planning and zoning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No action or recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the planning and zoning commission members present. The chairperson shall be considered a voting member of the planning and zoning commission. Conflict of interest: If any member has a conflict of interest regarding any item on the commission's agenda, the member shall openly declare same before discussion proceeds. And the member is thereby prohibited from discussing the item or voting on the question, and is not considered present and voting for the purpose of the tally. (Refer to Texas Government Code ch. 171, regarding conflicts of interest). 
(Ord. No. 767, § 8, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-86. - Powers and authority. 
(a)  The commission shall have all the rights, powers, privileges and authority authorized and granted by and through the statutes of the state authorizing and granting cities the power of zoning and subdivision regulation as found in Texas Government Code chs. 211 and 212. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall be responsible to and act as an advisory board to the city council. The planning and zoning commission shall: 
(1)  Review all current and proposed ordinances and amendments pertaining to planning and zoning and make recommendations to the city council for the action to be taken; 
(2)  Make proposals to the of city council to amend, extend and add to the comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city; 
(3)  Keep public records of its resolutions, findings and determinations; 
(4)  Review plats and zoning requests and make recommendations to the city council for the final adoption of same; 
(5)  Perform all functions and duties as required by law and such other and further duties as requested of it by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 767, § 9, 7-11-2017) 
Secs. 2-87-2-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-116-2-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOCIAL SECURITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Social Security for municipal employees, Texas Government Code § 606.021 et seq. 

Sec. 2-167. - Execution of agreements. 
    The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of securing federal old-age and survivors benefits for city employees under applicable state and federal laws. The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and the city. 
(Code 1971, § 2-16; Code 1992, § 2-121) 
Sec. 2-168. - Duties of city clerk. 
    The city clerk is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments, and reports, as required by the state in connection with the federal old-age and survivors insurance for city employees. 
(Code 1971, § 2-17; Code 1992, § 2-122) 
Sec. 2-169. - Allocation of funds. 
    A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of applicable state and federal laws relating to the federal old-age and survivors insurance program, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the city social security fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1971, § 2-18; Code 1992, § 2-123) 
Secs. 2-170-2-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Municipal Retirement System, Texas Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-196. - City participation. 
    The city participates in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided by law, ordinance and agreements with the state. 
State Law reference- Municipal participation in Texas Municipal Retirement System, Texas Government Code § 852.001 et seq. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1. - Hours of operation adopted. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for any person within the extended hours area of the city as defined in this chapter to consume any alcoholic beverage in a public place or to possess any alcoholic beverage in a public place for the purpose of consuming the same in such public place during the extended hours specified by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.06. 
(b)  It shall be lawful for the holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license within the extended hours area of the city, as defined in this chapter, to sell beer or to offer beer for sale during the extended hours specified by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 70.01 and 105.05. 
(c)  It shall be lawful for the holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit within the extended hours area of the city, as defined in this chapter, to sell and to offer for sale alcoholic beverages during the extended hours specified by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 29.01 and 105.03. 
(Code 1971, § 2-5-1(a); Code 1992, § 3-1; Ord. No. 381, § 1, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-2. - Extended hours area established, described. 
(a)  The extended hours area of the city is established and described as within the corporate limits of the city on each side of and within one-half block on each side of the two streets and highways named and further defined as follows: 
(1)  On Pena Street from its intersection with United States Highway 83 west to its intersection with Sixteenth Street. 
(2)  On United States Highway 83 from its intersection with Pena Street north to its intersection with United States Highway 85. 
(b)  The extended hours area of the city described in subsection (a) of this section is made subject to the extended hours of sale provided in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 105.03 and 105.05. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2; Ord. No. 381, § 2, 12-8-1981) 
State Law reference- Extended hours, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 105.03, 105.05. 
Sec. 4-3. - License and permit fees. 
(a)  As authorized by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38 and 61.36, the city levies an annual fee equal to one-half the state fee for each permit or license issued pursuant to the state alcoholic beverage code for premises located within the city. 
(b)  The only exemptions to the above fees shall be those provided by the state alcoholic beverage code. 
(Code 1971, § 2-5-1(b); Code 1992, § 3-3; Ord. No. 381, § 3, 12-8-1981) 
Sec. 4-4. - Hours of sale of mixed beverages, beer and wine. 
(a)  Hours of sale of mixed beverages. 
(1)  No person may sell or offer for sale, mixed beverages at any time not permitted by this section. 
(2)  A mixed beverage holder may sell and offer for sale mixed beverages between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day except Sunday. On Sunday, a person may sell mixed beverages between 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight. 
(3)  A holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit may also sell or offer for sale mixed beverages between 12:00 midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(b)  Hours of sale of beer and wine. 
(1)  No person may sell, offer for sale or deliver beer at any time not permitted by this section. 
(2)  A person may sell, offer for sale, or deliver beer between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day except Sunday. On Sunday, a person may sell beer between 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight. 
(3)  A holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license may also sell or offer for sale beer between 12:00 midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(c)  Hours of sale of alcoholic beverages prescribed by state law. The hours of sale and delivery for alcoholic beverages sold under a wine and beer retailer's permit or a wine and beer retailer's off-premise are the same as those prescribed for the sale of beer by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4; Ord. No. 516, § 1, 10-29-1991; Ord. No. 532, §§ 1, 2A, 2B, 2-9-1993) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 826; cruelty to animals, Texas Penal Code § 42.09 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Maintenance of enclosures. 
    All pens, stables or enclosures in which any animals or fowl are kept or confined in the city shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and so drained and all offal so removed as to create no offensive odor or smell. 
(Code 1971, § 4-1; Code 1992, § 4-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Keeping of swine prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, maintain, or have in his possession any swine within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 4-2; Code 1992, § 4-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Running at large of livestock, rabbits, and fowl prohibited. 
    The running at large of horses, mules, jacks, jennets, cattle, sheep, goats, rabbits or domestic fowl within the city limits is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any such animal or fowl to permit the same to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 4-3; Code 1992, § 4-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Rabies vaccination. 
    Each owner of a dog or cat has a duty to have the dog or cat inoculated annually with an antirabic vaccine by a licensed veterinarian. The veterinarian, upon collection of his fees, shall issue and deliver to the owner a vaccination certificate, containing the name and address of the owner, the date of vaccination, and a description of the vaccinated animal, including breed, color, age, and sex. 
(Code 1971, § 4-18; Code 1992, § 4-4; Ord. No. 413, § 4.17, 5-8-1984) 
State Law reference- Rabies control, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 826. 
Sec. 6-5. - Destruction of rabid, vicious, or injured animals. 
(a)  The police department by a humane method if practicable under the circumstances may destroy any rabid animal or any dangerous or vicious animal when necessary for the protection of persons or property. 
(b)  The police department may destroy by a humane method any injured animal found at large when: 
(1)  The animal is immobile and the severity of the injury would lead a reasonable nonmedical person to conclude that the animal is suffering with no, or only slight, chance of recovery and that it would be humane to euthanize the animal; and 
(2)  The animal does not bear a tag identifying its owner, and the owner cannot be located in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1992, § 4-5; Ord. No. 413, § 4.18, 5-8-1984) 
Secs. 6-6-6-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 6-29. - Running at large-Defined, prohibited. 
    Running at large means the presence of a dog at any place except the premises of the owner, except that a dog is not running at large if it is on a leash and under the control of a person physically able to control the dog. It is unlawful for any person owning or possessing any dog to permit it to run at large. 
Code 1992, § 4-26; No. 413, § 4.19, 5-8-1984) 
Sec. 6-30. - Same-Vicious, diseased dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning a dog to permit it to run or remain at large and unrestrained within the city limits when: 
(1)  Such person knows or reasonably should have known that the dog is dangerous or vicious, or has in the past shown a propensity to be dangerous or vicious, or when such person knows that the dog has at any time in the past attacked, mauled, molested, bitten or menaced any person without apparent provocation; or 
(2)  Such person knows or reasonably should have known that the dog is afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease that can deleteriously affect the health of persons or other domestic animals. 
(b)  If the owner of any diseased or infected dog found at large and unrestrained within the city limits shall have failed to obtain for such dog any vaccination or treatment required by other provisions of this article, he shall be presumed to have known of the diseased or infected condition of the dog. 
(Code 1992, § 4-27; Ord. No. 413, § 4.25, 5-8-1984) 
Sec. 6-31. - Impoundment-Running at large. 
(a)  Whenever the city animal control officer or any police officer finds a dog running at large, he shall, if possible, take possession of and impound the dog in the city dog pound. 
(b)  In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding a dog found at large, the animal control officer may cite the owner of the dog to appear in municipal court and answer to the alleged violation. 
(Code 1992, § 4-28; Code 1971, § 4-19; Ord. No. 413, § 4.20, 5-8-1984) 
Sec. 6-32. - Same-Notice, redemption. 
    If an impounded dog bears a collar tag or license identifying its owner, the owner shall be promptly notified of the impoundment of the animal, and any impounded animal shall be held for a period of up to four days during which time the owner may reclaim the animal upon payment to the city of the fees and costs provided in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 4-20; Code 1992, § 4-29; Ord. No. 413, § 4.21, 5-8-1984) 
Sec. 6-33. - Same-Failure to redeem. 
    Upon the expiration of four days from the date of impoundment or in the case of an identifiable animal upon the expiration of four days from the date of notice to its owner, if the impounded dog has not been reclaimed by its owner it shall be humanely euthanized or placed for adoption in a suitable home. 
(Code 1971, § 4-21; Code 1992, § 4-30; Ord. No. 413, § 4.22, 5-8-1984) 
Sec. 6-34. - Same-Fees, vaccination certificate. 
    The owner of an impounded dog may reclaim the dog at any time prior to its euthanization or adoption in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The owner shall pay to the city an impoundment fee as established by the city. 
(2)  The owner shall produce a current vaccination certificate for the dog. 
(Code 1992, § 4-31; Ord. No. 413, § 4.23, 5-8-1984) 
Sec. 6-35. - Prohibited activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning a dog to fail to exercise ordinary care and control of the dog to prevent it from molesting passersby, attacking persons or other domestic animals, running through or across cultivated gardens or trespassing upon private property in such manner as to damage, destroy or partially destroy, litter, or to overturn, spill or drag the contents from any trash or garbage container, or to defecate or urinate on such property or any appurtenances thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 4-33; Ord. No. 413, § 4.24, 5-8-1984) 
Secs. 6-36-6-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESTRICTIONS ON NUMBER OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-57. - Dogs and cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor more than two dogs or cats or combination of both, three months of age or older on any premises used for residential purposes. The owners of dogs and/or cats shall have three months from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived in which to comply with these provisions. 
(b)  Dogs or cats are kept or harbored so as to not to be a nuisance or detriment to any adjoining or adjacent neighbors. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 4.28, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 6-58. - Horses, goats, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or use within the corporate limits of this city, any pen or enclosure within which hides, cattle or horses are kept with the following exceptions: A stable will be allowed on a lot having an area of more than 20,000 square feet, providing that it is located not less than 100 feet from the front lot line. On such lots there shall not be kept more than one horse, cow, pony, mule, sheep or goat for each 20,000 square feet of lot area. A horse, mule, sheep, goat and cattle shall not be allowed within 100 feet from any dwelling used for human habitation, except that of persons dwelling on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 4.28, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 6-59. - Fowl. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, keep, harbor, maintain or raise more than four fowl, poultry, and all species of chicken or roosters within the city limits. This section does not pertain to household caged domestic birds such as canaries, parakeets or parrots. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 4.28, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 6-60. - Animal control officer authority. 
(a)  The city's animal control officer or/and the city inspector/code enforcement officer are hereby designated the person responsible for the purpose of the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Any animal control officer of the city shall have authority to issue citations for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 4.28, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 6-61. - Exceptions. 
    Any person who has animals which do not conform to the regulations prescribed in this chapter shall be allowed to retain those animals so long as the animals are raised for the sole purposes of participation in 4-H or the National FFA Organization. Proof of participation shall be provided to the city's animal control officer. This exception may be revoked at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 789 , § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Land development code. 
    The city's land development code (as amended) is hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 8-2. - Building and zoning fees. 
    The permits and fee schedule, as established by the council, shall be charged and collected by the city from all customers for residential, commercial, construction and planning and zoning purposes. 
(Ord. No. 765, §§ 1, 2, 5-30-2017) 
Sec. 8-3. - Telecommunication towers prohibited. 
    The placement of cellular towers, personal communication service (PCS) or cable towers with the city limits is hereby prohibited. This chapter shall not be in conflict with the Federal Telecommunication Act of 1996. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Secs. 8-4-8-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 8-25. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2003 edition, including appendix chapters (see International Building Code section 101.2.1, 2003 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the building code for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, building and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-26. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1, 9-13-2005) 
Sec. 8-26. - Revisions. 
    The following sections are hereby revised: 
    Section 101.1; Insert: City of Carrizo Springs. 
    Section 1612.3; Insert: City of Carrizo Springs. 
    Section 1612.3; Insert: September 13, 2005. 
    Section 3410.2; Insert: September 13, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 2, 9-13-2005) 
Sec. 8-27. - Fire zones established. 
    For the purpose of safeguarding property against fire hazards within the business, warehouse and commercial district, fire limits comprising two definite zones are established as follows: 
(1)  Fire Zone No. 1. Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Sixth Street and the centerline of Hay Street; thence southeast along the centerline of Hay Street and continuing in a straight line on the same course to the intersection with the centerline of the right-of-way of the Missouri Pacific Railroad Company extended; thence northeast along the line as extended and along the centerline of the right-of-way of the Missouri Pacific Railroad Company to the intersection with the centerline of English Street extended; thence northwest along the line as extended and along the centerline of English Street to the intersection with the centerline of Sixth Street; thence southwest with the centerline of Sixth Street to the point of beginning; save and except herefrom all of block two of the original townsite of the city according to the map and plat thereof recorded in volume 1 on page 13, Deed Records, Dimmit County, Texas. 
(2)  Fire Zone No. 2. Beginning at the intersection of the center of the Missouri Pacific right-of-way and the east corner of Fire Zone No. 1; thence southeast in a straight line to conform with the northeast side of Fire Zone No. 1 to Cliff Street; thence southwest along Cliff Street in a straight line to a point directly southeast of the south corner of Fire Zone No. 1; thence northwest to the south corner of Fire Zone No. 1; thence northeast along the center of the Missouri Pacific right-of-way to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1971, § 5-1; Code 1992, § 5-30) 
Secs. 8-28-8-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apprentice electrician means any person who, as his principal occupation, is engaged in learning and assisting a master electrician, electrical contractor, or journeyman. 
    Journeyman electrician means any person employed by a master electrician or person duly licensed and bonded in the city after first serving as an apprentice electrician. 
    Master electrician means any person, engaged in the business of, or holding themselves out to the public as engaged in the business of installing or repairing, or contracting to install or repair wires, conductors and equipment used within or on buildings for the utilization of electrical current for electric light, heat, power, or signaling purposes together with the fittings necessary for the protection of such wires, conductors, and equipment. 
(Code 1971, § 5-36; Code 1992, § 5-46) 
Sec. 8-59. - Exceptions to article. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall apply to the following: 
(1)  The installation of meters or other registering devices by any utility company engaged in the business of supplying electrical service and operating under a franchise from this city. Meter loop must conform with Central Power and Light Company regulations. 
(2)  The installation of telephone and telegraph equipment by any utility company engaged in the business of supplying communications service and operating under a franchise from this city. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prevent maintenance work from being done by any person through an employee regularly employed to do such work solely on or within the premises of property owned or controlled by such person, provided that such employee shall not be allowed to install any wiring conduit, apparatus or equipment. 
(Code 1971, § 5-52; Code 1992, § 5-47) 
Secs. 8-60-8-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-79. - Electrical inspector-Office created, appointed. 
    The office of electrical inspector for the city is hereby established. The office shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 5-38; Code 1992, § 5-66) 
Sec. 8-80. - Same-Bond. 
    Before assuming any authority conferred by this division, the electrical inspector shall file with the city clerk a good and sufficient surety bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00, payable to the city, and his successors in office, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. 
(Code 1971, § 5-39; Code 1992, § 5-67) 
Sec. 8-81. - Same-General duties. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall be well versed in the rules and regulations of the National Electrical Code adopted by this article, and shall keep in his office a complete record of all master, journeyman, and apprentice electricians, in addition to performing such other duties prescribed by this article. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall keep on file in his office a copy of this division, a copy of the National Electrical Code adopted by this division, copies of all amendments, changes, or revisions that may be made to it, and such copies shall be open to inspection by any person. 
(Code 1971, §§ 5-40, 5-42; Code 1992, § 5-68) 
Sec. 8-82. - Electrical examining board-Created. 
    A board of electrical examiners is hereby created for the city to be known as the electrical examining board. 
(Code 1971, § 5-44; Code 1992, § 5-69) 
Sec. 8-83. - Same-Composition. 
    The electrical examining board shall consist of six members, one of whom shall be the city electrical inspector, one of whom shall be the city manager, and the remaining four members shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council. The four members appointed by the city manager shall consist of one master electrician, the local manager of Central Power and Light Company, the local manager of the Rio Grande Electric Cooperative, Inc., and a local businessman with a general knowledge of electricity or a journeyman electrician. The master electrician and the journeyman shall not be from the same shop. 
(Code 1971, § 5-45; Code 1992, § 5-70) 
Sec. 8-84. - Same-Rules and procedures. 
    The electrical examining board may promulgate its own rules to govern its meetings and proceedings before it. 
(Code 1971, § 5-46; Code 1992, § 5-71) 
Sec. 8-85. - Same-Examination of master electricians. 
    It is the duty of the electrical examining board to examine master electricians as to their ability and qualifications to do electrical work in the city, and, if found to be competent, to issue such applicant a certificate stating that the applicant may do electrical work in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 5-47; Code 1992, § 5-72) 
Sec. 8-86. - Same-Resolution of disagreements. 
    If the electrical inspector and an electrical contractor cannot agree as to the nature of the performance of certain work in accordance with the provisions of this division, then the subject shall be brought before the electrical examining board who shall decide on the subject in question. 
(Code 1971, § 5-48; Code 1992, § 5-73) 
Sec. 8-87. - Electricians to be furnished copies of division. 
    All electricians in the city shall be furnished a copy of this division by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1971, § 5-43; Code 1992, § 5-74) 
Secs. 8-88-8-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICIAN CERTIFICATION, LICENSE AND REGISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Electricians, Texas Occupations Code ch. 1305. 

Sec. 8-118. - License for master electricians-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing electrical wires, appliance circuits, apparatus, fixtures, or electrical signs, as a master electrician unless such person has a license, issued by the city electrical inspection department, under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1971, § 5-62; Code 1992, § 5-91) 
Sec. 8-119. - Same-Application. 
    Application for a license required by this division shall be made to the city clerk, who shall notify the electrical examining board. 
(Code 1971, § 5-63; Code 1992, § 5-92) 
Sec. 8-120. - Same-Qualifications, examination. 
(a)  All applicants for a master electrician's license shall as a prerequisite to the application, qualify as a journeyman electrician and be employed for at least one full year on a full-time basis by a master electrician. These requirements shall be complete before they shall be permitted to take the master electrician's examination required by this section. 
(b)  Except as provided in Texas Occupations Code § 1305.201(b), applicants for a master electrician's license shall appear before the board of electrical examiners and take an examination before being permitted to do any electrical work in the city. Each applicant shall make a grade of 70 or better to pass the examination. The examination shall be one that is acquired through the national electrical board or some appropriate national or state organization who can provide testing materials sufficient to ensure the master electrician's capabilities. 
(c)  The board shall issue to every master electrician, after having passed the examination, a license to do electrical work and also issue a card certifying that the person holding the card has passed the examination prescribed by the board. 
(d)  The board shall charge a sum as established by the city to help defray the expense of conducting the examination. Such charge shall apply toward the license fee prescribed by this division, if the examination is passed. 
(e)  If any such applicant should fail to pass the examination, he shall be entitled to a second examination after the expiration of 30 days. If a third examination is necessary, it shall not be had until after the expiration of six months from the last examination so taken. The third examination shall be the final examination offered for that year. 
(Code 1971, § 5-64; Code 1992, § 5-93) 
Sec. 8-121. - Same-Fee. 
    The fee for the master electrician's license shall be as established by the city for the first year, payable prior to the issuance of such license. Thereafter, the license shall be renewed at a fee, per annum, as established by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 5-65; Code 1992, § 5-94) 
Sec. 8-122. - Same-Bond. 
    Prior to the issuance of a license as a master electrician, the applicant shall make, and execute and deliver to the city clerk, a bond in the sum of $1,000.00, payable to the city. After such bond has been approved by the city clerk, the bond shall be for the use and benefit of the owner or any party in interest in the property where the master electrician may furnish any material or labor or perform any service, against loss or damage to any person or property which may arise by reason of work or labor done, or material furnished in violation of the requirements of any law of the state or this Code or any other ordinance of the city controlling such work. Such bond shall be executed by each applicant with any recognized and responsible surety company authorized to do business in the state. 
(Code 1971, § 5-66; Code 1992, § 5-95) 
Sec. . - Same-Issuance, display, and term. 
(a)  After being duly qualified by the examination administered by the electrical examining board and after complying with the other requirements of this division, an applicant for a master electrician's license shall be issued such license by the city electrical inspection department. 
(b)  Any person holding a license as a master electrician in accordance with the provisions of this division shall display the same in a conspicuous place in his place of business. 
(c)  The term of the license issued under the provisions of this division shall be one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1971, §§ 5-67, 5-68, 5-71; Code 1992, § 5-96) 
Sec. 8-124. - Same-Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The license issued under the provisions of this division may be suspended at any time by the mayor and city council for violation of any provisions of this division. The offender may be prohibited from engaging in work in the city for a period of not less than ten days nor more than one year. A suspended license shall be reinstated at the end of the suspension period. 
(b)  No person holding a license required by this division shall allow his name to be used by any other party directly or indirectly for the purpose of obtaining a permit to work under such license, under penalty of having such license revoked by the city as provided in this division. 
(Code 1971, §§ 5-69, 5-70; Code 1992, § 5-97) 
Sec. 8-125. - Journeyman electricians; general qualifications; examination and fee; bond nonapplicable. 
(a)  Each journeyman electrician must have in his possession at all times, a card issued by the employing master electrician. The card must be registered with the city electrical inspector, who shall make a record of it. 
(b)  Each journeyman electrician will be examined by the same procedure as a master electrician as set forth in this division. The examination fee shall be as established by the city. The fee for the registration of the card, as required in subsection (a) of this section, shall be as established by the city. Journeyman electricians, since they must be employed by master electricians, need not have a bond. 
(Code 1971, § 5-49; Code 1992, § 5-98) 
Secs. 8-126-8-148. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 8-149. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal and maintenance of electric wiring and apparatus, that certain electrical code known as the National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association, being particularly the 1990 edition thereof. One copy of such code is filed in the office of the city clerk. It is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction, alteration, maintenance or removal of all electric wiring and apparatus within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  If there is a conflict between any provision of the code adopted by reference in this section and any other provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this Code or ordinance of the city shall take precedence and control. 
(Code 1971, § 5-37; Code 1992, § 5-116) 
Sec. 8-150. - Wiring enclosures. 
(a)  All electrical wiring for lights, heat and power, or other purposes to be installed within the city, as described in the following, shall in all cases be contained and encased in rigid metallic conduit or electrical metallic tubing or wire mold with proper fittings: 
(1)  All electric wiring in buildings of any description situated in all fire zones. 
(2)  All electrical wiring for decorative lighting and display windows; provided, however, that the electrical inspector may grant permission for a temporary decorative or window display to be installed with open wiring. Temporary wiring shall be removed at the expiration of the permit. 
(3)  All public buildings for use other than private dwellings or duplexes outside of the fire zone, shall be wired with continuous rigid metallic raceways. 
(b)  All wiring installed underground or in concrete slabs or other masonry in direct contact with moist earth, or in other permanently moist locations where subject to condensation of moisture from rigid conduit, shall be of the lead-covered type or wire especially approved for this purpose. 
(Code 1971, § 5-91; Code 1992, § 5-117) 
Sec. 8-151. - Installation of wiring. 
    The following provisions shall apply to the installation of electrical wiring within the city: 
(1)  A minimum of No. 14 wire will be permitted for residence lighting switch circuits only. 
(2)  All main line disconnects shall be installed adjacent to the meter and located outside of buildings. 
(3)  Approved SE cable is permissible for use in residences for electric stoves. 
(4)  All electric water heaters must be wired with grounded conductor or flexible metallic conduit with proper fittings from junction box to water heater. 
(5)  All switches and receptacles in commercial or public buildings must be of approved T-rating. 
(6)  Any service supplying over two circuits shall be of three wires. 
(7)  A utility serving the city shall not be allowed to energize the line until approved by the city inspector. 
(8)  Wire from the entrance switch to the panel box shall be of No. 6 or larger within the city limits and may be SE cable for residences. 
(9)  All service wires from a point of entrance of a building to a service switch and meter connection will be run in an approved conduit, with proper fittings, but no junction or pull boxes will be allowed in service conduits. Service wiring shall be installed not less than ten feet from the ground. 
(Code 1971, § 5-92; Code 1992, § 5-118) 
Sec. 8-152. - Use of certain wiring prohibited. 
    Use of the following electrical wiring is hereby prohibited within the city: 
(1)  BX or knob and tube electric installations. 
(2)  All basement lights without wall switches. 
(3)  All aluminum wiring. 
(Code 1971, § 5-93; Code 1992, § 5-119; Ord. No. 531, 10-13-1992) 
Sec. 8-153. - Electrical outlets. 
    The following regulations shall govern electrical outlets within the city: 
(1)  All cabinets and conduit installations shall be grounded in any approved manner. Not more than eight outlets shall be installed on one circuit in a residence, and not more than six outlets, in a business house, school, church, hotel or hospital. 
(2)  All motors, of 11/2 h.p. or over must have an approved motor starting device. 
(3)  Drop cords must not be installed in clothes closets or in places where wearing apparel is likely to be hung, however, ceiling fixtures will be permissible. 
(4)  Extension cords for portable lamps as well as the lamp cords for all drop lights exposed to weather which may be moved out of their natural pendant positions must be packing house cord or other reinforced portable cord. All drop lights on porches or in bathrooms and kitchens shall have porcelain, or other nonconductive material, sockets and reinforced lamp cords. 
(5)  Where one service is installed to control several installations, apartments, or customers, the main cabinet and cut-offs must be accessible at all times to each of the parties. 
(6)  In every electrical installation, all wires and attachments must be of at least such capacity as will maintain service with the full connected load, according to the requirements of this division. 
(7)  All holes in cabinet boxes and outlet boxes that are not in use shall be plugged up so that cabinet boxes will be as near dust tight as possible. 
(8)  All joints must be soldered or approved mechanical connector and taped on rough-in jobs, and fixture lead must be soldered or a fixture connector used. 
(9)  In dwellings, branch circuits which supply convenience outlets in the kitchen, pantry, dining room and breakfast room shall not supply other outlets and such circuits shall have conductors no smaller than No. 12. Laundry convenience outlets shall be on a separate circuit. 
(10)  Whenever in this section a fuse is called for, the requirements may be met by use of a circuit breaker approved for the purpose. Whenever a switch or a switch and fuses are called for, the requirement may be met by the use of an approved manually operated circuit breaker. If a circuit breaker is used, there shall be an overcurrent device in each underground conductor of the circuit. 
(Code 1971, § 5-94; Code 1992, § 5-120) 
Sec. 8-154. - Installation and inspection of concealed wiring. 
(a)  All electrical wiring must be complete before the same shall be allowed to be concealed from view. All cabinets, cut-outs, flush switches, and all other fittings shall be permanently installed before final inspection and acceptance as required by section 8-183, except the lighting or other fixtures. Separate permits issued under the provisions of this division shall be required for any alteration or change thereafter. 
(b)  No such concealed wiring for which a permit is issued or required under the provisions of this division shall be lathed over, or in any manner concealed from sight until inspected and accepted by the inspector, as required by section 8-183. Any person having charge of the construction, alteration, or repair of buildings, who covers or conceals or causes to be concealed or covered any such wiring before the wiring has been inspected and approved without having officially notified the inspector at least four hours previously, Saturday afternoons, Sundays and holidays not included shall be subject to penalties provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1971, § 5-50; Code 1992, § 5-121) 
Sec. 8-155. - Reconnected service requires inspection. 
    Whenever the service wires or interior wiring in a building or an outdoor sign do not meet the requirements of this division and are once disconnected, the service shall not again be connected until the entire wiring has been repaired to the satisfaction of the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1971, § 5-51; Code 1992, § 5-122) 
Secs. 8-156-8-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERMITS 

Sec. 8-179. - Required; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commence the construction, installation or alteration of any electrical work, either outside or inside of any building without first being issued a permit by the city electrical inspector or city clerk for such construction, installation, alteration or wiring. 
(b)  The city electrical inspector or city clerk shall issue such permit for the construction, installation or alteration of any electrical work, either outside or inside of any building, only to the following and none other: 
(1)  Master electricians; or 
(2)  Any person desiring to personally perform the construction, installation or alteration of any electrical work on the existing premises; that is, for additions or alterations of existing structures, which constitute his legal homestead, provided that such person shall submit the plans and specifications of such electrical work to the city electrical inspector and shall satisfy the inspector of his ability to perform such electrical work in accordance with the rules and requirements of this division. 
(c)  A temporary service without inspection or permit as required by this division will be permitted where it is not attached to buildings and shall be by approved SE cable. 
(Code 1971, § 5-81; Code 1992, § 5-141; Ord. No. 418, § 2, 6-12-1984) 
Sec. 8-180. - Application. 
    Application for a permit required by this division, shall be in writing, on forms furnished by the city electrical inspector or the city clerk and shall contain a description by street and number, or by street, lot and block as may be necessary to locate the work site. 
(Code 1971, § 5-82; Code 1992, § 5-142) 
Sec. 8-181. - Fees. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of the permit required by this division, and commencement of the work for which it is required, the fees as established by the city must be paid to the city clerk. 
(b)  For inspection of any and all electrical work mentioned in this section, being reconstructed, renewed, altered, overhauled, repaired, or moved, full inspection fees as provided in this section, for the new work, shall be paid. 
(Code 1971, § 5-83; Code 1992, § 5-143; Ord. No. 415, 6-12-1984; Ord. No. 445, 12-9-1986) 
Sec. 8-182. - Issuance. 
    Upon making application and payment of the inspection fee for a permit required by this division, the city electrical inspector or city clerk shall issue such permit. 
(Code 1971, § 5-84; Code 1992, § 5-144) 
Sec. 8-183. - Inspection following issuance; certificate of approval; clearance order. 
(a)  Following the issuance of a permit required by this division, the city electrical inspector shall carefully inspect such work during and after its completion, and if the work shall prove to be constructed in accordance with all rules and requirements governing the installation and if payment is made for any additional fee for additional inspection not embraced in the original application, the inspector shall issue a certificate approving the same. 
(b)  The city electrical inspector shall issue a clearance order to those persons to whom a permit is issued under the provisions of this division after the inspection and approval of the work completed under the permit. 
(Code 1971, § 5-85; Code 1992, § 5-145) 
Secs. 8-184-8-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS STANDARDS 

Sec. 8-205. - Standard Gas Code adopted. 
    For the purpose of providing minimum standards, provisions and requirements for the safe installation of consumers' gas piping and gas appliances installed, replaced, maintained, or repaired within the city, there is hereby adopted as the natural gas code for the city the Standard Gas Code, 1988 edition, as published by the Standard Building Code Congress International, Inc., amended or modified by the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. A copy of the natural gas code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and the natural gas code is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article as fully as if set out in this section and the provisions thereof, as amended, shall be controlling for the installation, replacement, maintenance, or repairing of all consumers' gas piping and gas appliances in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 5-106; Code 1992, § 5-171) 
Secs. 8-206-8-233. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING STANDARDS 

Sec. 8-234. - Standard Plumbing Code adopted. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations to govern plumbing installation, construction and maintenance, including permits and permit fees, there is hereby adopted as the plumbing code for the city the Standard Plumbing Code, 1988 edition, as published by the Standard Building Code Congress International, Inc., as may be amended, modified or repealed by the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. A copy of the code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. Such code is incorporated and made a part of this Code as fully as if set out in this section and the provisions thereof, as amended, shall be controlling for the installation, construction and maintenance of plumbing within the city. 
(b)  If there is a conflict in the code adopted by this section and any other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this Code or ordinance of the city shall prevail and control. 
(Code 1971, § 5-117; Code 1992, § 5-191) 
Sec. 8-235. - Permit fees. 
    Plumbing permit fees for the city shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 5-118; Code 1992, § 5-192; Ord. No. 414, 6-12-1984; Ord. No. 444, 12-9-1986) 
Secs. 8-236-8-263. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to require demolition or repair of dilapidated, substandard, unfit or hazardous buildings, Texas Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 

Sec. 8-264. - Report of investigation of structure to council. 
    Whenever the city engineer, the building inspector or the fire marshal shall after investigation be of the opinion that any building or structure, or part thereof, situated within the city has become unsafe and dangerous so as to endanger persons or property or so as to be a fire hazard by reason of defective construction, overloaded floors, deterioration caused by fire or other parts thereof, or for any other reason, he shall immediately report such finding in writing to the council, setting out in such report a description of such building or structure and its location and stating wherein the building or structure, or parts thereof, is unsafe and dangerous or is a fire hazard. 
(Code 1992, § 4-211; Ord. No. 450, 2-10-1986) 
Sec. 8-265. - Hearing by council. 
(a)  Notice required. Upon receiving an investigative report regarding the safety of a structure, the city council shall set a date for a hearing before it to determine whether such building or structure, or part thereof, is unsafe and dangerous or is a fire hazard and thereby constitutes a nuisance, and shall order the clerk to notify by personal service or by one publication in the official newspaper of the city, at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing, the record owners of such building or structure and the property on which it is located and all persons, if any, with recorded liens thereon to appear before the city council on the date of such hearing to show cause why such building or structure should not be declared a nuisance by reason of being unsafe and dangerous or a fire hazard, and the nuisance ordered abated by repair or removal. A notice of a hearing sent to an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee under this section must include a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. Personal service of such notice shall be had where practicable and any official or police officer of the city shall be qualified to serve such notice, setting out therein the time and place of such service. A member of the staff of the newspaper publishing such notice, if notice is published, shall certify when such publication was had and shall attach thereto a copy of the notice as published in such paper. 
(b)  Presentation of evidence. At such hearing, the city official reporting that such building or structure is unsafe and dangerous or a fire hazard shall present to the council all information and evidence which he has gathered with regard thereto showing the condition of such building or structure alleged by him to be unsafe and dangerous or a fire hazard, and shall specify wherein such building or structure is unsafe and dangerous and shall state whether such building or structure can be repaired and the unsafe and dangerous condition thereby removed, and if so, what repairs are necessary to place it in a safe condition. Such owners and lienholders, if any, and any person who may show an interest in such building or structure shall have the right to present to the council any evidence tending to disprove the evidence offered by the city official or tending to show that such building or structure is safe. 
(c)  Determination of condition of structure. After hearing the evidence introduced at the hearing, the council shall by resolution determine whether such building or structure is unsafe and dangerous so as to endanger persons or property or is a fire hazard. If the council determines that such building or structure is unsafe and dangerous so as to endanger persons or property or is a fire hazard, it shall in such resolution state whether such building or structure can be made safe by repairing it. 
(d)  Order to repair, remove. If the condition can be corrected by repairs, the council shall order the owners to repair or remove the structure, or parts thereof, or if such condition cannot be corrected by repairs, to remove same or parts within 20 days after the owners or lienholders, if any, have received personal service of notice of such order of the council, or after notice of such order has been published once in the official newspaper of the city. Such personal service or publication shall be made in the same manner as in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 4-212; Ord. No. 450, 2-10-1986) 
Sec. 8-266. - Owners responsible for costs of repair, removal. 
(a)  Secured by lien. An order of the council to repair or remove a structure shall state that should the owners fail to comply with such order within the time specified, the city will remove or cause to be removed such building or structure, or parts thereof, at its own expense, but for and on the account of the owner of such real property. Such work shall be done under the direction of the building inspector, and upon the building official reporting to the council the cost of such work and the approval of such cost by the council, the owners of such property shall become personally liable therefor, which claim shall be secured by a lien against the real estate from which such building or structure or part thereof has been removed, except that no such lien shall be imposed on a homestead as protected by the state constitution. Such sum shall become due and payable within 30 days from the date of the completion of such work. 
(b)  Approval of costs. Reasonable costs incurred by any city official in the notification either by personal service or publication, and identification of the record owners of any building or structure and the property on which such building or structure is located determined by the council to be unsafe and dangerous so as to endanger persons or property or is a fire hazard, and all persons, if any, with recorded liens thereon, shall be reported to the council and upon approval of such costs by the council, the owners of such property shall become personally liable therefor, which claim shall be secured by a lien against the real estate from which such building or structure or part thereof has been removed or repaired, such sum becoming due and payable within 30 days from the date such costs are approved by the council. 
(c)  Appeal. Such owners or lienholders or any person interested in such building or structure shall have the right to appeal within ten days after notice from such order of the city council or approval of costs to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief and upon their failure to do so within such period of time such findings shall be final. 
(Code 1992, § 4-213; Ord. No. 450, 2-10-1986) 
Sec. 8-267. - Foreclosure of lien. 
    Should the owner of a building or structure ordered to be repaired or removed fail to pay any of the sums when they become due and payable, the city, or its assigns, shall have the right to file suit in the court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of such claim and the foreclosure of its lien. 
(Code 1992, § 4-214; Ord. No. 450, 2-10-1986) 
Sec. 8-268. - Contesting lien foreclosure. 
    Any person owning or claiming any interest in property repaired or removed pursuant to a resolution of the council, against which a lien is so placed, who shall desire to contest such lien on account of the amount thereof, or the necessity of having such work done, or any inaccuracy, irregularity, invalidity or insufficiency of the proceedings or contract with reference thereto, or on account of any manner or thing not in the discretion of the council, shall have the right to appeal therefrom by instituting suit for that purpose in any court having jurisdiction within ten days from the time such lien is fixed. Any person who shall fail to institute such tax suit within such time shall be held to have waived every matter which might have been taken advantage of, and shall be barred or estopped from contesting or questioning the necessity of having such work done, and the amount of the claim therefor. 
(Code 1992, § 4-215; Ord. No. 450, 2-10-1986) 
Sec. 8-269. - Owner not to allow conditions to continue. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure or part thereof, which has become unsafe and dangerous so as to endanger persons or property, or so as to be a fire hazard by reason of defective construction, overloaded floors, lack of guards against fire, defective condition of the foundations, walls or other parts thereof or deterioration caused by fire or otherwise, or for any other reason, to allow or permit the building or structure to remain upon any real estate within the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4-216; Ord. No. 450, 2-10-1986) 
Sec. 8-270. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Order to deny access. When, by reasons of fire, deterioration, unsound construction, want of repair or other cause, a building or structure is so unsafe that there is imminent danger that the same will cause death or personal injuries, the building inspector may order all persons, except persons authorized to make inspections or repairs, to keep out of such building or structure, or the part thereof where such danger exists, and may place ropes or other barriers so as to cut off access to such structure or part, and may warn all persons of the danger orally or by posting notices. Such warning may be given by a police officer if so authorized by the building inspector. The building official shall forthwith give oral or written notice to the owner, tenant, or person in charge of such structure, or the agent of any thereof, of action taken by such official pursuant to this section, if any person can be found to receive such notice. 
(b)  Hearing. The building inspector shall immediately notify the council in writing of any action taken as provided in this section; and the owner, tenant, or person in charge of such building or structure shall, upon demand, be entitled to a hearing before the council at the earliest practicable time. Upon such hearing, the council shall determine whether the emergency action of the building official was justified and shall make its order accordingly, and shall also determine whether such building or structure shall be repaired or demolished as provided in the building code. If no hearing is demanded by the owner, tenant or person in charge, the council shall order a hearing and shall proceed as if the proceeding were under the building code. 
(c)  Removal of notice or barrier. Any person who shall, without permission of the building inspector or of the council, remove or deface any notice or barrier placed as provided by this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all buildings and structures as defined in the building code and also to all amusement devices offered for the use of the public, including, but not limited to, circus or carnival equipment used by the public, Ferris wheels, and the devices commonly known as "rides." 
(Code 1992, § 4-217; Ord. No. 450, 2-10-1986) 
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management generally, Texas Government Code ch. 418; local and interjurisdictional emergency management, Texas Government Code § 418.101 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Organization. 
    There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 10-2. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such offices and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 1, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-2. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Surveying actual or potential hazards, which threaten life and property within the city, and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures, which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city clerk. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives, which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attention on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city clerk. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the Carrizo Springs/Dimmit County Emergency Management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organization of the city. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, which may be offered for the purposes of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services, which could be used during a disaster, as, provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (Texas Government Code ch. 418). 
(Ord. No. 635, § 2, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-3. - Emergency management plan. 
    A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 3, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-4. - Interjurisdictional program. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with county judge and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program of the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 4, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-5. - Chapter overrides existing rules and regulations. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 5, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-6. - Liability. 
    This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 6, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-7. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 7, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 8, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-9. - Limitations. 
    This chapter shall not be constructed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 10, 3-11-2003) 
Sec. 10-10. - National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
    The National Incident Management System ordinance, dated March 1, 2004, is hereby adopted as the standard for incident management by the city. 
(Ord. No. 659, 9-13-2005) 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Groundwater protection. 
(a)  Designated property. For purposes of this section, the term "designated property" means the property described in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 713. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Designated groundwater means water below the surface of the designated property to a depth of 200 feet. 
(c)  Uses of potable groundwater. That use of the designated groundwater from beneath the designated property as potable water, as defined in Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.801(2), and the following uses of or contacts with the designated groundwater are prohibited: 
(1)  Human consumption or drinking. 
(2)  Showering or bathing. 
(3)  Cooking. 
(4)  Irrigation of crops for human consumption. 
(d)  Certification. The city council supports the application to the state commission on environmental quality for certification of a municipal setting designation for the designated property. 
(e)  Municipal setting designation. Any person owning, operating, or controlling the designated property remains responsible for complying with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to environmental protection, and that this section in itself does not change any environmental assessment or cleanup requirements applicable to the designated property. 
(f)  Approval does not constitute liability. Approval of this section shall not be construed to subject the city to any responsibility or liability for any injury to persons or damages to property caused by any chemical of concern. 
(g)  State commission on environmental quality to be notified. The city manager shall notify the state commission on environmental quality 60 days prior to any amendment or repeal of this section. 
(Ord. No. 713, §§ 1-7, 5-8-2012) 
State Law reference- Groundwater protection ordinances, Texas Local Government Code § 551.005. 
Secs. 12-2-12-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OIL AND GAS WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, Texas Natural Resources Code § 81.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-35. - Effect on other provisions. 
    This article shall not be construed as repealing, altering or otherwise affecting the validity and binding force of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city pertaining to fire protection, health or sanitation. 
(Code 1971, § 10-87; Code 1992, § 12-96) 
Sec. 12-36. - Unlawful drilling and operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or operate, commence to drill or operate, or cause or permit to be drilled or operated any oil or gas well within the corporate limits of the city without first complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 10-73; Code 1992, § 12-97) 
Secs. 12-37-12-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-61. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or operate or commence to drill or operate or cause or permit to be drilled or operated, any oil or gas well within the corporate limits of the city without first making application for and obtaining a license to do so. 
(Code 1971, § 10-98; Code 1992, § 12-111) 
Sec. 12-62. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to drill or operate a well for oil or gas within the corporate limits of the city shall first make application for a license to do so to the city clerk, which application shall set forth in writing the following facts: 
(1)  The date of the application. 
(2)  The name of the applicant. 
(3)  The address of the applicant. 
(4)  The proposed site of the well including the drilling block number, city lot and block number. 
(5)  The name of the fee owner. 
(6)  The name of the lease owner. 
(7)  The type of derrick desired to be used. 
(b)  This application shall be placed and kept of record by the city clerk as a part of the public records of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 10-99; Code 1992, § 12-112) 
Sec. 12-63. - Fee. 
    The applicant for a drilling or operating license required by this division shall pay to the city the sum as established by the city as a license fee for the issuance of the drilling and operating license, which sum shall be paid before the drilling or operating license shall be granted and any drilling or operating license granted in violation hereof shall be void. 
(Code 1971, § 10-100; Code 1992, § 12-113) 
Sec. 12-64. - Ownership, interest required. 
    No license shall be granted to any applicant for the drilling and operation of any well as provided in this division except upon land held by the applicant under an oil and gas lease, or drilling contract, from the owner of the mineral leasehold estate covering at least 51 percent of the total number of square feet of land contained in the drilling block, giving to the applicant the owner's permission to drill the well. 
(Code 1971, § 10-101; Code 1992, § 12-114) 
Sec. 12-65. - Issuance; content. 
    When the applicant for a license required by this division shall have complied with the provisions of this division, the city clerk shall furnish a printed form of license which shall be in the nature of a contract or franchise from the city to the applicant, and shall state therein the substantial regulative provisions of this division and shall likewise state therein that the applicant agrees to comply with same. This instrument shall be signed by the applicant and by the mayor or the mayor pro tem, in the name of the city and shall be executed in duplicate, one copy to be retained by the city and the other copy delivered to the applicant, constituting his drilling license. The provisions of this drilling and operating license, when so signed and executed, shall be binding upon the applicant in every respect. 
(Code 1971, § 10-102; Code 1992, § 12-115) 
Sec. 12-66. - Insurance. 
(a)  The drilling and operating license under this division shall carry a policy of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the licensee and the city, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business within the state. Such policy shall be an umbrella or all perils policy in the amount of $1,000,000.00. 
(b)  The licensee shall file with the city clerk certificates of such insurance as stated in subsection (a) of this section, and shall obtain the written approval thereof by the city clerk who shall act thereon within ten days from the date of such filing. The insurance policy shall not be cancelled without written notice to the city clerk at least ten days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. If such insurance policy is cancelled, the license granted shall terminate, and the licensee's rights to operate under such permit shall cease until the licensee files additional insurance as provided in this section. 
(Code 1971, § 10-103; Code 1992, § 12-116) 
Sec. 12-67. - Time constriction. 
    If drilling operations are not begun within 30 days after the granting of the license required by this division the license shall become null and void. However, such license may be extended by the city clerk by a written extension before the termination of the 30-day period, upon a proper excuse for delay in commencing the drilling operations. 
(Code 1971, § 10-104; Code 1992, § 12-117) 
Secs. 12-68-12-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRILLING AND STORAGE OPERATIONS 

Sec. 12-93. - Drilling block maps. 
(a)  The corporate area embraced within the city limits is hereby subdivided into drilling blocks, as shown by a map of the city designated "Map of Carrizo Springs Drilling Blocks," which map has been signed by the mayor and the city clerk and is on file in the office of the city clerk. All such drilling blocks are numbered from one to 52, inclusive, as shown on such map, with each drilling block for practical purposes being of approximately equivalent area, with each drilling block for practical purposes being of an approximately compact form, and with the exterior boundaries of each drilling block being the centerline of the exterior adjoining and abutting streets and alleys of such drilling block, except as otherwise shown on such map. For any lands which on September 29, 1955, were situated outside the city limits of the city and subsequently become a part of, are annexed to, or brought into the corporate area embraced within the city limits, the city council shall have the power, and reserve the authority, to place the same or to subdivide the same into additional drilling blocks, with each such drilling block containing for practical purposes approximately the equivalent area of the average drilling block shown on the map with each to be numbered, and with each to be as shown by a map thereof signed by the mayor and the city clerk and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The fact that any lands constitute or are a part of any drilling block as shown by any map identified or provided for in this section shall not authorize the drilling of any well thereon or the issuance of any permit therefor if the drilling thereof or the issuance of a permit therefor is or may otherwise be restricted or prohibited under the terms of any other section of this division. 
(Code 1971, § 10-74; Code 1992, § 12-131) 
Sec. 12-94. - Maximum number of wells per drilling block; exception. 
(a)  There shall not be more than one oil or gas well drilled within any drilling block for each producing sand area within such drilling block, whether such well is proposed on publicly or privately owned lands. It is intended that no single drilling block will have more than one well within such drilling block producing from the same producing sand. 
(b)  Where more than one producing sand is found within a drilling block, a separate license as provided for in this division may be issued to the licensee within such drilling block, if any, or his assigns, granting the right to such licensee or his assigns the right to drill an additional well to each of the separate producing sands. 
(Code 1971, § 10-75; Code 1992, § 12-132) 
Sec. 12-95. - Dual-processing wells. 
    When practicable, wells discovering more than one sand shall be completed as dual-producing wells, in order to minimize the number of drilling operations conducted in any one drilling block. 
(Code 1971, § 10-76; Code 1992, § 12-133) 
Sec. 12-96. - Construction and operation to conform to local and state fire prevention laws. 
    Construction and operation of all oil and gas wells within the city shall comply with state law, this Code, and other city ordinances with regard to firewalls, fire protection and locations. 
(Code 1971, § 10-77; Code 1992, § 12-134) 
Sec. 12-97. - Operations not to interfere with traffic. 
    No person engaged in the drilling or operation of a well for oil or gas shall permit or allow any of its equipment or properties to extend into the streets or alleys of the city so that it will interfere with the regular flow of traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 10-78; Code 1992, § 12-135) 
Sec. 12-98. - Permission required for conveyance of fuel, water on or under streets. 
    No person shall make any excavations or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water or minerals on, under and through the streets of the city in connection with any well drilling operation without the express permission of the city in writing, and then only in strict compliance with this Code and the other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 10-79; Code 1992, § 12-136) 
Sec. 12-99. - Slush pits. 
    Either earthen or steel slush pits shall be used in connection with well drilling operations. If a steel pit is used, the pit and its contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within 30 days after completion of the well. If an earthen slush pit is used, it shall be filled and leveled within 120 days after completion of the well. 
(Code 1971, § 10-80; Code 1992, § 12-137) 
Sec. 12-100. - Maintenance of premises. 
    The premises where an oil or gas well operation is taking place shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rubbish of every character, to the satisfaction of the health officer at all times, during the drilling operations and as long thereafter as oil or gas is being produced therefrom. 
(Code 1971, § 10-81; Code 1992, § 12-138) 
Sec. 12-101. - Control of escaping gas. 
    No person engaged in the drilling and operation of an oil or gas well within the city limits shall permit unburned gas to escape into the air, or to maintain a torch for the burning of such gas at a lesser distance than 40 feet from the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1971, § 10-82; Code 1992, § 12-139) 
Sec. 12-102. - Oil storage tanks connected to producing well. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use, construct or operate in connection with any producing well within the city limits any crude oil storage tanks except to the extent of two steel tanks for oil storage, not exceeding 500 barrels capacity each and so constructed and maintained as to be vaportight and each surrounded with an earthen firewall at such distance from the tanks as will under any circumstances hold and retain at least 11/2 times the maximum capacity of such tank. 
(Code 1971, § 10-83; Code 1992, § 12-140) 
Sec. 12-103. - Facilities for separating and treating oil. 
    A steel conventional separator may be used, constructed, and operated and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil may be used with each of such facilities to be constructed and maintained to be vaportight. Each oil and gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and bursting head. 
(Code 1971, § 10-84; Code 1992, § 12-141) 
Sec. 12-104. - Casings. 
    It shall be unlawful to drill a well for oil or gas without: 
(1)  Setting and cementing a string of casing upon reaching the sand at about 500 feet or at passing through the Indigo Sand from which the city intends to obtain its water supply, which casing shall be set and cemented from such depths to the surface of the earth, provided that any cementing process approved by the city council may be used in lieu of this provision; 
(2)  Setting and cementing casing on top of the producing sand; 
(3)  Notifying the city clerk of the reaching of these depths and giving him an opportunity to inspect such activity and to determine that a proper amount of casing is set and cemented. 
(Code 1971, § 10-85; Code 1992, § 12-142) 
Sec. 12-105. - Disposal of saltwater, impurities. 
    A person holding a license to drill under the provisions of this division shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all saltwater or other impurities which he may bring to the surface. Disposal shall be made in a manner that does not contaminate the water supply, present or prospective, or injure surface vegetation. 
(Code 1971, § 10-86; Code 1992, § 12-143) 
Chapter 14 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to enforce ordinances necessary to protect and preserve health, property, good government and order, Texas Local Government Code § 54.004; state fire marshal, Texas Government Code ch. 417; fire safety generally, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 791. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Bureau of fire prevention-Established. 
    The bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city is established by this section. 
(Code 1971, § 7-1; Code 1992, § 7-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Same-Supervising authority. 
    The bureau of fire prevention shall be operated under the supervision of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1971, § 7-2; Code 1992, § 7-2; Ord. No. 471, art. 2, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 491, § 2, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 14-3. - Same-Annual report. 
    A report of the fire prevention administrative department shall be made annually and transmitted to the city manager. It shall contain all proceedings under the code adopted by this chapter, with such statistics as the fire marshal may wish to include therein. 
(Code 1971, § 7-3; Code 1992, § 7-3; Ord. No. 471, art. 3, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 491, § 3, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 14-4. - Fire marshal as director of fire administrative department; appointment. 
    The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager on the basis of an examination to determine his qualifications. 
(Code 1971, § 7-4; Code 1992, § 7-4; Ord. No. 471, art. 4, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 491, § 4, 3-12-1990; Ord. No. 515, art. 2, 10-8-1991) 
Sec. 14-5. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means a composition or device: 
(1)  Designed for entertainment to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation; and 
(2)  Defined by 49 CFR 173.56(j)(1996). 
(b)  Fireworks within the city. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, use, manufacture, sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale or possess any fireworks within the city limits, shoot, fire, explode or set off any fireworks or other explosive matter within the city limits or within 5,000 feet thereof, except as authorized in this section. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any public demonstration or display of fireworks or bonfire of any kind, if conducted under proper supervision of the fire marshal, after application shall be made and permit issued by the fire marshal. Such permit shall not be granted unless such demonstration shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the fire marshal, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. 
(3)  In defining 5,000 feet in subsection (b)(1) of this section (fireworks with the city) and subsection (c)(2) of this section (territorial applicability), it is meant a distance of 5,000 feet extending outside the city limits on either side of a public or private road from the city corporate limits. 
(c)  Territorial applicability. 
(1)  This section shall be applicable and in force throughout the territory of the city within its corporate limits. 
(2)  This section shall also be applicable and in force within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending for a distance outside the city limits for a total of 5,000 feet, and it shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this section within such area of 5,000 feet outside the city limits, provided that this section shall not apply within any portion of such 5,000-foot area which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation. 
(d)  Supervised displays; permit required; contents of application. Permits for the public or private display of 1.3G fireworks may be issued by the fire marshal, provided a person desiring to display any fireworks shall apply in writing to the fire marshal for a permit at least 15 days in advance of the date of the proposed display and shall set forth: 
(1)  The name of the organization sponsoring the display together with the names of persons actually in charge of the filing of the display. 
(2)  The date and time at which the display is to be held. 
(3)  The exact location planned for the display. 
(4)  A description setting forth the age and experience in the display of fireworks of persons who are to do the actual discharging of the fireworks. 
(5)  The number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged. 
(6)  The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to the display. 
(7)  A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of all buildings, highways, telegraph, telephone or other overhead obstructions and trees located within 200 yards from the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged and the lines behind which the audience will be restrained. Such permit shall not be granted unless such display shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the said fire marshal, after proper study of the application and proper inspection of the proposed premises, shall not be hazardous to property or endangering to any person. 
(e)  Civil liability; persons not relieved. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person from any civil liability in connection with the storage, possession, sale or use of fireworks or other device, composition or substance referred to herein. 
(f)  Seizure. The fire marshal, his deputy or any peace officer is authorized to seize any fireworks found within the city limits or within 5,000 feet thereof, and destroy any fireworks so obtained. 
(Code 1992, § 7-5; Ord. No. 94, §§ 1-3, 11-13-1951; Ord. No. 506, §§ 1-6, 3-12-1991; Ord. No. 597, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Texas Occupations Code ch. 2154; local regulation of fireworks, Texas Occupations Code § 2154.004. 
Sec. 14-6. - Tampering with fireplugs or equipment prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to handle, use or otherwise tamper with any fireplug or fire prevention apparatus or equipment within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 7-5; Code 1992, § 7-6) 
Sec. 14-7. - Arson reward. 
    The city hereby offers a reward of $250.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 7-6; Code 1992, § 7-7) 
Secs. 14-8-14-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 14-33. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1965 edition, and the 1966 revision thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by this article. Three copies of such code are filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  If there is a conflict between any provision of the code adopted by reference in this section and any other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the other provisions of this Code, or ordinance of the city shall take precedence and control. 
(Code 1971, § 7-22; Code 1992, § 7-26) 
Sec. 14-34. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Corporation counsel , when used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, means the attorney for the city. 
    Municipality , when used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, means the city. 
(Code 1971, § 7-21; Code 1992, § 7-27) 
Sec. 14-35. - Duty of fire marshal to recommend amendments. 
    The fire marshal shall also recommend amendments to the fire prevention code adopted by this article which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1971, § 7-23; Code 1992, § 7-28; Ord. No. 471, art. 5, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 491, § 5, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 14-36. - General enforcement. 
    The fire prevention code adopted by this article, shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1971, § 7-24; Code 1992, § 7-29) 
Sec. 14-37. - Enforcement inspections. 
    The fire marshal shall be the chief inspector for the city in enforcing the fire prevention and protection ordinances. The fire marshal may request such assistance from time to time as may be necessary. 
(Code 1971, § 7-25; Code 1992, § 7-30; Ord. No. 471, art. 6, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 491, § 6, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 14-38. - Modifications. 
    The fire marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the city's fire administrative department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1971, § 7-31; Code 1992, § 7-31; Ord. No. 471, art. 7, 8-15-1988) 
Sec. 14-39. - Permits in addition to those required by code. 
    The city manager and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, process or occupancy, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in the city hall and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1971, § 7-32; Code 1992, § 7-32; Ord. No. 471, art. 8, 8-15-1988) 
Sec. 14-40. - Appeals under code. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1971, § 7-33; Code 1992, § 7-33; Ord. No. 471, art. 9, 8-15-1988) 
Sec. 14-41. - Establishment of limits-For storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks. 
    The limits referred to in the fire prevention code adopted in section 14-33 within which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  B-1 and B-2 business districts; 
(2)  R-1 and R-2 residence districts; 
(3)  A-duplex and multiple-family dwelling districts as set out in the land use and zoning ordinance and as set out on the zoning map. 
(Code 1971, § 7-27; Code 1992, § 7-34) 
Sec. 14-42. - Same-For new bulk plants for flammable liquids. 
    The limits referred to in the fire prevention code adopted in section 14-33 within which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited are established by this section as the city limits. 
(Code 1971, § 7-28; Code 1992, § 7-35) 
State Law reference- Storage of flammable liquids (other than liquefied petroleum gas) at gas stations, Texas Health and Safety Code § 753.003. 
Sec. 14-43. - Same-For bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas. 
    The limits referred to in the fire prevention code adopted in section 14-33 within which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted shall be the fire limits of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 7-29; Code 1992, § 7-36) 
Sec. 14-44. - Same-For storage of explosives and blasting agents. 
    The limits referred to in the fire prevention code adopted in section 14-33 within which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as the city limits. 
(Code 1971, § 7-30; Code 1992, § 7-37) 
Sec. 14-45. - Violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith, or to violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under the fire prevention code or any certificate or permit issued thereunder from which no appeal has been taken or to fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in the order. 
(c)  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The application of the penalty in section 1-16 shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1971, § 7-34; Code 1992, § 7-38) 
Sec. 14-46. - Investigation. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of loss, which may be determined by such investigation. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same. 
(c)  The fire marshal shall have a right to all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection, examination and investigation to enter into all buildings and premises within the city, and shall be his duty to enter upon and make or cause to be made an examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings and structures in order to determine whether any conditions dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to firefighters or occupants and, if such be found, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of such building or premises. Provided, however, that the owner or occupant may appeal such order within five days to the city manager, who shall investigate the same and report on such to the city council, and unless by authority of the city council such order of the fire marshal is revoked, such order shall remain in force and effect. 
(d)  The fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal each month concerning all hazardous conditions, together with the separate report on each fire within the city. 
(Code 1992, § 7-39; Ord. No. 491, § 7, 3-12-1990) 
Secs. 14-47-14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code, Texas Natural Resources Code ch. 113. 

Sec. 14-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Liquefied petroleum gas means and include any material which is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of them: propane, propylene and butanes, normal butane or isobutane, and butylenes. 
(Code 1971, § 7-46; Code 1992, § 7-56) 
Sec. 14-67. - Storage, handling within fire limits prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, store, handle or to dispense liquefied petroleum gases within the fire limits of the city established in section 8-27. 
(Code 1971, § 7-47; Code 1992, § 7-57) 
Sec. 14-68. - Parking, storing vehicles in fire limits prohibited. 
    No tank truck or tank trailer used for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gases shall be parked, stored or operated upon any street, alley or lot within the fire limits of the city established in section 8-27. 
(Code 1971, § 7-54; Code 1992, § 7-58) 
Sec. 14-69. - Repair or storage of vehicles within fire limits prohibited. 
    No tank truck or tank trailer used for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gases shall be stored or repaired inside or outside of any building within the fire limits of the city established in section 8-27. 
(Code 1971, § 7-55; Code 1992, § 7-59) 
Sec. 14-70. - Exception to sections 14-68 and 14-69. 
    The provisions of sections 14-68 and 14-69 shall not apply to any person transporting liquefied petroleum gas without stopping, except in case of an emergency, through the area of the fire limits of the city in the normal course of business. 
(Code 1971, § 7-56; Code 1992, § 7-60) 
Sec. 14-71. - Parking of liquefied petroleum gas transports. 
(a)  Liquefied petroleum gas transport trucks or semitrailers, when not in use or being serviced, shall not be parked closer than 50 feet to any building or group of buildings within the corporate limits of the city, except where such building or buildings are devoted exclusively to the transaction of liquefied petroleum gas business operations. 
(b)  Liquefied petroleum gas transports shall not be left parked at night on any highway, road, street or alley within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 7-57; Code 1992, § 7-61; Ord. No. 470, § 1, 8-9-1988) 
Chapter 16 - FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, Texas Water Code § 16.315. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A is usually refined into Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building: 
(1)  Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and 
(2)  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-30, VE, or V, the term "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before the date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards having been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see Flooding ). 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
    Mean sea level means for purposes of the national flood insurance program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)) includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as cleaning, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
(2)  For the purpose of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefor, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1971, § 5-147; Code 1992, § 8-1; Ord. No. 453, art. 2, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-2. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has, in Texas Water Code § 16.311 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain the provisions as is set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 8-2; Ord. No. 453, art. 1, § A, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-3. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1992, § 8-3; Ord. No. 453, art. 1, § B, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-4. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1992, § 8-4; Ord. No. 453, art. 1, § C, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-5. - Applicability of chapter. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 8-5; Ord. No. 453, art. 3, § A, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-6. - Compliance with chapter. 
    No structure or land shall be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 8-6; Ord. No. 453, art. 3, § D, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-7. - Effect on existing land use restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1992, § 8-7; Ord. No. 453, art. 3, § E, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-8. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1992, § 8-8; Ord. No. 453, art. 3, § F, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-9. - Warning and disclaimer. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1992, § 8-9; Ord. No. 453, art. 3, § G, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-10. - Identification of areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency on its Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Community No. 480199, dated January 16, 1976, and any revisions thereto are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 8-10; Code 1971, § 5-162; Ord. No. 453, art. 3, § B, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-11. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which service such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1992, § 8-11; Ord. No. 453, art. 1, § D, 2-10-1987) 
Secs. 16-12-16-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 16-41. - Floodplain administrator-Appointed. 
    The city manager is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1992, § 8-26; Ord. No. 453, art. 4, § A, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-42. - Same-Duties and responsibilities. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether a proposed building site will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the state water commission, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 16-10, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions regarding flood hazard control. 
(Code 1992, § 8-27; Ord. No. 453, art. 4, § B, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-43. - Development permit-Required. 
    A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-28; Ord. No. 453, art. 3, § C, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-44. - Same-Procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 16-65; 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 16-42(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Code 1971, §§ 5-148-5-151; Code 1992, § 8-29; Ord. No. 453, art. 4, § C, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-45. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board as established by the city shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided the relevant factors in section 16-44(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Prerequisites for granting variances are as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(j)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that the criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 8-30; Ord. No. 453, art. 4, § D, 2-10-1987) 
Secs. 16-46-16-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 16-64. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1971, § 5-152; Code 1992, § 8-46; Ord. No. 453, art. 5, § A, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-65. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 16-10, 16-42(8), or 16-66(d), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 16-44(a)(1) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation in relation to mean sea level to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but not be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1971, §§ 5-154-5-161; Code 1992, § 8-47; Ord. No. 453, art. 5, § B, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 16-66. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 16-3, 16-4 and 16-11. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the development permit requirements of sections 16-43 and 16-44, and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 16-10 or 16-42(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1971, § 5-153; Code 1992, § 8-48; Ord. No. 453, art. 5, § C, 2-10-1987) 
Chapter 18 - HOUSING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Housing authorities, Texas Local Government Code, ch. 392. 

Sec. 18-19. - Created. 
    There is created by this section a housing authority of the city, authorized to transact business and exercise its powers pursuant to state law, set forth at the Housing Authorities Law (Texas Local Government Code § 392.001 et seq.). 
(Code 1971, § 2-2; Code 1992, § 9-26) 
Secs. 18-20-18-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 18-42. - Standard Housing Code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations controlling the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings, dwelling units or structures within the area of jurisdiction of the city the Standard Housing Code, being particularly the 1988 edition, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. One copy of such code is filed in the city clerk's office. It is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1971, § 5-129; Code 1992, § 9-46) 
Sec. 18-43. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official means the building inspector. 
(Code 1971, § 5-130; Code 1992, § 9-47) 
Sec. 18-44. - Amendment. 
    Section 108 of the housing code adopted by this article is amended to read as follows: 
"Sec. 108. Violations and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed, or continued and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-16 of the Code of Ordinances for the city." 
(Code 1971, § 5-131; Code 1992, § 9-48) 
Secs. 18-45-18-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Fair Housing Act, Texas Property Code ch. 301. 

Sec. 18-62. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to this race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin. 
(b)  It is further declared that this policy is grounded upon a recognition of the inalienable right of each individual to provide for himself and his family a dwelling according to his own choosing; and further, that the denial of such rights though consideration based upon race, color religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable right which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1, 2-8-2000) 
Sec. 18-63. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 18-64, 18-65, and 18-66. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon or any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Family includes any group of persons desiring to reside together of persons desiring to reside together or one individual person. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, corporation, partnerships, association, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 2, 2-8-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.003. 
Sec. 18-64. - Discrimination on the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by section 18-67, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin. 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicated any preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representation regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, sex, religion, disability, financial status, and national origin. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 3, 2-8-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code §§ 301.021, 301.022. 
Sec. 18-65. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions or such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purpose of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 4, 2-8-2000) 
Sec. 18-66. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, national origin. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 5, 2-8-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.027. 
Sec. 18-67. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 18-64: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses, wherever located, at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale with any 24-month period; provided, further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under my express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house is sold or rented: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities salesman, or such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwelling, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting, or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 18-64(3), but nothing is this process shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractor, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  The rental or rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupies or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other of the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes providing lodgings which it owns or operated for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 6, 2-8-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.041 et seq. 
Sec. 18-68. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter referred to as the "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the city manager. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof. The city manager is directed to prepare and adopt from time to time standard complaint forms and to furnish them without charge to any person aggrieved. The city manager and employees of his office may assist in the clerical preparation of such complaints. 
(b)  The city manager shall receive and accept notification and referral of complaints from the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284 and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed directly by the person aggrieved. 
(c)  If, in the course of any investigation as provided in section 18-69 hereof on a complaint filed with or referred to the city manager, he shall receive credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that the person named in such complaint has committed a discriminatory housing practice on grounds not stated in such complaint, the city manager may prepare and file a such supplementary complaint shall thereafter be treated, in the same manner as an original complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(d)  If at any time the city manager shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the city manager may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(e)  Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the city manager shall furnish a copy of the same to the person named in the complaint. 
(f)  A complaint under subsections (a), (c), and (e) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall state the facts upon which the allegations of discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints maybe reasonable and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and, with the leave of the city manager, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be signed. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 7, 2-8-2000) 
Sec. 18-69. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complaint as herein provided, the city manager shall cause to be made a prompt investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  In connection with such investigation, the city manager may question and take and record testimony and statements of such persons who appear and may examine, record and copy documents which are produced. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, the city manager shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice act has occurred, or is about to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation's, including voluntary discontinuance or recertification of the discriminatory housing practice and voluntary compliance and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  In the event conciliation is effected, the city manager shall disclose nothing said or done in the course of such conciliation is such a way as to make public identification of the person named in the complaint without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 8, 2-8-2000) 
Sec. 18-70. - Committee hearing. 
(a)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the city manager but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the city manager, and if conciliation has not been effected, the city manager shall refer the complaint to the city council, together with the answer of the respondent, if any, and a full report of his investigation and activities in the matter. 
(b)  The city council shall promptly set a date for the hearing. This shall be within 30 days of the date on which the city manager referred the complaint. At least five days prior written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice. The hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner and shall be public. Proof of the matter alleged within the complaint may be presented by the city manager. The complaint and the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice may appear personally or by representative and with or without legal counsel and shall have the right to present proof and cross-examine witnesses in all matters relating to the complaint and subsequent related matters. In the event that a person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit a discriminatory housing practice shall fail to appear at the city council hearing either personally or by representative, after notice as provided above, them such hearing shall be deemed waived by such person. 
(c)  If, after such hearing, a majority of the city council shall determine on the basis of the evidence at the hearing that the complaint is well founded, the city council shall forthwith by persuasion, education and entreaty diligently attempt to secure within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, voluntary discontinuance of any discriminatory housing practice. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 9, 2-8-2000) 
Sec. 18-71. - Certification to city attorney. 
    If the city council shall determine that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred and if a hearing before the city council on the complaint alleging such violation has been waived or if the committee has held a hearing and the efforts of the city council to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, the city council shall cause the city manager to certify in writing to the city attorney that such discriminatory housing practice has occurred and request the city attorney for forthwith prosecute such violation in the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 10, 2-8-2000) 
Sec. 18-72. - Legal proceedings. 
(a)  Upon certification by the city manager pursuant to the direction of the city council, the city attorney shall institute a charge in municipal court and prosecute the same to final conclusion. 
(b)  The certification to the city attorney and the actions to be taken by the city attorney shall be cumulative of all other remedies and the procedures for the effectuation and enforcement of this article and the prosecution of alleged violators of this article. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 11, 2-8-2000) 
Sec. 18-73. - Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
    The city council and the city manager are authorized and encouraged to cooperate with the Secretary for Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, any may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article and may accept reimbursement from the Secretary for services rendered to assist him in carrying out the provisions of the above cited federal law. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 12, 2-8-2000) 
Sec. 18-74. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not action under color of law by force or threat of force, to injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
(1)  Any person because of his race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwelling; 
(2)  Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or class of persons from: 
a.  Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin, in any of the activities, services, organization or facilities described in subsection (1) of this section; or 
b.  Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
(3)  Any person because he is or has been or in order to discourage such person or any other person from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin, in any of the activities, services, organization or facilities described in subsection (1) of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceable assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity of to participate. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 13, 2-8-2000) 
Chapter 20 - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED, LOST, SEIZED, STOLEN PROPERTY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNKED VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq.; officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 545.305. 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique auto means a passenger car or truck that that is at least 25 years old. 
    Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Demolisher means a person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle. 
    Garagekeeper means an owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the service, repair, or maintenance of a motor vehicle. 
    Junked vehicle. 
(1)  The term "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that: 
a.  Is self-propelled; and 
b.  Is: 
1.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
2.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
(i)  Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
(ii)  Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(2)  For purposes of this article, the term "junked vehicle" includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft. This article applies only to: 
a.  A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate; 
b.  An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 CFR 47; or 
c.  A watercraft that: 
1.  Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number; and 
2.  Is not a watercraft described by Texas Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.055. 
    Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act, Texas Government Code ch. 501. 
    Police department means the police department of the city acting under the general police power authority as vested in the department by the city council or the sheriff or constable of the county. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from the original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
    Storage facility means a garage, parking lot, or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing, storing, or parking of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1971, § 16-133; Code 1992, § 10-26; Ord. No. 451, § 16-133, 2-10-1987) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code §§ 683.075, 683.077. 
Sec. 20-20. - Effect of article on other provisions. 
    This article does not affect a law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle left on public property. 
(Code 1992, § 10-61; Ord. No. 451, § 16-144, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 20-21. - Enforcement. 
    The person authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by this article may enter private property for the purposes specified in this article to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance. The municipal court may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures. 
(Code 1992, § 10-62; Ord. No. 451, § 16-143, 2-10-1987) 
Sec. 20-22. - Declared public nuisance. 
(a)  Findings. A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the state by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  Maintaining. A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this section. 
(c)  Penalty. A person who commits an offense under this section is, on conviction, subject to a fine as provided in section 1-16. On conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 1992, § 10-63; Ord. No. 451, § 16-140, 2-10-1987) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code §§ 683.072, 683.073. 
Sec. 20-23. - Procedure for abating nuisance. 
(a)  In order for the city to abate and remove a public nuisance under this article not less than ten days' notice must be given. The notice must be personally delivered, sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of: 
a.  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
b.  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)  The notice must state that: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(d)  If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(e)  In addition, the vehicle is prohibited from being reconstructed or made operable after it has been removed. 
(f)  A public hearing shall be held before the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part as a public nuisance. The hearing shall be held before the city council or a board, commission or official as designated by the city council if a hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. A resolution or order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site. 
(g)  Notice shall be given to the state department of highways and public transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. The notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part. The department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title issued for the vehicle. 
(h)  The provisions of this article do not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery 
(i)  These procedures shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city except that the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part from property may be by any duly authorized person. 
(Code 1992, § 10-64; Ord. No. 451, § 16-141, 2-10-1987) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code § 683.074 et seq. 
Sec. 20-24. - Disposal. 
    A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, demolisher, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. The process of disposal must comply with the provisions of section 20-23(c). 
(Code 1992, § 10-65; Ord. No. 451, § 16-142, 2-10-1987) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code § 683.078. 
Chapter 22 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Library Systems Act, Texas Government Code § 441.121 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Acceptance of designation of community library. 
(a)  The city accepts by this section the designation of a community library as authorized by the state library and historical commission, pursuant to the authority invested in the commission by the Texas Library Systems Act, Texas Government Code § 441.121 et seq. 
(b)  Such community library as designated by this section shall be a member of the San Antonio Major Resource System. 
(Code 1971, § 2-3; Code 1992, § 11-1) 
Chapter 24 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal licensing authority, Texas Local Government Code § 215.075; eligibility of persons with criminal backgrounds for certain occupations, professions and licenses, Texas Occupations Code § 53.0211 et seq.; suspension, revocation or denial of license to persons with criminal background, guidelines and application of law, Texas Occupations Code § 53.021. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, RODEOS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, regulate and regulate the location and conduct of amusements, Texas Local Government Code §§ 215.032, 215.074. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 24-19-24-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 24-40. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, show, exhibit or participate in any carnival, circus, wild west show, rodeo, or similar show or exhibit within the city, without first obtaining a permit specifically authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 3-1; Code 1992, § 12-41) 
Sec. 24-41. - Restricted to specific location. 
    The permit issued under the provisions of section 24-40 shall specify the location at which the event is to be operated and such event shall be restricted to that location. 
(Code 1971, § 3-2; Code 1992, § 12-42) 
Sec. 24-42. - Fee; exceptions. 
    A fee for the permit required in section 24-40 may be charged in an amount prescribed by the city council, provided that no such fee shall be charged for a carnival sponsored or operated by a local charitable, religious or civic organization. 
(Code 1971, § 3-3; Code 1992, § 12-43) 
Secs. 24-43-24-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD HANDLERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 431; Texas Meat and Poultry Inspection Act, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 433; food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile food units, and roadside food vendors, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 437. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-73. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Communicable diseases means diseases as mentioned in section 24-105 and shall include actinomycosis, coccidiodomycosis, pneumonic plague, primary pneumonia, bacterial pneumonias and tuberculosis. 
    Food establishment means any hotel, abattoir, restaurant, cafe, or any other place where food or drink is manufactured, transferred, stored, packed, served or otherwise handled. 
(Code 1971, § 8-16; Code 1992, § 12-61) 
Secs. 24-74-24-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HEALTH CERTIFICATE 

Sec. 24-105. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall work as a food handler in any food establishment unless he has a health certificate signed by a legally licensed physician certifying that the bearer has had an X-ray examination of his lungs and is free from any active communicable disease of the lungs or any disease or local infection transmitted through handling of food or drink. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of any food establishment to employ or permit any food handler to work therein, unless such food handler has the certificate required by this section. 
(Code 1971, § 8-17; Code 1992, § 12-76) 
Sec. 24-106. - Term. 
    All health certificates issued under this division shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1971, § 8-18; Code 1992, § 12-77) 
Sec. 24-107. - Size requirements for x-rays. 
    For purposes of this division, the X-ray required by section 24-105 may be made on 35- or 75-millimeter film or larger. 
(Code 1971, § 8-19; Code 1992, § 12-78) 
Secs. 24-108-24-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-128. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler or solicitor means any person soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers or magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines. 
(Code 1971, § 12-1; Code 1992, § 12-161) 
Secs. 24-129-24-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 24-155. - Required; exceptions from division. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or soliciting activity without first having applied for and obtained a license from the city clerk. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to persons selling farm produce raised by them, or on their lands, or on lands under their control, and does not apply to salesmen representing wholesalers who take orders for goods, wares and merchandise sold to retailers. 
(Code 1971, § 12-16; Code 1992, § 12-176) 
Sec. 24-156. - Application; contents. 
    Application for a peddler's or solicitor's license required by this division shall be made to the city clerk and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The name, address, age, height, complexion, color of hair, and color of eyes of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person, firm or corporation that the applicant represents. 
(3)  A full and complete description of the goods, wares, merchandise or other articles which the applicant desires to sell, provided that additional description as to grade and quality may be required by the license board. 
(4)  If the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony in any state or federal court, it shall be so stated in the application, giving the date of each conviction and the time served under each conviction. 
(5)  The names and addresses of five persons, not relatives, as references to which the license board may write or communicate with for any information it may desire regarding the applicant. 
(6)  Attached to the application and made a part thereof shall be a set of fingerprints of the applicant, five photographic likenesses of the applicant, a statement of the assets and liabilities of the applicant with the names and addresses of five persons who will verify such statement, and a statement certifying the moral character of the applicant signed by a county official of the applicant's residence. 
(Code 1971, § 12-17; Code 1992, § 12-177) 
Sec. 24-157. - Fee. 
    Prior to the issuance of the peddler's or solicitor's license required by this division, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee as established by the city. Such fee shall be used to defray expenses incident to the issuing of the license. 
(Code 1971, § 12-18; Code 1992, § 12-178) 
Sec. 24-158. - Bond. 
    Prior to the issuance of a peddler's or solicitor's license required by this division, the applicant shall submit to the city clerk a bond in the penal sum of $500.00, signed by the applicant, as principal, and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the division sold by the principal of such bond at the time of delivery and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery. The bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal of the bond, or to an agent or employee of the principal. 
(Code 1971, § 12-19; Code 1992, § 12-179) 
Sec. 24-159. - Issuance. 
    If the city manager after the investigation required by this division finds the applicant for a license required by this division to be the person he represents himself to be, and that he is not an illegal alien, an escaped convict, or a fugitive from justice, and that he has truly stated in his application the kind and quality of the merchandise, goods and services he proposes to sell, the city manager shall issue to the city clerk authorization to issue a license when the applicant has paid the fees and provided bond as provided in this division. 
(Code 1971, § 12-20; Code 1992, § 12-180) 
Sec. 24-160. - Term. 
    A peddler's or solicitor's license issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for a period of one year following the date of issuance. 
(Code 1971, § 12-22; Code 1992, § 12-181) 
Sec. 24-161. - To be carried while selling or soliciting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in selling or soliciting in the city without carrying the license required by this division while engaged in such soliciting or selling. 
(Code 1971, § 12-23; Code 1992, § 12-182) 
Sec. 24-162. - Appeal. 
    If the peddler's or solicitor's license required by this division is not issued to an applicant, such applicant may appeal such decision to the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 12-21; Code 1992, § 12-183) 
Secs. 24-163-24-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Control of junkyards and automobile graveyards, Texas Transportation Code ch. 396.001; metal recycling entities, Texas Occupations Code ch. 1956. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-193. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junk means and includes old iron, chain, brass, copper, tin, lead, or any other base materials, old rope, bags, rags, waste paper, paper clippings, clips, bagging, rubber, glass, empty bottles, bones, or old parts of machinery, or any other article which has been discarded or is no longer used for the purpose for which the articles were manufactured. 
    Motor vehicle junkyard means any business and any place of storage or deposit which displays or in or upon which there are displayed to view from a public highway, street or alley, two or more vehicles of all types which are unfit for reconditioning for use on the public highways, or used parts of motor vehicles of all types, or old iron, metal, glass, paper, tires, cordage or other waste or discarded or secondhand material which has been a part of or intended to be a part of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts of material shall be equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles. 
    Storage area or dumping ground means any area used on the premises of any business for storage or dumping of used materials, salvage, waste or discarded materials of any type. 
(Code 1971, § 10-34; Code 1992, § 12-206) 
Sec. 24-194. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    In addition to the penalty imposed by section 1-16, any dealer who violates any provision of this article shall have his license as a junk dealer cancelled, and his bond shall be forfeited. In the event of such forfeiture, the amount due upon such bond may be recovered in any ordinary civil action. 
(Code 1971, § 10-62; Code 1992, § 12-207) 
Sec. 24-195. - Conduct of business. 
    It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any place used or maintained by any person as a motor vehicle junkyard or storage area or dumping ground, or for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storage or leaving of worn out, wrecked, or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts or equipment thereof, or for the maintenance or operation of such place or area for the accumulation of rubbish of any description, unless the operation is conducted in the manner prescribed in this article including the payment of the license fee. 
(Code 1971, § 10-35; Code 1992, § 12-208) 
Sec. 24-196. - Maintenance of premises. 
    All persons granted a license as provided in this article or operating or maintaining establishments with outside storage, salvage, or trash areas shall keep the premises used in the operation and maintenance of such business in a neat and orderly condition. 
(Code 1971, § 10-36; Code 1992, § 12-209) 
Sec. 24-197. - Fence required. 
    The property and premises on which the secondhand goods business described in section 24-196 is conducted shall be enclosed by a structurally sound solid fence, at least eight feet high. The fence shall be constructed in accordance with the building codes adopted by this Code and continually kept in first class condition. No junk of any character, or parts, or machinery of any kind shall be allowed to remain outside, or extend or protrude above such fence or be seen through it. 
(Code 1971, § 10-37; Code 1992, § 12-210) 
Sec. 24-198. - Fireproof construction of buildings required. 
    No junk dealer of any type shall carry on his business in any building which is not of fireproof construction. 
(Code 1971, § 10-38; Code 1992, § 12-211) 
Sec. 24-199. - Business to be conducted only at licensed location. 
    No junk dealer licensed under the provisions of this article shall carry on his business at any place other than the one designated in his license. 
(Code 1971, § 10-39; Code 1992, § 12-212) 
Sec. 24-200. - Acquisition of junk from certain persons prohibited. 
    No junk dealer shall purchase, receive, or in any way acquire any junk from any person under the age of 16 years, or from any habitual drunkard, or from any insane person. 
(Code 1971, § 10-40; Code 1992, § 12-213) 
Sec. 24-201. - Inspection. 
    The place of business of each junk dealer shall be subject to inspection by the proper municipal authorities at all reasonable times, and the contents thereof shall be arranged in an orderly manner, with all similar things located together so as to facilitate such inspection. 
(Code 1971, § 10-41; Code 1992, § 12-214) 
Sec. 24-202. - Junk retention time; exception. 
(a)  All junk received by any junk dealer shall be retained for a period of 48 hours before it is disposed of by such dealer. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to old rags or paper received by the dealer. 
(Code 1971, § 10-42; Code 1992, § 12-215) 
Sec. 24-203. - Records. 
(a)  Each junk dealer shall keep a daily record plainly written in ink or indelible pencil in the English language, which shall accurately describe each article purchased, received, or in any manner acquired by him, and the name and residence of each person from whom each article was purchased or acquired, the day and hour of such purchase or acquisition, and the price paid for each article. 
(b)  The record shall be open to inspection by the chief of police or any person acting under his direction at all reasonable times. No entry in the record shall be in anywise changed, erased, obliterated, altered, or defaced. 
(c)  In the case of parts of motor vehicles, and in addition to the above requirements, the record shall contain all serial numbers, engine numbers, or other identifying numbers, the make, style, model, color, and license number of the automobile from which they were taken. 
(Code 1971, § 10-43; Code 1992, § 12-216) 
Secs. 24-204-24-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 24-230. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person desiring to use or maintain any property within the city, for any of the purposes mentioned in section 24-195 shall do so without obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to establishments where the storage of materials, salvage or trash, is an accessory use to the prime function of the establishments, for example automobile dealers, repair and machine shops, and packing sheds, provided the area designated for the storage of materials, salvage or trash does not exceed five percent of the total land use. 
(Code 1971, § 10-54; Code 1992, § 12-231) 
Sec. 24-231. - Application. 
    Application for a secondhand goods dealer's license required by this division shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, a legal description of the property or premises upon which business is to be conducted, and the nature of business. 
(Code 1971, § 10-55; Code 1992, § 12-232) 
Sec. 24-232. - Issuance; appeal of denial. 
    The city manager shall have the power to issue or reject the application for a license required by the provisions of this division. However, the applicant shall have the right to appeal and a hearing before the city council. If the city council concurs in the action of the city manager in denying the license, its decision shall be final. 
(Code 1971, § 10-56; Code 1992, § 12-233) 
Sec. 24-233. - Bond. 
    Prior to the issuance of the license required by this division, the applicant shall post a bond in the amount of $1,000.00. 
(Code 1971, § 10-57; Code 1992, § 12-234) 
Sec. 24-234. - Fee. 
    Prior to the issuance of the license required by this division and prior to renewal thereafter, a fee shall be paid to the city clerk in the amount as established by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 10-58; Code 1992, § 12-235) 
Sec. 24-235. - Term. 
    The license issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid until January first next succeeding the date of issuance. 
(Code 1971, § 10-59; Code 1992, § 12-236) 
Sec. 24-236. - Revocation. 
    If complaint is made in writing by any municipal official or by any resident of the city, to the effect that any junk dealer has violated any of the provisions of this division, the dealer shall be summoned to appear before the city council at a time not less than three days after the service of written notice upon him to show cause why his license shall not be revoked. If, after a hearing, the city council finds that the dealer is guilty as charged in the complaint, his license shall be revoked, and he shall be entitled to a refund covering the unexpired period of such license. Notice of the revocation of the junk dealer's license shall be served upon the licensee by mailing such notice to him at the address given in the application and by filing a copy of such notice with the city clerk. 
(Code 1971, § 10-60; Code 1992, § 12-237) 
Sec. 24-237. - Unlicensed conduct of business prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to carry on business as a junk dealer at any time after suspension, revocation or expiration of the license issued under this division. 
(Code 1971, § 10-61; Code 1992, § 12-238) 
Secs. 24-238-24-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGISTRATION OF ITINERANT AND TRANSIENT VENDORS AND MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 

Sec. 24-268. - Purpose. 
    This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state of the city, for the purpose of establishing a reasonable method and system of inquiring into the history and background of a transient and itinerant person, and the person or business entities they may represent, engaged in selling any product or service in the city for the purpose of determining the honesty and integrity of such persons or business entities, and whether or not they are engaged in fraudulently representing the product or service they sell, and whether or not they are engaged in the selling and receiving valuable consideration for a product or service which does not exist or is not intended to ever exist, all for safety, protection and best interest of the citizens of the city; and all the provisions of this article shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Code 1992, § 12-261; Ord. No. 487, § 1, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-269. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Designated, established business location within the city means the ownership and occupancy of a lot or other tract of land, and building thereon within the city used by the person, or the person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other form of business entity he represents, such building being used in the direct selling of the product or service within the city, provided that leasing or renting of such building is for a continuous period of time, or not less than 90 days. 
    Designated, established residence within the city means the ownership and legal and continuous occupancy of a lot or other tract of land and residence located thereon within the city by such person, or by the person he represents or the prior continuous occupancy, for a period of not less than 90 days, or rented or leased quarters within the city, by such person, or the person he represents, as the only residence or place abode of either such person. 
    Itinerant or transient vendor means any person representing himself or representing another person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other form of business entity, selling any product or service within the city, when neither such person or the person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other business entity he represents has a designated, established residence or business location within the city. 
    Product or service means any physical or material object or item, or any service of whatsoever nature, or any property right of any value represented by oral or written promise or contract. 
    Selling means selling, leasing or renting direct to the ultimate owner or user of such product or service, or to the agent or other representative of the ultimate owner or user of such product or service, whether such selling involves the delivery of the product or service at the time of the sale, or the taking of orders for future delivery, and whether such selling involves payment in advance, payment on delivery, by whatever means of delivery or deferred payment after the delivery of the product or service sold. 
    Ultimate owner or user means any member of any family for any other member of such family. 
(Code 1992, § 12-262; Ord. No. 487, § 2, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-270. - Selling on streets, sidewalks and alleys. 
    No person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other form of business entity, directly or by and through its agents and employees, regardless of nature, itinerant, transient, permanent, locally domiciled or otherwise, shall engage in any kind of selling activity described in this article on the public streets, sidewalks and alleys of the city except as authorized by ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 12-263; Ord. No. 487, § 3, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-271. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article for registration, registration cards and licenses shall not apply to or affect or control the following: 
(1)  The selling of products or services wholesale to retail dealers within the city. 
(2)  The selling of products or services within the city by use of the United States mail exclusively, and where no personal contact by the seller, or agents of the seller or purchaser, is had. 
(3)  The selling of insurance contracts by registered agents. 
(4)  Any person engaged wholly in interstate commerce or anyone whose operations form an integral part of interstate commerce and upon whom the provisions of this article would impose a direct and unlawful burden with respect to such operations. 
(5)  Solicitations for charitable purposes. 
(6)  The sale, delivery or soliciting of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products or bakery products. 
(7)  The selling of vegetables, eggs and other farm and garden products which have been raised or produced by the vendor when the vendor is a resident of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-264; Ord. No. 487, § 4, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-272. - Registration of itinerant and transient vendors. 
    The city clerk may issue registration cards to itinerant or transient vendors who qualify for such under the terms of this article. Registration cards shall not be transferable. Each itinerant or transient vendor, prior to engaging in the selling of any product or service within the city, shall first register with the city clerk at the office of such clerk in the city hall on registration forms provided for that purpose. No itinerant or transient vendor shall sell any product or service without carrying a valid registration card as provided for in this section. Each itinerant or transient vendor, at the time of registration, shall pay a registration fee to the city clerk in the amount as established by the city, such fee being based upon the reasonable expenses anticipated to be incurred by the city in conducting the investigation provided for. When a registration form and accompanying documents have been filed in proper form the city clerk shall initiate appropriate action to process the registration, and make an appropriate investigation of the applicant to ensure compliance with this Code and with state statutes concerning the sale and distribution of the products. After investigation, the city clerk shall approve or deny an application; if denied, the city clerk shall deliver to the applicant a written statement setting forth the reasons for the denial and notifying the applicant of his right to appeal. 
(Code 1992, § 12-265; Ord. No. 487, § 5, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-273. - Information to be given. 
    The form for registration under this article shall require, and each person registering shall furnish, the following information: 
(1)  The full name of the person registering. 
(2)  Whether or not he has a permanent home and/or business address, and if so, setting out such address or addresses. 
(3)  Whether or not the registrant represents himself or another person, partnership firm association, corporation or other business entity, and if so, the name or names and permanent home or business address, if any, of such other person, partnership, firm, association or other business entity. 
(4)  The names (including state and county) of the last preceding cities or towns in which the person registering conducted selling operations, up to, but not exceeding, the last five such towns or cities immediately preceding his arrival in this city. 
(5)  A detailed description of the product or service to be offered for sale and sold by such person within the city, including display of samples, if any, at the time of registering. 
(6)  The names and addresses of references, if any, including banks and inspection and approval agencies. 
(7)  A statement by the registrant, under oath, as to whether he has ever been sued in a civil or criminal proceeding in a duly constituted court of law for any form of fraud, theft or embezzlement; and whether or not the person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other business entity he may represent has ever been, to the registrant's knowledge, convicted in a duly constituted court of law for any form of fraud, theft or embezzlement. 
(Code 1992, § 12-266; Ord. No. 487, § 6, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-274. - Mobile food vendor's license. 
    The city clerk may issue a mobile food vendor's license to enable the holder to sell food from a vehicle within the city. A license issued under this article is nonassignable and is valid for a period of one year from its date of issuance. A mobile food vendor's license authorizes the holder to sell food products from a vehicle upon public streets, alleys and thoroughfares in the city, provided that a mobile food vendor may not utilize signs that are not attached to the vendor's vehicle, and further provided that a mobile food vendor may not remain parked or stationary for a period of more than ten minutes upon a public street, alley, thoroughfare or the rights-of-way thereof while engaged in selling such food products. Holders of a valid mobile food vendor's license are exempt from the requirement of this article for registration as itinerant or transient vendors. 
(Code 1992, § 12-267; Ord. No. 487, § 7, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-275. - Mobile food vendor's application; issuance; fees. 
(a)  An applicant for a mobile food vendor's license shall file an application with the city clerk. In addition, if the applicant uses or proposes to use a motor vehicle in the conduct of his business, the applicant has in force a policy of liability insurance, with minimum policy limits, as follow: 
(1)  $100,000.00 per person. 
(2)  $300,000.00 for any single occurrence for bodily injury or death. 
(3)  $10,000.00 for any single occurrence for injury to. 
(b)  When an application and accompanying documents have been filed in proper form, the city clerk shall initiate appropriate action to process the application, and make an appropriate investigation of the applicant, which may include, but is not limited to, an inspection of the vehicle and operation of the applicant to ensure compliance with this Code and with state statutes concerning the sale and distribution of the products. If the applicant proposes to use a motor vehicle in the conduct of his business, the application shall be denied if the city clerk finds that the applicant does not possess a valid driver's license or that the applicant is a habitual violator of the traffic laws as defined in Texas Transportation Code § 521.292(b). 
(c)  After investigation, the city clerk shall approve or deny an application; if denied, the city clerk shall deliver to the applicant a written statement setting forth the reasons for the denial and notifying the applicant of his right to appeal. 
(d)  The license shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is issued and the expiration date. 
(e)  An applicant for or holder of a mobile food vendor's permit shall pay a fee for the license, which fee shall be used to defray the expenses of administering this article, the amount to be as established by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 12-268; Ord. No. 487, § 8, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-276. - Food handler's certificate required. 
    Any itinerant or transient vendor or mobile food vendor who is selling food or food products is required to obtain and maintain in his place of business or employment a current food handler's certificate from the health department. A certificate is current if the date of issuance is not more than two years old. 
(Code 1992, § 12-269; Ord. No. 487, § 9, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-277. - Entering premises without invitation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitors of orders for goods, wares or merchandise, peddlers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of goods, wares or merchandise to go in or upon any private premises situated within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise or for the purpose of selling or disposing of or peddling the same without having first been requested or invited to go in or upon such premises by the owner or occupant thereof for such purpose or purposes. 
(Code 1992, § 12-270; Ord. No. 487, § 10, 1-9-1990) 
Sec. 24-278. - Hours for soliciting on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitors of orders for goods, wares or merchandise, peddlers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of goods, wares or merchandise to go in or upon any private premises situated within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise or for the purpose of selling or disposing of or peddling the same after the hour of 7:00 p.m. or before the hour of 9:00 a.m., except with the express prior consent of the owner, resident or other person with control of the property. 
(Code 1992, § 12-271; Ord. No. 487, § 11, 1-9-1990) 
Secs. 24-279-24-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 24-300. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses with the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction of the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council that this article is promulgated pursuant to Texas Local Government Code ch. 243, the Carrizo Springs Charter and Texas Local Government Code §§ 51.001 and 51.072, and all other applicable laws which may pertain to this article. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 1, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Achromatic means colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. The term "achromatic" includes, but is not limited to, grays, tans, and light earth tones. The term "achromatic" does not include white, black, or any bold coloration that attracts attention. 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment that as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, film, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret means a commercial establishment that regularly features the offering to customers of live entertainment that: 
(1)  Is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers; and 
(2)  Is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, simulation, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motel means hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Child care facility means a building used as a nursery, children's boardinghome, child placing agency or other place for the care or custody of children under 15 years of age, licensed by the state, pursuant to Texas Human Resources Code ch. 42. 
    Church means a building in which persons regularly assemble for worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with faith, or propagating a particular form or belief: 
    City means the city of Carrizo Springs, Texas. 
    Code enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer of the city or the code enforcement officer's designated agent. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Historic district means any historic district located in the city. 
    Hospital means a building used to provide health services for human inpatient medical care for the sick or injured licensed pursuant to the Texas Hospital Licensing Law (Texas Health and Safety Code § 241.001 et seq.) or operated by an agency of the federal government, or a convalescent facility licensed pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code § 242.031. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  State of dress that fails to completely and opaquely covers a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or any part of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family, or mobile home park and mobile home subdivision zoned for residential purpose. 
    Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multiple-family, or mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, and campground used for residential purposes. 
    School means a building where persons regularly assemble for the purposes of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, dormitories, stadiums, and other structures or ground used in conjunction therewith; 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity. 
    Sexually oriented business means a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, topless bar, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, adult cabaret, adult theater, escort agency, sexual encounter center, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer; 
    Sign means any display, design, pictorial, or other presentation that is: 
(1)  Constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened, or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that it is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business; and 
(2)  Used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services, or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business. 
The term "sign" also includes any representation painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business establishment or to any part of the tract upon which the establishment is situated. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Any of the following, or any combination of the following, when less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Any human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair; 
b.  Any buttock; or 
c.  Any portion of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or stimulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on August 31, 2011. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 2, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-302. - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses may be classified by the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-303. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the code enforcement officer. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions or the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 24-304 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  Applicant must notify interested parties of the intent to establish a S.O.B by posting an ad in the local newspaper. The interested parties will have the opportunity to express objections. Applicants will have the opportunity to show that such a business will not have a detrimental effect on the location. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 4, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-304. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within 45 days after receipt of an application unless the code enforcement officer finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 21 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse had been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operation a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. 
(5)  Any fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manager a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with section 24-307, 24-311, 24-312, 24-316, 24-317, 24-318, 24-319, or 24-320 of this section. 
(8)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 43: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 21: 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; 
(iii)  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 22; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 25; or 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses. 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(8)a of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(8)b of this section has elapsed. 
(d)  The code enforcement officer upon approving issuance of a sexually oriented business license, shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of that action and state where the applicant must pay the license fee and obtain the license. The code enforcement officer approval of the issuance of a license does not authorize the applicant to operate a sexually oriented business until the applicant has paid all fees required by this article and obtained possession of the license. 
(e)  The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 5, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-305. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is as established by the city. 
(b)  In addition to the fees required by subsection (a) of this section, an applicant for an initial sexually oriented business license shall, at the time of making application, pay a nonrefundable fee as established by the city, for the city to conduct a survey to ensure that the proposed sexually oriented business is as in compliance with the locational restrictions set forth in section 24-312. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 6, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-306. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the sheriff's department, the fire department, the city code enforcement officer, and the city building inspector to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the code enforcement officer at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 7, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-307. - Expiration of license. 
    Each license expires one year from the date of issuance, except that a license issued pursuant to a locational restriction expires on the date the exemption expires. A license may be renewed only by making application as provided in section. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected by the pendency of the application. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 8, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-308. - Suspension. 
    The code enforcement officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with section 24-306, 24-311, 24-312, 24-316, 24-317, 24-318, 24-319, or 24-320; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 9, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-309. - Revocation. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 24-308 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The sheriff shall revoke a license if the code enforcement officer determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the sheriff during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee had allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 24-304(a)(8)a for which the time period required in section 24-304(a)(8)b has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 24-304(a)(8)a for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Texas Penal Code § 21.02; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the code enforcement officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the code enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective, If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 24-304(a)(8)b has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 10, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-310. - Appeal. 
    If the code enforcement officer denies the issuance or renewal of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the code enforcement officer shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the applicant or licensee whose application for a license renewal has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked has the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of the notice of the decision of the code enforcement officer. The applicant or licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 11, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-311. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 12, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-312. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential or historic district as defined in this article; 
(4)  A public park; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this article; 
(6)  A hospital; or 
(7)  A child care facility. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion of a building or structure, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion of a building or structure containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement must be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, hospital, or child care facility or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, historic district, or residential lot. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses must be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully in operation on August 31, 2011, that is in violation of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section is a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed six months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. The nonconforming use may not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,500 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operation at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(g)  An owner of a nonconforming sexually oriented business who cannot recoup actual investments in the use by March 1, 2012, may request an extension of the compliance date from the planning and zoning commission. The request must be in writing and filed with the planning and zoning commission on or before February 1, 2012. No application for an extension that is received by the planning and zoning commission after February 1, 2012, may be considered. 
(h)  The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a hearing on the request for extension in accordance with applicable procedures set forth for the planning and zoning commission determines that the owner of the nonconforming sexually oriented business cannot recoup actual investments in the use by March 1, 2000, it may, by written order, provide a new compliance date to the owner. Any extension granted by the planning and zoning commission must specify a date certain for closure of the sexually oriented business and is not valid for operation of the business at any other location. 
(i)  The planning and zoning commission's decision on a request for an extended compliance date is final unless appealed to the district court within ten days in accordance with Texas Local Government Code ch. 211. 
(j)  A sexually oriented business that remains in operation pursuant to an extension granted under this section is not considered as having a license for purposes of measuring distances between a sexually oriented business and a church, a public or private elementary or secondary school, a boundary of a residential or historic district, a public park, the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, a hospital, a child care facility, or another sexually oriented business, as required in this section. 
(k)  A sexually oriented business fully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, historic district, residential lot, hospital, or child care facility within 1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(l)  All sexually oriented businesses shall be located only in a B-1 district. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 13, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-313. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the code enforcement officer denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 24-312, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city clerk a written request for an exemption for the locational restriction of section 24-312. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the city clerk within the ten-day limit, the board of adjustments and appeals shall consider the request. The city clerk shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)  A hearing by the board may proceed if a majority of the board members are present. The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)  The board of adjustments and appeals may, in its discretion, grant an exemption form the locational restrictions of section 24-312 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article; 
(3)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  That all other applicable provisions of this article will be observed. 
(e)  The board of adjustments and appeals shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the board of adjustments and appeals is final. 
(f)  If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the board's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 24-312 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the board's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article other than the locational restrictions of section 24-312. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 14, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-314. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented business. 
(a)  An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if he allows: 
(1)  The merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from any point outside the establishment; 
(2)  The exterior portions of the establishment to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by this article; or 
(3)  The exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color, except that this subsection does not apply to an establishment if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and 
b.  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the establishment, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way as to be component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center. 
(b)  The exterior of any sexually oriented business lawfully in operation on August 31, 2011, is not required to comply with subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section until alterations, repairs, remodeling, and repainting that cumulatively affect more than 50 percent of the exterior are performed on the sexually oriented business during any 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 14.1, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-315. - Sign requirements. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of the Code or any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person commits an offense if he erects, constructs, or maintains any sign for the establishment other than one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided in this section. 
(b)  A primary sign may have no more than two display surfaces. Each display surface must: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length. 
(c)  A secondary sign may have only one display surface. The display surface must: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 20 square feet in area; 
(4)  Not exceed five feet in height or four feet in width; and 
(5)  Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the establishment. 
(d)  A primary or secondary sign must contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only: 
(1)  The name of the establishment; and/or 
(2)  One or more of the following phrases: 
a.  Sex parlor. 
b.  Nude studio. 
c.  Modeling studio. 
d.  Topless bar. 
e.  Love parlor. 
f.  Adult bookstore. 
g.  Adult movie theater. 
h.  Adult video arcade. 
i.  Adult movie arcade. 
j.  Adult video store. 
k.  Adult motel. 
l.  Adult cabaret. 
m.  Adult theater. 
n.  Escort agency. 
o.  Sexual encounter agency. 
(e)  A primary sign for an adult motion picture theater may contain the phrase "movie titles posted on premises," in addition to the phrases listed in subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(f)  Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign must be of solid color, and each letter must be the same print-type, size, and color. The background behind the lettering on the display surface or a primary or secondary sign must be of a uniform and solid color. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the sign requirements of this section and section 24-314, any sign lawfully existing on the premise of a lawfully operating sexually oriented business on August 31, 2011, may continue to be maintained on the premises, until: 
(1)  The sign is intentionally removed or destroyed by the owner or operator of the sexually oriented business or abandoned by the owner or operator of the sexually oriented business; or 
(2)  The city requires removal, relocation or reconstruction of the sign in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 14.2, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-316. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 21 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 21 years. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 15, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-317. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 21 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 21 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises that can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in reception area open to the public. 
(e)  An employee of a nude model studio, while exposing any specified anatomical area, commits an offense if the employee touches a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(f)  A customer at a nude model studio commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee. 
(g)  A licensee or an employee of a nude model studio commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by walk through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 16, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-318. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he allows a person under the age of 21 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 21 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under 21 years was in a restroom not open to public view of persons of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 17, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-319. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as the term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rents" or "subrents" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(d)  An employee of an adult motel commits an offense if the employee is under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 18, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-320. - Additional regulations for adult cabarets. 
(a)  An employee of an adult cabaret, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense if the employee touches a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(b)  A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee. 
(c)  A licensee or an employee of an adult cabaret commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a walkthrough of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 18.1, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-321. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designation any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manger's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The code enforcement officer may waive the forgoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the code enforcement officer or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that a patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from the manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and shall also of the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measure at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall be the duty of any agents and employees premises, to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) of this section is maintained at all times that a patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a)(1) through (8) of this section commits an offense if he fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 19, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-322. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 21 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or videocassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy or bestiality; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region buttocks, or female breast; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packing on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 20, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-323. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 24-303(a), 24-312 or 24-317(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintained and operated educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicated a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 24-303(a) or 24-312 that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 21, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-324. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 24-312 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 22, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 24-325. - Amendment. 
    Sections 24-312 and 24-313 may be amended only after compliance with the procedure required to amend a zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 23, 9-13-2011) 
Chapter 26 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 26-1. - Discharging firearms. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm of any description within the corporate limits of the city. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to gunsmiths discharging firearms brought to them for repairs or to training guns or pistols of their own make, when done with the permission and at a place approved by the chief of police nor shall parties shooting in galleries licensed by the city come within the meaning of this section. The provisions of this section shall also not apply to: 
(1)  Law enforcement officers, members of the armed forces of the United States or members of the National Guard, while they are engaged in the perform of official duties as such. 
(2)  Persons exercising the legal right of self-defense or defense of others. 
(Code 1971, § 10-1; Code 1992, § 13-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate discharge of firearms, Texas Local Government Code § 229.001; discharging firearms in public places, Texas Penal Code § 42.01(a)(8), (a)(9). 
Sec. 26-2. - Shooting airguns, slingshots, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any airgun, slingshot or other like device, or to hurl, throw or discharge any gravel, marble, shot or other missile out of a gravel shooter, blowgun, rubber sling or other implement having a spring, rubber, air or other power, within the corporate limits of the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Law enforcement officers, members of the armed forces of the United States or members of the National Guard, while they are engaged in the perform of official duties as such. 
(2)  Persons exercising the legal right of self-defense or defense of others. 
(Code 1971, § 10-2; Code 1992, § 13-2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means: 
(1)  On any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, 10:30 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of the next day; 
(2)  On any Saturday or Sunday, 1:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m.; and 
(3)  On any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday on days that the school in which the minor is enrolled is in session, 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. 
    Direct route means the shortest path of travel through a public place to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Guardian means a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any commercial establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural, adoptive or step parent of a minor; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age or older authorized by a natural, adoptive or stepparent, or by a guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, plaza, building, or other place used by or accessible to the public including, but not limited to, the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, shops, and parking lots adjacent to commercial establishments. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; 
(2)  Walk, run, idle, wander, stroll, or aimlessly drive or ride about in or upon any public place or linger or stay; or the premises of any commercial establishment; or 
(3)  Fail to leave any public place or the premises of any commercial establishment when requested to do so by a (peace officer) or the owner, operator, employee or other person in control of the premises of any commercial establishment. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protected loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense under this section if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any commercial establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense under this section if he permits, or by insufficient control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any commercial establishment within the city during curfew hours in violation of the curfew imposed as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under section (b) of this section that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate or intrastate transportation or transportation for which passage through the curfew area is the most direct route; 
(4)  Engaged in a lawful employment activity or going to or returning home from a lawful employment activity without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religions or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Texas Family Code ch. 31; 
(10)  Acting at the direction of a peace officer; or 
(11)  Remains in any public place or on the premises of any commercial establishment during the scheduled vacation of or on a holiday observed by the school in which the minor is enrolled; or that the minor has graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor has permission to be absent from school or be in a public place from an authorized school official. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a peace officer shall: 
a.  Ascertain the age of the offender; 
b.  Ascertain the name and address of the offender; 
c.  Ascertain the name and address of the offender's parent or guardian if the offender is a minor; 
d.  Ascertain the name of the school in which the minor is enrolled, if the violation of this section occurs between 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday on days that schools are in session; 
e.  Ascertain the reason for being in public. 
(2)  The peace officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the peace officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstance, no defense in subsection (c) of this section is present. 
(3)  If the peace officer determines that a citation is warranted, the peace officer shall issue to the offender a municipal court Class "C" misdemeanor citation and submit a copy of the citation to the municipal judge. 
(4)  If the peace officer issues a citation to a minor, the peace officer shall order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route, unless the minor has violated the 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. curfew on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday on days that the school in which the minor is enrolled is in session. If a minor has violated the 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. curfew on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday on days that the school in which the minor is enrolled is in session, the peace officer, in addition to the issuance of a citation, shall turn the minor over to the school's truant officer. 
(5)  If the peace officer issues a citation to a minor, the city clerk shall send a letter by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the parent or guardian of the minor advising of the fact that the minor was found in violation of this chapter and received a municipal court misdemeanor citation. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable as provided in section 1-16. 
(2)  When required by Texas Family Code § 51.08, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection (b) of this section and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 776, §§ 1-5, 1-31-2018) 
State Law reference- Local curfew ordinances, Texas Local Government Code § 370.002. 
Sec. 26-4. - Vehicles in Veterans' Park. 
    No motor vehicles shall be allowed inside the fenced area of the city park (Veterans' Park) unless permission is granted by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 550, §§ 1, 2, 11-8-1994) 
Chapter 28 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Texas Occupations Code § 1201.001 et seq.; local regulation of manufactured housing, Texas Occupations Code §§ 1201.008, 1201.252. 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home means a transportable single-family dwelling units, without a foundation but suitable for year-round habitation and equipped with the means to connect to water, sanitary and electric facilities. The term "mobile home" shall not include similarly prefabricated modular or unitized dwellings placed on permanent foundations, nor shall the term "mobile home" refer to travel trailers, campers or similar units designed for recreation or other short term uses. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel of land within the corporate city limits of at least ten acres upon which two or more mobile homes are, or are intended to be, placed and occupied as dwellings. 
    Permit means a written permit issued by the planning and zoning commission allowing the construction, alteration, or extension of a mobile home under the provisions of this chapter and other applicable rules, regulations, and codes. 
(Code 1992, § 14-1; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-2. - Location of mobile homes. 
    All mobile homes in the city shall be located in mobile home parks, except for those units located on individual lots on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or in lots authorized by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1992, § 14-2; Ord. No. 535, § 2, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-3. - Permits and licenses. 
(a)  Any person seeking to locate a mobile home within the corporate city limits shall obtain a written permit from the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Permit application shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Location and legal description of real property. 
(3)  Proof of ownership of mobile home and real property where the mobile home is to be located. 
(4)  Size of mobile home. 
(c)  The permit application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the city, depending on type of request. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued without a certificate of approval of sanitary facilities from the inspector of the sanitary department. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued without a certificate of recommendation from the city zoning enforcement officer as to compliance with the requirements of the city's zoning regulations. 
(f)  Licenses shall be issued upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission upon assurance of compliance with the provisions of this chapter and may be revoked, after proper inspection and notification, if conditions or practices exist in violation of this chapter. 
(g)  Person obtaining a mobile home permit must be the owner of both the mobile home and the real property where the mobile home is to be located. 
(h)  Person obtaining a mobile home permit must reside in the mobile home. 
(i)  Each mobile home lot shall contain a minimum of 6,000 square feet. No lot shall have less than 50 feet frontage. 
(j)  Mobile home shall be at least 25 feet from any public roadway and at least 15 feet from any adjoining property line. 
(k)  The city council shall have the final decision to grant or deny the issuance of mobile home permits in the city. 
(Code 1992, § 14-3; Ord. No. 535, § 3, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-4. - Sanitary and utilities requirements. 
(a)  No mobile home shall be permitted to locate unless the mobile home is provided with connection to the municipal sewage disposal system. Such connection shall be in accordance with the plumbing code adopted by the city and must be acceptable to the city inspector. 
(b)  Each mobile home shall have at least one 15-gallon refuse can with tight-fitting cover screened from view. Refuse shall be collected and removed regularly and in such manner that no nuisance be maintained. 
(c)  Every mobile home shall have an accessible, safe, adequate, and potable water supply. Connection shall be made to the city's public water supply system unless a special exception is granted by the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 14-4; Ord. No. 535, § 4, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-5. - Nonconforming permits. 
(a)  Nonconforming permits are issued on a five-year basis and they solely waive the real property where the mobile home is to be located, from residential district to mobile home district, for as long as the requirements and regulations are abided by, otherwise, the permit shall become invalid and canceled. 
(b)  Nonconforming permits must be used within a three-month period from the date of issuance; unless a good cause is shown, the person shall have to repeat the zoning procedure for another permit. 
(c)  The mobile home shall be tied down and skirted to make it appear like a house. 
(d)  The person must abide by all city codes required by this Code and must obtain all necessary permits issued by the city inspector. 
(e)  The person shall not place a mobile home on real property until the nonconforming permit has been issued by the proper authority unless temporary permission is authorized by the city manager due to an emergency cause. Upon failure to comply with this procedure, the owner shall remove the mobile home at owner's expense. 
(f)  For placing of a mobile home on real property before issuance of permit, a fine as provided in section 1-16 shall be imposed for each day and each day is a separate offense. 
(g)  Should the person in whose name the mobile home permit has been issued move or sell the real estate and/or mobile home, the real property will automatically revert back to residential district and the new owner shall apply to the planning and zoning commission for a nonconforming permit. 
(h)  In the case of an owner of a mobile home having a nonconforming permit, if the mobile home shall be sold or rented, the nonconforming permit shall become invalid and canceled. 
(Code 1992, § 14-5; Ord. No. 535, § 5, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-6. - Fees. 
    The rezoning fee per request for new mobile homes on a residential district shall be as established by the city to cover the following expenses: 
(1)  Advertise legal publication of public hearing notices in newspaper for two weeks prior to the hearing. 
(2)  Postage for certified mail to all property owners residing within 200 feet of the real property where mobile home is to be located, notice to commissioners and person applying for permit. 
(3)  Commissioner's attendance fees. 
(4)  Other costs, namely copier, paperwork, typing, supplies, and dictaphone recording. 
(Code 1992, § 14-6; Ord. No. 535, § 6, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-7. - Time to place mobile home. 
    Once the permit is issued, the applicant will have 90 days to place the mobile home on the real property, otherwise the permit issued shall become invalid. The applicant shall reapply through the planning and zoning commission to obtain a new permit. 
(Code 1992, § 14-7; Ord. No. 535, § 7, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-8. - Grandfather clause. 
(a)  Original owners residing in mobile homes under the grandfather clause and desiring to replace a mobile home with a new mobile home, the owner shall pay a fee as established by the city to defray the expenses that will be incurred by the planning and zoning commission and all its administrative expenses. 
(b)  The owner shall appear before the planning and zoning commission to obtain a five-year nonconforming permit and owner shall be informed of the city codes and regulations pertaining to mobile home. 
(c)  No public hearing or letters informing neighbors shall be necessary. 
(d)  A permit under the grandfather clause shall be valid for as long as the owner shall remain as the owner of both the mobile home and the real property where the mobile home is located. 
(e)  The real property will automatically revert to residential zone when the owner of the mobile home, under the grandfather clause, sells or transfers ownership of such mobile home. The new owner must comply with the mobile home procedure and shall pay the fee as established by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 14-8; Ord. No. 535, § 8, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-9. - Renewal of nonconforming permit. 
(a)  The nonconforming permit shall be renewed every five years and a fee as established by the city shall be paid. 
(b)  The city inspector shall notify all owners of five-year nonconforming permits within a reasonable time prior to the expiration of the five-year nonconforming permit, and the owner shall appear at the city hall building to pay the fee as established by the city. 
(c)  No notice of public hearing nor certified letters to neighbors to appear before the planning and zoning commission shall be required when renewing a five-year nonconforming permit. 
(Code 1992, § 14-9; Ord. No. 535, § 9, 11-9-1993) 
Chapter 30 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate nuisances in the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code § 217.042; municipal regulation of sanitation, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 342; Texas Litter Abatement Act, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSANITARY, UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS 

Sec. 30-19. - Accumulation of stagnant water. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or other premises in the city to allow or permit holes or places where water may accumulate and become stagnant to be or remain on such lot or premises or to allow or permit the accumulation or retention of stagnant water thereon. 
(Code 1971, § 10-16; Code 1992, § 15-25) 
State Law reference- Authority to require filling up places where stagnant water accumulates, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.003. 
Sec. 30-20. - Accumulation of unwholesome matter. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, building, house, establishment or premises in the city to allow or permit any carrion, filth or any other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(Code 1971, § 10-17; Code 1992, § 15-26) 
State Law reference- Authority to require cleaning premises of impure or unwholesome matter, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 
Sec. 30-21. - Growth or accumulation of weeds, rubbish. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or premises in the city to allow or permit weeds, tall grass, rubbish, brush or any other unsightly, objectionable, or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to accumulate or remain on such lot or premises. 
(Code 1971, § 10-18; Code 1992, § 15-27) 
State Law reference- Authority to require premises to be kept free of weeds, rubbish, brush, etc., Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.004. 
Sec. 30-22. - Notice to owner to remedy condition-Generally. 
    Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist on any premises within the city, the owner of such premises shall be notified by the city, in writing, to correct, remedy or remove the conditions within seven days after such notice and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with such notice. 
(Code 1971, § 10-19; Code 1992, § 15-28) 
State Law reference- Notice to remove insanitary, unsightly, etc., conditions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.006. 
Sec. 30-23. - Same-Service. 
(a)  The notice provided for in section 30-22 must be given: 
(1)  Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  By publication at least once; 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(b)  If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(Code 1971, § 10-20; Code 1992, § 15-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.006. 
Sec. 30-24. - Remedy of conditions by city-Expenses charged to owner. 
    If the owner of any lot or premises upon which a condition described in this article exists fails to correct, remedy or remove such condition within seven days after notice to do so is given in accordance with this article, the city may do such work or make such improvements as are necessary to correct, remedy or remove such conditions, or cause the work to be done, and pay therefor and charge the expenses incurred to the owner of such lot. Such expenses shall be assessed against the lot or real estate upon which the work was done or the improvements made. The doing of such work by the city shall not relieve such person from prosecution for failure to comply with such notice in violation of section 30-22. 
(Code 1971, § 10-21; Code 1992, § 15-30) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to correct or remove conditions described in this article, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.006. 
Sec. 30-25. - Same-Filing of statement of expenses. 
    Whenever any work is done or improvements are made by the city under the provisions of section 30-24, the city manager, on behalf of the city, shall file a statement of the expenses incurred with the county clerk. Such statement shall give the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or the improvements were made. 
(Code 1971, § 10-22; Code 1992, § 15-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
Sec. 30-26. - Same-Lien for expenses. 
    After the statement provided for in section 30-25 is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on the lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvement made, to secure the expenses thereof. Such lien shall be secured only to tax liens and liens for street improvements and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city and the statement of expenses made in accordance with section 30-25, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Code 1971, § 10-23; Code 1992, § 15-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.005. 
Secs. 30-27-30-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 30-56. - Exemptions from article. 
    None of the terms or prohibitions of this article shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city, county or state while engaged upon necessary public business. 
(2)  Any vehicle recognized under existing law as an emergency vehicle while serving its purpose in an actual emergency. 
(3)  Excavations or repairs on bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Code 1971, § 11-14; Code 1992, § 15-51) 
Sec. 30-57. - Disturbing noise. 
    The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited. Any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-1; Code 1992, § 15-52) 
Sec. 30-58. - Use of loudspeakers, amplifiers. 
    The maintenance or operation of any loudspeaker or amplifying device on the outside of any building or structure in the city whereby music, speaking or noises of any type are or may be transmitted outside the confines of a fully enclosed stone or wood structure is prohibited; provided, however, that the city manager may, on being shown to his satisfaction that the operation thereof will not create an undue disturbance, grant a temporary permit to persons desiring to use loudspeakers or other electrical devices for parades or gatherings to be held in any park or other suitable place of assembly; and further provided that between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. the reasonable use of amplifiers as an integral part of a system or set of chimes or carillon or the ringing of bells to call the people to religious worship by any of the duly constituted, organized and recognized churches of the city, or the use of any public address systems or amplifiers in any ball park or stadium while an athletic contest is in progress therein, or at the municipal swimming pool, shall not be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 11-2; Code 1992, § 15-53) 
Sec. 30-59. - Playing of radios, television sets, instruments. 
    The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons in any office or hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any reasonable person in the vicinity, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-3; Code 1992, § 15-54) 
Sec. 30-60. - Yelling, shouting on streets. 
    Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any reasonable persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence or of any reasonable person in the vicinity, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-4; Code 1992, § 15-55) 
Sec. 30-61. - Keeping animals. 
    The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of reasonable persons in the vicinity is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-5; Code 1992, § 15-56) 
Sec. 30-62. - Blowing steam whistles. 
    The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-6; Code 1992, § 15-57) 
Sec. 30-63. - Mufflers for engines. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(Code 1971, § 11-7; Code 1992, § 15-58) 
Sec. 30-64. - Building and excavating operations. 
    The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, and the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, is hereby prohibited, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the city manager, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 30 days while the emergency continues. If the city manager should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during progress of the work. 
(Code 1971, § 11-8; Code 1992, § 15-59) 
Sec. 30-65. - Creation near schools, courts, hospitals, churches. 
    The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working or sessions thereof, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-9; Code 1992, § 15-60) 
Sec. 30-66. - Attracting attention to shows, sales. 
    The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise is declared to be unlawful. 
(Code 1971, § 11-10; Code 1992, § 15-61) 
Sec. 30-67. - Loud vehicles. 
    The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such a manner as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
(Code 1971, § 11-11; Code 1992, § 15-62) 
Sec. 30-68. - Sounding of vehicle horn or signal. 
    The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion, as a warning signal only; or the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sounds, and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-13; Code 1992, § 15-63) 
Sec. 30-69. - Loading or unloading of vehicles; opening or destruction of containers. 
    The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-12; Code 1992, § 15-64) 
Sec. 30-70. - Engine braking. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Engine braking or Jake braking , which must not be confused with the registered trademark "Jake brake" belonging to the Jacobs Vehicle Systems, Inc., means the use or operation of any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking, decompression or deceleration of a motor vehicle which results in the excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle in excess of state or federal noise standards for said vehicles. 
(b)  Offense. Engine braking, as defined in this section, shall be unlawful within the city limits. Therefore, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the city limits any engine brake, Jake brake, compression brake, dynamic braking system, mechanical exhaust device, or other similar device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the application of unmuffled compression brakes where necessary for the protection of persons and/or property, which cannot be avoided by application of an alternative braking system. 
(2)  Noise caused by the application of engine compression brakes, otherwise known as engine braking, which is effectively muffled, or, if the application is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the community, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency purposes shall be exempt. 
(4)  Sound created by city-owned and -operated equipment shall also be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Erection of signs. The director of public works and engineering shall be and is hereby specifically authorized to erect such signage as shall be necessary and appropriate for the enforcement of this section. 
(e)  Penalty provision Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Multiple violations may arise from the same occurrence if violations continue unabated after the issuance of a citation. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 1(15.65), 3-14-2017) 
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid Waste Disposal Act, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 361; Solid Waste Recovery Financing Act, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 362; Comprehensive Municipal Solid Waste Management, Resource Recovery and Conservation Act, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 363; Texas Litter Abatement Act, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local solid waste management plan, Texas Health and Safety Code § 363.064; municipal collection and disposal services, Texas Health and Safety Code § 363.111 et seq. 

Sec. 32-19. - Purpose. 
(a)  The accumulation of garbage, trash, rubbish, brush and other refuse on the premises of private residences, business, public and private institutions, vacant lots, and in the streets, and alleys and on other property ("premises") within the city constitutes a health hazard, fire hazard, safety hazard, public menace or nuisance and greatly increases the danger of the spread of infections, contagious and epidemic diseases. The regulations of this article are adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare by requiring property owners, tenants, occupants and lessees to secure and maintain containers and receptacles of sufficient size and material for the deposit of garbage, trash, and rubbish for collection and removal at regular intervals and to maintain their premises free of accumulations thereof. 
(b)  This article establishes the responsibilities of the residential and non-residential customers regarding collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste materials. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bags mean plastic sacks designed to store residential refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top. The total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 35 pounds. 
    Brush means plants or grass clippings, leaves or tree trimming, including bags and/or bundles of landscape waste. 
    Bulky items or bulk waste means indoor/outdoor furniture, mattresses and box springs, carpet, swing sets, plastic swimming pools, large toys, bicycles, fish aquariums, exercise equipment, large household appliances, white goods, and similar items. 
    Bundle means an easily handled package securely tied together not exceeding three feet in length and 35 pounds in weight. 
    Commercial means any structure or building other than a residential structure, including business structures, hotels, motels, rooming houses, apartments, town homes, condominiums, mobile home parks/manufactured home parks, or boarding houses and structures containing three or more dwelling units. 
    Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, institutions, multifamily dwellings with more than two units, warehouses, and manufacturing activities, excluding residential wastes and grease from commercial restaurants and other food service establishments. 
    Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, demolition or landscaping operations. 
    Construction materials means demolition waste including any and all solid waste resulting from any construction, remodel or demolition projects and the clean-up of such projects within the city limits; including, but not limited to, debris, broken concrete and rebar, paper plastic, cartons, gypsum board, wood, rubber, masonry, sheetrock, drywall, roofing materials, and all other materials, including rock and earthen materials and other materials resulting from or incidental to the clean-up of such projects or that are directly or indirectly the byproducts of construction, remodel, or demolition work with respect to existing buildings or other structures under development. 
    Container means customers are required to use containers which have been approved by the city council and issued by the city sanitation department. The city will rent the refuse containers to the customer. The weight of the container and its contents shall not exceed 300 pounds. 
    Customer means an occupant or owner of a residential, commercial or industrial unit who generates sold waste. 
    Garbage means every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition, of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, or grains or the animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used in tin cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable animal or vegetable waste matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents; except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish or stable matter. 
    Hazardous waste means any commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish, or other solid waste identified as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq., as amended. 
    Infectious waste means commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish, or other waste containing pathogens or biologically active material which because of its type, concentration, and quantity is capable of transmitting disease to persons exposed to the waste, including human and animal tissue, bandages, and other material used in health care which became contaminated by pathogenic materials. 
    Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal community, commercial, institutional, or recreation activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial solid waste. 
    Premises means all public and private establishments, including individual residences, all multifamily dwellings, residential care facilities, hospitals, schools, businesses, other buildings and all vacant lots. 
    Refuse means non-putrescible solid waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and non-combustible waste materials. 
    Rubbish means all waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cutting, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping, crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral, or metallic substances, and all other water materials not included in the definition of "bulky items" "construction debris," "dead animals," "garbage waste," "hazardous waste," or "stable matter." 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse, rubbish, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and from community and institutional activities. The term "solid waste" does not include: 
(1)  Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject to regulation by permit issued under the Texas Water Code ch. 26; 
(2)  Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural or manmade inert solid materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or 
(3)  Waste materials that result from the activities associated with the exploration, development or production of oil or gas or geothermal resources and other substance or material regulated by the state railroad commission under Texas Natural Resources Code § 91.101, unless the waste, substance or material results from activities associated with gasoline plants, natural gas liquids processing plants, pressure maintenance plants or repressurizing plants and is hazardous waste as defined by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended (42 USC 6901 et seq.). 
    Unacceptable waste means any and all waste, including, but not limited to, hazardous waste; class 1 non-hazardous special waste, and untreated medical waste, the acceptance of which would cause the city to violate any permit condition, legal or regulatory requirement, or damage city equipment or facilities, or present a substantial danger to the health or safety of the public or the city's employees. Examples of unacceptable waste include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Hazardous waste from conditionally exempt small-quantity generators that may be exempt from full controls under 30 Texas Administrative Code §§ 335.401-335.412 (relating to household materials which could be classified as hazardous waste); 
(2)  Class 1 industrial non-hazardous waste not routinely collected with municipal solid waste; 
(3)  Special waste from healthcare-related facilities (refers to certain items of medical waste); 
(4)  Municipal wastewater treatment plant sludge, other types of domestic sewage treatment plant sludge, and water-supply treatment plant sludge; 
(5)  Solid or dissolved material pumped out of a septic tank; 
(6)  Grease and grit trap waste; 
(7)  Waste from commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plants; air pollution control facilities; and tanks, drums, or containers used for shipping or storing any material that has been listed as a hazardous constituent in 40 CFR 261, appendix VIII, but has not been listed as a commercial chemical product in 40 CFR 261.33(e) or (f); 
(8)  Slaughterhouse waste; 
(9)  Dead animals shall not be placed in solid waste collection containers. Please call the animal control officer for disposal of dead animals; 
(10)  Drugs, contaminated food, contaminated beverages, other than those contained in normal household waste; 
(11)  Pesticide (insecticide, herbicide, fungicide, or rodenticide) containers; 
(12)  Discarded materials containing lead or asbestos; 
(13)  Incinerator ash; 
(14)  Soil contaminated by petroleum products, crude oils, or chemicals; 
(15)  Used oil; 
(16)  Large household appliances, white goods, or light ballasts and/or small capacitors containing polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) compounds; 
(17)  Waste from oil, gas, and geothermal activities subject to regulation by the state railroad commission when those wastes are to be processed, treated, or disposed of at a solid waste management facility permitted under this article; 
(18)  Waste generated outside the boundaries of the state that contains: 
a.  Any industrial waste; 
b.  Any waste associated with oil, gas, and geothermal exploration, production or development activities; or 
c.  Any item listed as a special waste in this definition; 
(19)  Any waste stream other than household or commercial garbage, refuse or rubbish; 
(20)  Lead-acid storage batteries; and 
(21)  Used oil filters from internal combustion engines. 
    White goods means appliances such as refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, and other large enameled appliances, which do not contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) or chlorofluorocarbon compounds (CFC) and have been officially certified to that effect. 
    Yard waste means leaves, yard trimmings, yard and garden debris, Christmas trees, and brush, including clean woody vegetative material not greater than four inches in diameter which results from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations. The term "yard waste" does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs, with or without intact root balls, and specifically excludes all treated wood. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-21. - Service established. 
(a)  All occupied residential and nonresidential structures within the city limits shall establish service at the same time the customer's water account is established. All residential and business customers are required to have water, sewer and solid waste collection and disposal service. One cannot opt out of solid waste collection and disposal services. The charges for solid waste collection and disposal shall be included on the monthly utility bill of all utility customers. Basic service includes the collection of one container. Customers will be charged for additional containers based on current rate. 
(b)  The sanitation department will issue one container per residence. Residents needing additional containers will need to call the utility billing department and request them. Additional containers can be rented from the city at a fee set by the city council. Each container shall possess a clearly visible identifying number. The number will be assigned to the account of a customer and that customer will be held responsible for the unit until such time that the unit is returned to the city. 
(c)  When establishing solid waste collection service for nonresidential customers, the size of the commercial container will be determined. The commercial container shall be an appropriately sized container that will be collected at a frequency that prevents the accumulation of waste outside the container and prevents littering or spilling of materials onto public areas or neighborhood sites. Collection on nonresidential solid waste shall not be made less than once time per week. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 3, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-22. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Storage or accumulations of solid waste or recyclable materials that is unsightly or a health or safety hazard is prohibited. No owner, lessee, or occupant of any residential or nonresidential unit shall permit the accumulation of any solid waste or recyclable material on residential or nonresidential premises except in acceptable containers as defined herein. Proper storage of such materials between collection days is required to ensure prevention of littering and unsanitary conditions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in control of any premises to allow solid waste or recyclable materials to be piled, placed, or accumulated on any sidewalk, street, or other right-of-way within the city limits. 
(c)  No person shall dump, throw or place any solid waste, ashes, grass cuttings, rock, or any other material of any kind in or on any public street, alley, storm sewer, drainage structure, and drainage channel, other public or private property in the city except for the designated collection location on the designated collection day. 
(d)  All hazardous waste, special waste (as defined in state or federal regulations), and medical waste materials must be disposed on in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning material (burning match, charcoal, embers, etc.) into any container used for disposal of solid waste or recyclable materials. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste, recyclable material, or any other waste material by fire, burial, or similar methods within the city limits. 
(g)  Meddling with solid waste or recycling containers or in any way pilfering, scattering content, or scavenging materials from such containers is prohibited by anyone other than the owner or resident of the premises where the container is located. 
(h)  No person shall place any solid waste or recyclable material into any residential or nonresidential waste container without the effective consent of the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises upon which the container located. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to place solid waste in, on, or near a solid waste container in a manner that does not allow the lid of the solid waste container to completely close with all the solid waste completely within the container. 
(j)  No person shall knowingly place any solid waste, bulky items, or any other material in, on, or next to the solid waste container of another person or entity in the city. 
(k)  Residents are prohibited from setting out any solid waste that is generated from a non-residential source to be collected as residential solid waste. 
(l)  No appliances or items that contain or have polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) or chlorofluorocarbon compounds (CFC) or any other gaseous compounds. 
(m)  No hazardous waste (as defined herein), medical waste, soil, dirt, rock, sand or concrete shall be set out for residential collection. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place non-recyclable materials in a recyclable container. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 4, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-23. - Removal of unauthorized containers. 
    All solid waste containers not meeting the requirements of this article, upon notice shall be removed by the customer or the unauthorized containers shall be disposed of the by the city. The city shall not be liable for the removal and disposal of the unauthorized containers if the customer fails to remove the unauthorized containers. Only authorized solid waste containers will be serviced. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 5, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-24. - Maintenance of garbage and containers. 
    Garbage shall be placed inside large plastic bags. Said bags shall be sealed such that the garbage is contained and cannot blow out of the container. The lid to t container shall be placed upon the container such that the lid closes completely. It is the customer's responsibility to ensure animals or the wind cannot scatter the contents of the container over the streets, alleys and premises of the city. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 6, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-25. - Placement of containers. 
(a)  Containers, as defined in this article, shall be placed on the property line or street at a place designated by the director of public works or his designee. 
(b)  Containers shall be placed at the property line no earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day prior to the scheduled collection date. To ensure collection, the container shall be placed at the property line no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 7, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-26. - Mobility or visually impaired customers. 
    Mobility or visually impaired customers may receive special collection services. The resident receiving this special service must apply for such accommodation and must be mobility or visually impaired where no member of the household is physically able to place the container at the property line. Such special services shall require approval by the director of public works or his designee. The rate for these special collection services will be the same rate as is charged to those customers with no impairments. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 8, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-27. - Preparation and placement of tree trimmings and leaves. 
(a)  For special collection by the city at designated times. Tree trimming will be cut to lengths not exceeding three feet and bundled (securely tied together) in a package not to exceed 35 pounds in weight. Yard waste, consisting of small pieces, small cuttings, small loose material and leaves will be placed in plastic bags and sealed such that the items cannot spill out of the bag. All such material for special collection shall be placed just inside the customer's property line, and in the street. 
(b)  Brush, limbs, leaves, and cuttings from trees and shrubs which have been trimmed or removed by a commercial tree trimmer shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner of the person controlling the premises. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 9, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-28. - Preparation and placement required for collection. 
    No garbage, trash, rubbish or tree limbs shall be collected by the city unless it is placed and maintained as designated by this article. All empty containers shall be disinfected with a suitable disinfectant and removed from the collection point without any necessary delay. Failure to comply with this provision shall be an offense and each day's failure to comply will constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 10, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-29. - Nonresidential, commercial collection containers. 
(a)  Overfilled nonresidential containers will not be emptied if a safety hazard exists. Customers will be responsible for removing the excess and collection will be rescheduled when the excess material has been removed. 
(b)  The customer is responsible for providing access to solid waste container and keeping the area around and on top of the container clear of obstruction so that the container can be serviced as scheduled. If the container is blocked and not cleared, service will not be provided. The customer will be responsible for the cost of extra collections required. 
(c)  The customer is responsible for odor and insect control around containers. 
(d)  Commercial containers shall not be placed on any sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way, and shall be placed solely on private property. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in control of any premises to allow solid waste or recyclable materials to be piled, placed, or accumulated on any sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way within the city limits. Commercial containers shall be placed on the site in such a manner that the collection vehicle is able to service the container without obstructing the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 11, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-30. - Frequency of collection by the city. 
(a)  Collection of garbage and trash by the city shall occur as follows: 
(1)  Residential class: Zone pick-up once weekly. 
(2)  Business class: Zone pick-up periodically on the basis of the demand requirement of the business unit. 
(3)  Special collection of tree trimming and leaves: This service will be offered twice per year. Each year, the city council will set a schedule for this service and it will be advertised on the city website and in the local newspaper. 
(b)  The city has the right to change, adjust and re-draw collection zones as needed. The public will be notified of any changes, adjustments or re-drawing of the collection zones. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 12, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-31. - Charges for solid waste collection and disposal services. 
    Rates for solid waste collection and disposal shall be as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 13, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-32. - Disposal of extraordinary accumulations. 
    Places of wholesale accumulations such as killing dressing fowl, wholesale fruit and vegetable houses, storage plants and any place where the daily accumulation of garbage, trash and rubbish is more than the ordinary quantities are not included in the service furnished by the city. Such places are required to remove the same to the city landfill at their own expense, in a manner prescribed by the director of public works or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 14, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-33. - Disposal of heavy, dead animals. 
    Such animals shall be delivered to the city landfill at the expense of the owner or person having them in their charge in the manner and by the method directed by the director of public works or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 15, 12-12-2017) 
Secs. 32-34-32-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDFILL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Landfills generally, Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.061 et seq. 

Sec. 32-55. - Authorized persons. 
    Employees of the city and city officials directing operation of the garbage collection service and persons delivering garbage or other rubbish to the city landfill are allowed on the city landfill. All other persons are prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 9-17; Code 1992, § 16-61) 
Sec. 32-56. - Ownership by city of deposits. 
    Any material deposited at the landfill shall be the property of the city. No person shall be allowed to separate and collect, carry off or dispose of the same except under the direction of the designated official. 
(Code 1971, § 9-18; Code 1992, § 16-62) 
Sec. 32-57. - Supervisor employed. 
    The city shall employ an individual to supervise the activities of all individuals using the city's landfill from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, and from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays and 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 1, 3-13-1984; Code 1992, § 16-63) 
Sec. 32-58. - Fee for landfill use. 
    A fee as established by the city shall be charged to all those individuals utilizing the city's landfill during the hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 2, 3-13-1984; Code 1992, § 16-64) 
Sec. 32-59. - Tipping fees. 
(a)  No charges shall be imposed to city residential customers for disposing domestic items such as brush, limbs, leaves, furniture, and appliances during the following time periods: 
(1)  March of each year on the last five working days. 
(2)  June of each year on the last five working days. 
(3)  September of each year on the last five working days. 
(4)  December of each year on the last five working days. 
(b)  The above time periods shall not apply to demolition and/or construction materials. 
(c)  Proof of city residence. City residential customers shall prove residency in the city to the gate keeper at the city's landfill by presenting the most recent paid utility bill stub and driver's license. 
(d)  Tipping fees, including fees for vehicle tires, shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 16-65; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 7-18-1991; Ord. No. 600, 8-29-2000; Ord. No. 614, § 1, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 675, § 1, 6-19-2007) 
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority of home rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, Texas Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home rule municipality regarding sidewalks, Texas Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, Texas Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - General prohibition of obstructions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber to any extent any portion of any street, alley or sidewalk in the city with lumber, boxes, timber, firewood, posts, vehicles or anything whatever in any manner whatever. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any barrel, box, wood, merchandise, vehicles, or other objects on any sidewalk in the city, so as to obstruct entirely or in part passage along the sidewalk or any part thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 14-2; Code 1992, § 17-1) 
Sec. 34-2. - Stands prohibited on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful to have or maintain any fruit stand, huckster's stand or other stall on any sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 14-3; Code 1992, § 17-2) 
Sec. 34-3. - Removal of obstructions. 
    Where any such object as mentioned in sections 34-1 and 34-2 may be found by the city marshal or reported to him, it shall be his duty to notify the owner of such object to remove the same immediately, and if such object is not removed immediately, it shall be deemed an offense. 
(Code 1971, § 14-4; Code 1992, § 17-3) 
Sec. 34-4. - Maintenance of sidewalks by adjacent property owners. 
    It is unlawful for any person to permit any sidewalk adjacent to the premises owned or used by him to become or remain in such condition as to endanger persons using the same. 
(Code 1971, § 14-6; Code 1992, § 17-4) 
Sec. 34-5. - Permit required for defined driveways. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial driveway means an entrance to or exit from any commercial business, or similar type establishment adjacent to a state highway. 
    Private driveway means an entrance to or exit from a residential dwelling, farm or ranch adjacent to a state highway for the exclusive use and benefit of grantee. 
    Public access driveway means all approaches to a state highway from schools, churches, cemeteries and other public places or buildings of like character. 
(b)  No private driveway, commercial driveway or public access driveway opening into any highway or road under the jurisdiction of the state highway department shall be constructed within the territorial limits of the city unless a permit for the construction thereof is first obtained from the state highway department. 
(Code 1971, § 14-5; Code 1992, § 17-5) 
Sec. 34-6. - Unauthorized removal of trees, shrubs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove without permission from the city council from any park, plaza or other public place any tree, shrub, plant, sod, stone, or gravel. 
(Code 1971, § 14-12; Code 1992, § 17-8) 
Sec. 34-7. - Merchants allowed to place merchandise upon sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall hereafter be lawful for any person, firm or corporation to place merchandise on the sidewalks in the city only during the following periods: 
(1)  Fridays and Saturdays; 
(2)  One day prior to and the actual day of all national holidays; 
(3)  Two weeks prior to the beginning of the school year; and 
(4)  All advertised sales. 
(b)  Merchandise displayed by merchants shall not cover beyond one-third of the sidewalk from the existing building. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation violating subsection (a) of this section shall be notified by the city marshal to remove such objects immediately, and if such objects are not removed immediately, it shall be the duty of the city marshal to file a complaint against the responsible person or party. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and every day such object remains on any street shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be treated as such. 
(Code 1992, § 17-9; Ord. No. 511, §§ 1-3, 6-28-1991) 
Secs. 34-8-34-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 

Sec. 34-33. - Official map adopted. 
    The city street map showing and designating the various streets within the city, and identified by the signatures of the mayor and city council dated April 12, 1967, is adopted as the official street name and numbering map of the city correctly showing and designating in the city the names of all streets therein. Such map is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1971, § 14-7; Code 1992, § 17-26) 
Sec. 34-34. - Procedure for designating. 
(a)  All streets within the city extending in approximately an easterly and westerly direction are and shall be designated by name and all streets extending in approximately a northerly and southerly direction are and shall be designated by numbers. 
(b)  Pena Street shall constitute the baseline for all numbering on the streets running north and south and First Street (Highway 83) shall constitute the baseline for all numbering on the streets running east and west. 
(Code 1971, § 14-8; Code 1992, § 17-27) 
Sec. 34-35. - Procedure for numbering lots, buildings. 
(a)  Buildings fronting streets from the west and from the south shall bear even numbers in their last figure. Buildings fronting streets from the east and from the north shall bear odd numbers in their last figure. Buildings fronting streets shall be numbered from the baseline as established in section 34-34, such numbers being zero at the baseline and not to exceed the number 99 at the end of the first block, being 100 at the beginning and not to exceed the number 199 at the end of the second block, and continuing in this manner. Any blocks located upon streets which do not intersect the baselines shall bear the 100s number of the corresponding block nearest the same location which does intersect the baseline. 
(b)  In each block, each 25 feet of frontage shall be deemed the unit for determining the last figure of the number to be used. From the corner of each block nearest its respective baseline each 25 feet of frontage shall be given a number. Where duplex houses or court cottages are erected on any lot entitled to receive only one number, the different apartments of such house or the separate units shall be designated with the number to which the lot is entitled and in addition thereto a suffix letter beginning with the letter "a" for each of such additional units. All houses situated on the rear of any lot will be given the number to which such lot is entitled with the prefix "rear of" affixed thereto. All second stories that may be numbered will be given the number of the lot upon which such building may be situated with the suffix "1/2" added thereto. 
(c)  All lots or parts of lots, houses and buildings located on those portions of any street extending approximately north and south and being north of the Pena Street baseline shall be known and designated as "North" and all south of the Pena Street baseline shall be designated as "South," and all located on all those portions of any street extending east and west and being east of the First Street (Highway 83) baseline shall be known and designated as "East" and all west of the First Street (Highway 83) baseline shall be known and designated as "West." The prefixes shall be placed before the proper name of the street, such as "West Nopal Street" or "North Fifth Street." 
(d)  In case of doubt or where a question arises as to the proper number to be assigned to any lot or building, the city clerk shall decide the question and fix the number of such lot or building. 
(Code 1971, § 14-9; Code 1992, § 17-28) 
Sec. 34-36. - Unauthorized excavations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, drain, or ditch in any street, alley or public park, plaza or other property in this city without first having obtained the permission of the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 14-13; Code 1992, § 17-29) 
Chapter 36 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Property taxes, Texas Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.; local taxation, Texas Tax Code § 301.001 et seq.; municipal hotel occupancy tax, Texas Tax Code ch. 351. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Property taxes, Texas Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-19. - Taxation of certain personal property to be sent out of state (Freeport Exemption). 
    All of that property described in the Texas Constitution article VIII, section 1-j shall not be taxable in the city beginning January 1, 1994. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 8-9-1994) 
Secs. 36-20-36-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 36-42. - Property tax discounts. 
    The property tax discounts in Texas Tax Code § 31.05(b) and (c) are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1992, § 18-41; Ord. No. 457, 8-11-1987) 
State Law reference- Property tax discounts authorized, Texas Tax Code § 31.05(b), (c). 
Secs. 36-43-36-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt exemption for persons 65 years old or over, Texas Tax Code § 11.13(d), (e). 

Sec. 36-73. - Exemption granted. 
(a)  Upon compliance with all the requirements of the applicable laws and ordinances, $10,000.00 of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons 65 years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city. 
(b)  Such exemption shall be effective as to such residence homesteads as may qualify from and after January 1, 1980. Eligibility for such exemption shall be determined each year as of January 1 of such year. 
(Code 1971, § 15-6; Code 1992, § 18-66; Ord. No. 371, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-1980) 
State Law reference- Residence homestead exemption for the elderly, authority, Texas Tax Code § 11.13. 
Sec. 36-74. - Exemption limitation. 
    The exemption authorized in this division shall extend only to a residential homestead as may be defined by the laws of the state. Such exemption shall be allowed only if the property in question is in fact the residential homestead of the applicant and such person has attained the age of 65 years of age on January 1 of the taxable year in question. The exemption shall be granted if one spouse has attained the age of 65 years on such applicable date even though the other has not attained such age. 
(Code 1992, § 18-67; Ord. No. 371, § 5, 7-8-1980) 
Sec. 36-75. - Application. 
    The exemption provided for by this division shall not be allowed unless the person claiming such exemption shall file with the tax assessor-collector, between January 1 and April 30 of the year for which such exemption is claimed, documentary proof of age satisfactory to the tax assessor-collector and a sworn claim for such exemption, describing the property for which exemption is sought, on forms prescribed by the tax assessor-collector, giving complete information as provided for by such forms. In the event of good cause shown to the satisfaction of the tax assessor-collector, late applications may be accepted but no later, in any event, than ten days prior to time for submission of assessment rolls to the board of equalization. After the filing of such proof of age and claim for exemption, the tax assessor-collector may, if he deems it necessary, request further information in order to determine eligibility for such exemption, which such information shall be provided by the applicant as a prerequisite to obtaining such exemption. Such application for exemption shall be made annually for each year that such exemption is sought. 
(Code 1971, § 15-7; Code 1992, § 18-68; Ord. No. 371, § 3, 7-8-1980) 
Sec. 36-76. - Determination of tax assessor-collector. 
    After application for the exemption provided for by this division, all necessary proof, and any other necessary information has been filed, the tax assessor-collector shall determine eligibility for such exemption. The determination of the tax assessor-collector shall be final and the property in question shall be placed on the tax rolls of the city in accordance with such determination. However, if the tax assessor-collector should deny such application for exemption, notice shall be given to the applicant within ten days of such determination and in any event no later than the submission of all assessment lists to the board of equalization. However, there shall be no appeal of the tax assessor-collector's determination. 
(Code 1992, § 18-69; Ord. No. 371, § 4, 7-8-1980) 
Sec. 36-77. - Exemption eligibility date. 
    January 1 of each tax year shall be the determinative date for eligibility for the exemption provided for by this division, and qualification therefor shall be determined each year as of that date. Determination of eligibility for such exemption shall be for only the year in question with each subsequent year requiring application and determination of eligibility as provided in this division. There shall be no proration of the exemption provided for in this division for any taxable year either in the event of qualification or disqualification of either any applicable person or property for such exemption after January 1 of the applicable year. 
(Code 1992, § 18-70; Ord. No. 371, § 6, 7-8-1980) 
Secs. 36-78-36-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- A one percent local sales and use tax was adopted by the people at an election held February 10, 1968. 
State Law reference- Sales and Use Tax Act, Texas Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 

Sec. 36-98. - Gas and electricity sales tax. 
    By this section, the city retains the taxes authorized by Texas Tax Code § 321.105 on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by Texas Tax Code § 321.105. 
(Code 1971, § 15-8; Code 1992, § 18-86) 
State Law reference- Residential use of gas and electricity, Texas Tax Code § 321.105. 
Sec. 36-99. - Telecommunications service sales tax. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The application of the exemption provided for in Texas Tax Code § 321.210(a) is hereby repealed by the city as authorized by Texas Tax Code § 321.210(a). 
(c)  The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(Code 1992, § 18-87; Ord. No. 463, § 1, 5-10-1988; Ord. No. 463, § 1, 10-1-1988) 
State Law reference- Telecommunications exemption, Texas Tax Code § 321.210. 
Secs. 36-100-36-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal hotel occupancy tax, Texas Tax Code ch. 351. 

Sec. 36-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping and not including the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
    Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term "hotel" includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, roominghouse, or bed and breakfast. The term "hotel" does not include: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by Texas Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution; or 
(3)  An oilfield portable unit, as defined by Texas Tax Code § 152.001. 
The term "hotel" includes a short-term rental; the term "short-term rental" means the rental of all or part of a residential property to a person who is not a permanent resident. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel if the room is one which is ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant is other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Occupant means any who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of October, November and December; the second quarter being the months of January, February and March; the third quarter being the months of April, May and June; and the fourth quarter being the months of July, August and September. 
    Tax assessor-collector means the tax assessor and collector of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 18-101; Ord. No. 493, § 1, 3-12-1990; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 1-11-1994) 
Sec. 36-127. - Tax levied; amount; exemptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2.00 or more each day and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room of possession. 
(b)  Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  No tax shall be imposed upon a permanent resident. 
(2)  As provided in Texas Tax Code § 351.006. 
(Code 1992, § 18-102; Ord. No. 493, § 2, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 36-128. - Collection of tax. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by this article for the city. The hotel operator shall be entitled to one percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax. However, as hereinbelow provided, this reimbursement may be forfeited at the discretion of the city if the hotel operator fails to timely pay over the tax or timely file a report as required by the city or file a false report with the city. 
(Code 1992, § 18-103; Ord. No. 493, § 3, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 36-129. - Quarterly reports to tax assessor-collector. 
    On the last day of the month following each quarterly period (beginning on the last day of the month following the second quarterly period of calendar year 1990), every person required to collect the tax imposed hereby shall file a report with the assessor-collector of taxes showing the price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies and any other information the assessor-collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the assessor-collector. The assessor-collector is hereby authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this article. The assessor-collector shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonable time documentation for information contained in the report to the city by the hotel. 
(Code 1992, § 18-104; Ord. No. 493, § 4, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 36-130. - Rules and regulations of tax assessor-collector; access to books and records. 
    The assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 18-105; Ord. No. 493, § 5, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 36-131. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed herein when said report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five percent of the amount due as penalty, and after the first 30 days, he shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax. However, such penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the due date. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including hotel operators who fail to collect the tax, fail to file a return, file a false return or who are delinquent in their tax payment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each 24 hours of any such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 18-106; Ord. No. 493, § 6, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 36-132. - Additional penalties. 
    The city is hereby authorized to take the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report or failed to pay the tax when due: 
(1)  Require the forfeiture of any revenue the city allowed the hotel operator to retain for his cost of collecting the tax; 
(2)  Bring suit against the hotel for noncompliance; and/or 
(3)  Bring suit against the hotel seeking any other remedies provided under state law. 
(Code 1992, § 18-107; Ord. No. 493, § 7, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 36-133. - Additional authorization to bring suit. 
    The city attorney is hereby authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and required to pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in the injunction. 
(Code 1992, § 18-108; Ord. No. 493, § 8, 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 36-134. - Administrative requirements; accountability; keeping of records. 
(a)  The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. The city council shall approve in writing in advance the annual budget of the entity to which it delegates those functions, and shall require the entity to make periodic reports to the city council at least annually listing the expenditures made by the entity of revenue from the tax provided by the municipality. 
(b)  The entity must maintain the revenue provided by the municipality from the tax in a separate account established for that purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any other account. 
(c)  The municipality may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its convention and visitors programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax other than by contract as provided herein. 
(d)  The approval by the city council of the annual budget of the entity to which these functions are delegated creates a fiduciary duty in the person or entity with respect to the revenue provided by the municipality to the person or entity under the contract. 
(e)  A person or entity with whom the municipality contracts to conduct authorized activities shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person or entity and, on request of the city council or other person, shall make the records available for inspection and review. 
(f)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing of expenditures hereinbefore authorized. The portion of the total administrative costs for activities for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the administrative costs actually incurred in conducting the authorized activities. 
(g)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity the primary purpose of which is not directly related to the promotion of the person's job in an efficient and professional manner. 
(Code 1992, § 18-110; Ord. No. 493, § 10, 3-12-1990) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Rules of the Road, Texas Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of the movements of a vehicle. 
    Driveway, public, means any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or from any public property. 
    Loading zone means that portion of any roadway set apart, marked and numbered for the sole use of the public as a place for loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or other cargo. 
    Noise means any harsh or discordant sound. 
    Parking stall or parking space means that portion or section of a roadway adjacent to the curbing or edge, set apart, marked and bounded by lines painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the roadway for the use of parking vehicles; or that portion of any alley marked by official signs showing such space to be a parking zone. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a street includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    School bus means every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Stop, stopping or standing means, when prohibited, any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Tire means any pneumatic tire in which compressed air is used to support the load. 
    Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Truck means a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    U-turn means the turning or causing the turning of a vehicle, so that when such turn is completed that such vehicle will be headed in the opposite direction from that in which it was headed before such turning was begun, whether or not such vehicle is pulled into a driveway or any space beyond the curbline of the street. 
(Code 1971, § 16-1; Code 1992, § 19-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Effect of Code on existing regulations. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed as repealing or otherwise affecting any ordinance of the city prescribing traffic regulations on specific streets or highways in the city, such as, but not limited to, ordinances prescribing speed limits, establishing areas or spaces where parking is prohibited or limited, or designating one-way streets or alleys or intersections for the control of traffic by signs or signals, and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1971, § 16-2; Code 1992, § 19-2) 
Sec. 38-3. - Authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws. If there is a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws. 
(Code 1971, § 16-3; Code 1992, § 19-3) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 
Sec. 38-4. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1971, § 16-4; Code 1992, § 19-4) 
Sec. 38-5. - Obedience to fire department officials. 
    No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a fire department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 16-5; Code 1992, § 19-5) 
State Law reference- Obedience to police, Texas Transportation Code § 542.501. 
Sec. 38-6. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1971, § 16-7; Code 1992, § 19-7) 
Sec. 38-7. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1971, § 16-9; Code 1992, § 19-9) 
Sec. 38-8. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any motorcycle shall attach such vehicle or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10; Code 1992, § 19-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 181. 
Sec. 38-9. - Use of roller skates, coasters, etc., on roadway. 
    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1971, § 16-11; Code 1992, § 19-11) 
Sec. 38-10. - Injurious materials in streets. 
    No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or alley. 
(Code 1971, § 16-12; Code 1992, § 19-12) 
State Law reference- Removal of material from highway required, Texas Transportation Code § 600.001. 
Sec. 38-11. - Removing, damaging traffic barriers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee, to remove or damage any barriers erected under the direction of a duly authorized city official either closing a street or for the purpose of warning traffic of an obstruction in the street. 
(Code 1971, § 16-13; Code 1992, § 19-13) 
Secs. 38-12-38-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 38-41. - Prohibited turns at intersections. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized, subject to approval by the city council, to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs. 
(b)  No driver of any vehicle shall make a U-turn at any intersection within the city where there is suspended and operating a traffic-control signal light. 
(Code 1971, § 16-35; Code 1992, § 19-42) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate turning at intersections, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(7). 
Sec. 38-42. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  Whenever the city council designates a one-way street or alley, the chief of police shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where the movement of vehicular traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon those streets and alleys or parts of streets and alleys designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in any other direction, when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and established at every intersection thereon, where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 16-45; Code 1992, § 19-52) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to designate one-way streets and require traffic thereon to move in one specific direction, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(10). 
Sec. 38-43. - General obstruction of traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in such manner as to block or obstruct the traffic on any street or alley of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 16-49; Code 1992, § 19-56) 
Sec. 38-44. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1971, § 16-50; Code 1992, § 19-57) 
Sec. 38-45. - Funeral processions. 
    Every funeral procession shall be marked with appropriate pennants or other device or method, such as burning headlights in daytime, sufficient to show the nature of such procession. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to cross through or interrupt any funeral procession. 
(Code 1971, § 16-54; Code 1992, § 19-61) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate processions are assemblages on highways, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(3). 
Sec. 38-46. - Driving on fresh pavement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of any street in the city that has been freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street is ready for travel. 
(Code 1971, § 16-58; Code 1992, § 19-65) 
Sec. 38-47. - Causing noise by spinning of tires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of a motor vehicle to start from a stopped position with such force so as to create a loud noise by the slipping and spinning of tires on such motor vehicle, which noise is possible to be heard at a distance of at least 500 feet, or any driver of a motor vehicle driving at a slow rate of speed and accelerating with such force so as to create a loud noise by the slipping and spinning of tires on such motor vehicle, which noise is possible to be heard at a distance of at least 500 feet. 
(Code 1971, § 16-59; Code 1992, § 19-66) 
Sec. 38-48. - Unauthorized driving on public grounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to drive or operate any motor vehicle on any of the public school grounds or the grounds of any other public property in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 16-60; Code 1992, § 19-67) 
Sec. 38-49. - Parking of oversized vehicles. 
(a)  (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any oversized vehicle, as defined in appendix A, zoning ordinance, sections IV, V, and VI, to park the same upon any street within residential areas (R-1, R-2 and R-3) or in school zones, during school hours when school is in session. This section shall not apply to the parking of such vehicles for such time as is actually necessary to load and unload passengers, freight or merchandise. 
(2)  This subsection (a) shall not apply to large trucks/tractors, recreational vehicles and boats provided only when said large trucks/tractors, recreational vehicles and boats are parked on private property. 
(b)  No oversized vehicles shall be parked at any time within the residential areas as listed in subsection (a) of this section; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the parking of such vehicles for such time as is actually necessary to load or unload passengers, freight or merchandise and that such vehicle may be parked in the restricted parking area temporarily for trip preparation or other purpose. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, proof that the vehicle was, at the time of the alleged offense, owned by the person charged with the offense shall constitute prime facie evidence that the vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged by the owner; but the owner shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that the vehicle was not parked by him as charged in the complaint. 
(2)  For purpose of this section: 
a.  The term "oversized vehicle" means a motor vehicle, trailer or boat which by itself or together with other structures or vehicles attached to it exceeds 24 feet in length, eight feet in width or eight feet in height, exclusive of appurtenances such as antennas, air conditioners, luggage racks, and mirrors. 
b.  Residential parking exceptions. Oversized vehicles may be parked in a driveway or other permanently maintained parking area as specified in this Code within the residential area under the following conditions: 
1.  An oversized vehicle may be temporarily parked in the residential area for such time as is actually necessary to load or unload passengers, freight, or merchandise, or to prepare for a trip. Trip preparation time shall be limited to a maximum of 12 hours prior to use and 12 hours after use, twice within any calendar month. 
2.  An oversized vehicle may be parked in the residential area at any time if it bears a special handicapped parking permit (decal) issued by the proper authority. 
3.  A disabled person who owns an oversized vehicle may apply to the proper authority for such a permit if the person has a mobility impairment, uses the vehicle as a primary means of transportation or livelihood, and the vehicle is specially equipped or modified to accommodate the disability. 
4.  It shall be a violation hereof from the holder of a permit issued hereunder to transfer title to the oversized vehicle without contacting the proper authority for cancellation and removing the permit from the vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 16-61; Code 1992, § 19-68; Ord. No. 570, 8-13-1996; Ord. No. 572, 10-8-1996) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate vehicle stopping, standing or parking, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 
Sec. 38-50. - One-way streets. 
    The schedule of one-way streets in the city is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1992, § 19-69) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate one-way streets, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(10). 
Sec. 38-51. - Stop streets. 
    The schedule of stop streets in the city is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1992, § 19-70) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate stop streets, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(8). 
Sec. 38-52. - Yield streets. 
    The schedule of yield streets in the city is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1992, § 19-71) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate yield streets, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(8). 
Secs. 38-53-38-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic control devices and signals, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1); traffic control signs, signals, etc., Texas Transportation Code ch. 544. 

Sec. 38-78. - Uniformity. 
    All signs and signals required under this article for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1971, § 16-73; Code 1992, § 19-86) 
State Law reference- Conformance with state sign manual, Texas Transportation Code § 544.001. 
Sec. 38-79. - Powers and duties of chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this article to make effective the provisions of this article, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this article or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices. 
(Code 1971, § 16-74; Code 1992, § 19-87) 
Sec. 38-80. - Designation of crosswalks and safety zones and marking traffic lanes. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this article and other traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1971, § 16-75; Code 1992, § 19-88) 
Sec. 38-81. - Installation of traffic lights. 
    The chief of police, as authorized by the city council from time to time, shall designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections. 
(Code 1971, § 16-78; Code 1992, § 19-91) 
Sec. 38-82. - Ratification of existing devices. 
    All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code, and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic control devices, provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article or state law. 
(Code 1971, § 16-82; Code 1992, § 19-96) 
Secs. 38-83-38-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Speed generally, Texas Transportation Code § 545.351 et seq.; municipal alteration of speed limits, Texas Transportation Code § 545.356 et seq. 

Sec. 38-108. - Maximum limits on specific streets. 
    The city council may alter the maximum speed limit of 30 miles per hour on any street or portion thereof within the city in accordance with the provisions of Texas Transportation Code § 545.356. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
(Code 1971, § 16-97; Code 1992, § 19-123) 
Sec. 38-109. - Maximum speed limit on Texas Highway 85, Nopal Street. 
    No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on all or any part of Texas Highway 85, also known as Nopal Street, within the city limits, at a speed greater than the maximum speed limits set out as follows: 
(1)  Between United States Highway 83 and the east right-of-way line of Brown Street, the maximum speed limit is 30 miles per hour. 
(2)  Between the east right-of-way line of Brown Street and the east end of the bridge across Carrizo Creek, the maximum speed limit is 40 miles per hour. 
(3)  Between the east end of the bridge across Carrizo Creek and the east city limits, the maximum speed limit is 40 miles per hour; provided, however, that the maximum speed limit will be restricted and reduced to 30 miles per hour on school days and during school functions as set out in this section. The maximum speed limit will be 30 miles per hour during the period of time from 7:45 a.m. to 3:45 p.m. on school days when the flashing warning signal lights or other traffic control devices are in actual operation giving notice to the operators or drivers of vehicles of such speed regulation. The maximum speed limit will be 30 miles per hour at such other times and in connection with school activities when the flashing warning signal lights or other traffic control devices are in actual operation giving notice to the operators or drivers of vehicles of such speed regulation. 
(4)  Additional speed restrictions for State Highway 85 are as provided in Ordinance No. 502. 
(Code 1971, § 16-101; Code 1992, § 19-125) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 502, adopted November 13, 1990, provided further speed limitation for State Highway 85. A map of this and other provisions for maximum, reasonable and prudent speeds for the section of highway described is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 38-110. - Speed humps. 
    Authorizing the location of speed humps within the city limits, whose primary purpose is to reduce the speed of vehicles traveling along roadways. Speed humps shall be located with safe principles, however: 
(1)  Speed humps will usually be placed a reasonable number of feet apart. 
(2)  A speed hump shall not be located in front of a driveway or within an intersection. 
(3)  Speed humps should not be located within 250 feet of a traffic control device or within 50 feet of an intersection. 
(4)  A speed hump shall not be located in front of a property if the occupants objects to its placement. 
(5)  A speed hump must not be close to a fire department facility as to significantly interfere with emergency vehicle operations. 
(6)  The street must be paved. If there are no curbs, a special design must be used to prevent vehicle run-arounds. 
(7)  The speed hump is a gentle rise and fall of pavement surface place in the roadway to reduce the speed of the vehicle. 
(8)  The base of the hump shall be approximately 12 feet wide and gradually slopes to a maximum height of three inches. 
(Ord. No. 629, 11-12-2002) 
Secs. 38-111-38-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING; STANDING; PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2); stopping, standing and parking, Texas Transportation Code § 545.301 et seq. 

Sec. 38-134. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to be parked any vehicle on any street in the city for the purpose of exhibiting such vehicle for sale, or for the purpose of washing such vehicle, or for the purpose of making repairs to such vehicle, except such repairs as may be necessary as emergency repairs. 
(Code 1971, § 16-113; Code 1992, § 19-148) 
Sec. 38-135. - Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than five feet of each lane of a roadway, a total of ten feet in the center of the roadway, for free movement of the vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. 
(Code 1971, § 16-114; Code 1992, § 19-149) 
Sec. 38-136. - Designation and marking of parking stalls and areas where parking is prohibited or limited. 
(a)  The chief of police shall cause parking stalls to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time and he shall cause spaces in which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time. The chief of police shall also cause time-limit parking areas to be maintained and marked off in and on such parts of streets as may be designated by the city council from time to time. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by markings on the pavement or curb. 
(b)  In areas designated as time-limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the council, the same to be designated with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time-limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area. 
(c)  Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under this section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 16-115; Code 1992, § 19-150) 
Sec. 38-137. - Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited as provided in section 38-136 or in a time-limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible. 
(Code 1971, § 16-116; Code 1992, § 19-151) 
Sec. 38-138. - Angle parking. 
(a)  The chief of police, with the approval of the city council, shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within this city unless the state highway engineer has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any railway tracks. 
(b)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(c)  Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
(Code 1971, § 16-117; Code 1992, § 19-152) 
State Law reference- Parallel parking, Texas Transportation Code § 545.303. 
Sec. 38-139. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the free passage of other vehicles in such alley. 
(Code 1971, § 16-118; Code 1992, § 19-153) 
Sec. 38-140. - General loading and unloading. 
    All freight trucks shall be, and are hereby required to be, loaded and unloaded from the alley entrance, if practicable. Where conditions are such as to make the loading or unloading thereof from an alley impracticable, such trucks shall be parked on the street in accord with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 16-119; Code 1992, § 19-154) 
Sec. 38-141. - Permit to back to curb for loading or unloading. 
    The chief of police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized by this section, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1971, § 16-120; Code 1992, § 19-155) 
Sec. 38-142. - Restriction of standing, parking on Pena Street, Seventh Street. 
(a)  On Pena Street and Seventh Street within the city limits, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, as provided in this Code. 
(b)  On Pena Street between United States Highway 83, also known as First Street, and the west city limits, standing or parking of vehicles will be restricted as follows: 
(1)  Between United States Highway 83, also known as First Street, and Fourth Street, the standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited, and there will be no parking. 
(2)  Between Fourth Street and Sixth Street, the standing or parking of vehicles is allowed on the south side, and the standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited on the north side. 
(3)  Between Sixth Street and Eighth Street, the standing or parking of vehicles is allowed on the south side. 
(4)  Between Sixth Street and Eighth Street, the standing or parking of vehicles is allowed on the north side on Sundays only. 
(5)  Between Eighth Street and Tenth Street, the standing or parking of vehicles is allowed on the south side, and the standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited on the north side. 
(6)  Between Tenth Street and the west city limits, the standing or parking of vehicles is allowed on both the north side and the south side. 
(Code 1971, § 16-122; Code 1992, § 19-156) 
Sec. 38-143. - Parking regulations for specific streets. 
    The schedule of parking regulations for the streets and alleys in the city is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1992, § 19-157) 
Sec. 38-144. - Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked such vehicle. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such provision, ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1971, § 16-121; Code 1992, § 19-158) 
Sec. 38-145. - Designating reserved disabled parking spaces on public property. 
(a)  The location of public parking spaces for disabled persons shall be as established by the city. 
(b)  Each reserved disabled person parking space shall be marked as required by Texas Transportation Code § 681.009. 
(c)  Any vehicle upon which disabled license plate devices, as defined in Texas Transportation Code § 504.201, are displayed or in which a disabled person identification card is placed in the lower left-hand side of the front windshield, when being operated by or for the transportation of a disabled person shall be allowed to park for unlimited periods in any parking space or parking area designated specifically for the physically handicapped. 
(d)  No person shall park a vehicle neither displaying the special device plate nor displaying a disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated for the disabled. 
(e)  No person who is not temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled person shall park a vehicle with such special device or displaying a disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specially for the disabled. 
(Ord. No. 734, 19-159, 8-5-2014) 
Secs. 38-146-38-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrians, Texas Transportation Code ch. 552. 

Sec. 38-174. - Application of article. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as provided in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 16-148; Code 1992, § 19-176) 
Sec. 38-175. - Use of crosswalks required. 
(a)  All crossings by any pedestrian of any intersection within the corporate limits of the city shall be made within the crosswalks of such intersection. 
(b)  It shall be lawful for a pedestrian to cross a street at any place other than an intersection, but when any such crossing is made or being made by any pedestrian he shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon such street approaching such place of crossing and in proximity thereto. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cause any vehicle to stop or for such pedestrian to cause any interference with the movements of any vehicle by reason of such crossing at such place. 
(Code 1971, § 16-15; Code 1992, § 19-178) 
State Law reference- Authority to require pedestrians to use crosswalk, Texas Transportation Code § 552.009. 
Secs. 38-176-38-196. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PARKING METERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 

Sec. 38-197. - Designation; use. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to establish the location of metered parking spaces upon any street or portion of any street where it is determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the installation of parking meters shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control, or inspection of the parking of vehicles. The parking of vehicles in such metered parking spaces shall be controlled and regulated by parking meters, installed and maintained by the city manager or his designee, and located upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces. The city manager shall designate the maximum parking time for each parking meter, basing this designation on the investigation above set forth. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized to designate any portion or section of any drive, roadway or area within any public ground or lands owned or controlled by the city, as a public parking area within which parking shall be controlled by parking meters, whenever the city manager shall find and determine that the use of public property or any public building, structure or activity situated thereon or adjacent thereto will be benefited by the control of such parking, or access to such ground, buildings or activity will be made more readily available to a larger number of citizens or congested traffic and parking conditions will be thereby eliminated. In the areas so designated, the city manager shall designate the maximum parking time for each parking meter, basing his designation on the fact finding above set forth. Prior to making changes or designation the city manager will meet with city council in order to be able to fairly consider any impacts to affected downtown businesses and patrons. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.183, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-198. - Installation. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall install or remove parking meters in the metered parking spaces established as provided by this article. Such meters shall be capable of being operated, either automatically or mechanically, upon the deposit therein of an appropriate coin, or coins, of United States currency, authorized tokens or a parking meter fee debit card or other approved payment method for the full period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in any metered parking space. 
(b)  A parking meter fee debit card means a card to be used as a substitute for coins to obtain time on a parking meter. 
(c)  A token means a token issued by the city or contracted service provider to be used as a substitute for coins to obtain time on a parking meter. 
(d)  Each parking meter shall be so designed, constructed, installed and set that upon the expiration of the time period registered, by the deposit an approved payment method, it will indicate by an appropriate signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired, and during said period of time and prior to the expiration thereof, will indicate the interval of time which remains of such period. 
(e)  Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and hours when the requirements to deposit an approved payment method therein shall apply, the value of the money to be deposited and the lawful period of time permitted for parking by meter actuation in the metered parking space in which such meter is located. 
(f)  Parking meter fees shall apply in all areas between the hours designated by the city except on officially designated city holidays and Sundays. The city manager or his designee shall make recommendations to city council for exceptions to the days and times when parking meter fees shall apply. Exceptions: Parking meter fees shall not apply during the hours of the day when the fee is specifically exempted for special downtown events or events permitted with a special privilege license and event permit. 
(g)  Parking at a space with a meter may be prohibited as indicated by street sign for designated days or hours of the day. Penalties for parking during the prohibited times shall apply regardless of whether the payment of the parking meter fee was made. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.184, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-199. - Parking space designation; use. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate the parking space next to each parking meter for which such meter is to be used by appropriate markings upon the curb or pavement of the street. Parking spaces shall be not less than 18 feet in length. 
(b)  When double meters are installed on a single post, the front vehicle shall park with its rear bumper aligned with the meter post and the rear vehicle shall park with its front bumper aligned with such post so that the meter post is in the center between both vehicles. In such locations an additional maneuvering area of eight feet painted with a white "X" shall be provided at the front and back of the double parking space to facilitate ingress and egress. The additional maneuvering area will not be provided where the parking space immediately joins a loading zone or yellow zone which can be used for ingress and egress. 
(c)  The parking space at single meters shall also be 18 feet in length with space for ingress and egress as outlined above. 
(d)  No person shall park a vehicle in any such designated parking meter space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the metered parking space in which such meter is located so that any part of such vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the markings designating such space, or so that any part of such vehicle occupies or protrudes into the maneuvering area at the front or back of such space, except that a vehicle which is of a size too large to be parked within a single designated parking meter space shall be permitted to occupy two adjoining parking meter spaces when coins, tokens, a parking meter fee debit card, or other approved payment method shall have been deposited in the parking meter for each space so occupied as is required in this article for the parking of other vehicles in such space. 
(e)  A vehicle displaying special license plates issued by the state department of highways and public transportation to former prisoners of war, as provided in Texas Transportation Code § 502.257, is exempt from the payment of parking fees, including those collected through parking meters, charged by the city. This exemption does not permit parking at a space in excess of the time allowed or permit parking a vehicle at a place or time that parking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.185, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-200. - Operation; time limits. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, it shall be a violation for a person to park a vehicle in any parking space upon a street alongside of and next to which a parking meter has been installed during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the metered parking space in which such meter is located unless a coin or coins of United States currency, tokens, a parking meter fee debit card, or other approved payment method of the appropriate denominations as provided in this article shall have been deposited therein, or shall have been previously deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time, and such meter has been placed in operation. 
(b)  No person shall permit a vehicle within his control to be parked in any such parking meter space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the metered parking space in which such meter is located when the parking meter for such space indicates by signal that the lawful parking time in such space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act of parking or the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately thereafter a coin or coins, tokens, parking meter fee debit card, or other approved payment method in such meter. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsections (d) and (g) of this section, it shall be a violation for a person to park a vehicle in any parking meter space for a consecutive period of time longer than that permitted in the metered parking space in which such meter is located irrespective of the number or amounts of the coins, tokens, parking meter fee debit card, or other approved payment method are deposited for such meter. Each parking meter shall reflect the specific time limitation for that meter. 
(d)  Placing of additional coins, tokens, parking meter fee debit card, or other approved payment method in parking meters located on city-owned properties outside the right-of-way of city streets beyond the prescribed maximum time limit shall be permitted. 
(e)  When any vehicle is found parked in violation of any parking provision contained in this section, such fact shall be prima facie evidence that the person in whose name it is registered, is guilty of a violation of the parking provision contained in this section. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of this article and the state vehicle code prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(g)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, a vehicle may be parked at no charge in any parking meter space when the vehicle is being operated by or for the transportation of a person with a disability and there are special license plates issued under Texas Transportation Code § 504.201 displayed on the vehicle or a valid disabled parking placard is placed on the rearview mirror of the vehicle's front windshield. This subsection does not permit a vehicle to be parked at a time when or a place where parking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.186, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-201. - Use of slugs unlawful. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter anything other than the required United States coin or coins, authorized tokens, or parking meter fee debit card. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter a United States coin which has had its size altered in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.187, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-202. - Tampering with prohibited. 
    No person shall open or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.188, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-203. - Applicability of proceeds. 
(a)  Revenue collected under this section from parking meters may be used for any lawful purpose. 
(b)  The coins or tokens deposited in parking meters shall be collected by the duly authorized agents of the city. It shall be the duty of such persons so designated to collect the coins or tokens as deposited in the meters and deliver such coins or tokens in a sealed or locked container to a bank for deposit to the account of the city. The city finance director shall receive an accounting of such deposits daily. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.189, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-204. - Key; custody; duplicates. 
    The city manager or his designee shall have custody of all parking meter keys. He may issue such keys to any city employee whose duties require the use of such keys, and such employee shall return the keys to the city manager or his designee upon completion of the work for which their use was needed, or at any other time as directed by the city manager to return them. Any person who shall have in his custody or possession a parking meter key belonging to the city except as authorized hereunder, or who shall make or cause to be made any duplicate of a traffic meter key belonging to the city without being authorized by the city manager to do so, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.190, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-205. - Parking meter rates. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to establish parking meter fees upon any drive, roadway, city-owned or -controlled parking lot or parking facility, or any other area where the parking space is subject to a parking meter. The following fees are hereby established for public parking at any parking meter that is governed by this section: 
(1)  A rate to be established by the city council between a minimum of ten cents and a maximum of $0.20 for each 12 minutes, which includes any applicable sales tax. The maximum duration of parking at any meter shall be established by the city council and shall not exceed ten hours. 
(2)  In establishing the foregoing rates, the city council shall consider the cost of providing the service, the prevailing private market parking rates in the immediate vicinity of the meter, the needs of patrons of nearby businesses and other premises to have access to the use of meter parking, and shall also consider relevant traffic mobility and engineering issues as applicable. 
(3)  The city manager is authorized to increase the rate established in subsection (1) of this section to at least $0.80 and no more than $1.00 in order to include the third party transaction actual cost for the provision of credit or debit card processing services for any time up to the first hour of each transaction for parking at parking meters. For any subsequent time beyond the first hour of the same transaction, the rate established in subsection (1) of this section will apply. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.191, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-206. - Designation of authority. 
    Duties under this article that do not require the exercise of professional engineering judgment shall be performed by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.192, 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 38-207. - Proof of parking meter location and time limit. 
    When any person is charged with having committed an offense under this article, proof that a parking meter was located at the parking space in connection with which the offense was committed shall constitute prima facie evidence that the parking meter was installed and the space laid out by order of the city, and that the location was designated by the city and maximum parking time was designated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 19.193, 8-5-2014) 
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal utility systems, Texas Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Service outside city. 
    The city shall furnish utility service outside the city limits only with approval of the city council. 
Sec. 40-2. - Tapping fees. 
    The tapping fees for connection with the city water mains and laterals shall be as established by the city. The tapping fees for connection with the sewer system shall be as established by the city. The tapping fees for connection with the gas distribution system shall be as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 3, 8-29-2000; Ord. No. 749, § 3, 10-13-2015) 
Sec. 40-3. - Connection; disconnection; reconnection fees. 
(a)  The charge for connection of water service during regular business hours shall be as established by the city. Upon the establishment of a new utility account, all customers must pay a non-refundable service connection fee in the amount as established by the city prior to using water from the city water system. New applications for water connections will be received until 2:00 p.m. on weekdays. Those received by the 2:00 p.m. deadline will be worked that day. Those that are received after the 2:00 p.m. deadline will be worked the next day. All other utility connection charges shall be as established by the city. 
(b)  The city does not do connection, disconnection or reconnection of utilities on weekends or holidays. 
(Ord. No. 769, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 40-4. - Senior citizen discount and sewer rates. 
(a)  There is established a discount of 25 percent of the month water rate and sewer rate. The discount is available when the applicant meets the following conditions: 
(1)  Applicant must prove he is 62 years of age or older. 
(2)  Applicant must show proof he owns, rents, and resides within the city limits of the city. 
(b)  The age to qualify for this discount increases from 62 years of age to 65 years of age. Customers who are currently receiving the senior citizen rate as of October 1, 2017 shall continue to receive the discount. will not be affected by this change. The change will only affect new applicants. Applicant must show proof he owns, rents, and resides within the city limits of the city. Bill must be in the name of the senior citizen applicant. Senior citizens who receive the discounted rate will need to appear in person at the utility billing office at city hall once a year to renew their application (individual must have a valid picture ID such as a current driver license). Annual renewal will take place each year, on weekdays, between October 1 and October 31. Failure to appear will result in the senior citizen rate being removed from the account. If a senior citizen in the program has a physical condition which makes it impossible to appear at city hall, arrangements will be made to send a city employee to the address where the senior citizen rate is active in order to verify the identity of the individual (must have a valid picture ID such as a current driver license) and have them complete the renewal form. The senior citizen's name must be on the utility bill. 
(1)  The applicant must request the discount by applying at the city utilities department. 
(2)  The water rate discount is not transferable. 
(3)  All applicants must renew his application no later than December 31, 2007, and every two years thereafter. 
(4)  A penalty of not less than $50.00 and not more than $200.00 shall be imposed when false information is provided by applicant in his application requesting the 25 percent discount on his monthly water rate. 
(Ord. No. 667, §§ 1-6, 6-27-2006; Ord. No. 769, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 40-5. - Billing period. 
    The billing period will be from the fifth of one month through the fifth of the next month. Utility bills are due by 5:00 p.m. on the 15th of each month. Payments received after 5:00 p.m. on the 15th will be subject to a ten percent late fee. The late fee will be applied automatically to the total amount due. Late notices will be sent out on the 16th. The final day to pay a bill (including the late fee) is the 25th. On the 26th of each month, if the bill is still outstanding, utility services will be disconnected. In order for service to be reconnected, the customer will have to pay the total of the outstanding bill (including the ten percent late fee), a disconnection fee and a reconnection fee. 
(Ord. No. 769, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 40-6. - Utility administrative fees. 
    Fees for the following shall be as established by the city: 
(1)  Credit card convenience fee. 
(2)  Pay at utility counter (city hall). 
(3)  Payment online. 
(4)  Late payment fee. The fee is applied to the total outstanding balance due on the customer's utility bill at the time the bill becomes delinquent. 
(5)  Transfer fee. When a customer transfers their utility service to another address within the city utility system. The final bill from the customer's previous address will be mailed to the customer's new address. Also, the customer will need to pay the difference between the deposit fee in place at the customer's previous address and the city council approved deposit fee that is in effect at the time of the transfer. 
(6)  Returned check fee. 
(7)  Re-reads. There will be no charge if the re-read finds the original reading was incorrect. The customer gets one free re-read per 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 769, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 40-7. - Deposits. 
    Deposits to be paid to the city for water, sewer or gas service shall be as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 769, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 40-8. - Liability for payment of service. 
(a)  As used in this chapter, customer of record refers to the person or entity who executes the application for utility services. 
(b)  The customer of record has primary personal liability for payment for utility services provided under this chapter. Nevertheless, if service is provided to property: 
(1)  Owned by a person or entity jointly with the customer of record; or 
(2)  Managed or operated by the customer of record for the owner or owners of the property, the owner or owners of the property shall not be treated as new customers but shall remain jointly and severally liable with the customer of record for unpaid delinquent charges. 
(c)  If the customer of record is an entity or does business under an assumed name, all principals of the customer of record, as defined in the city policy as then in effect, shall be jointly and severally liable for unpaid delinquent charges. The city may refuse or discontinue service to any property for which any person obligated to pay delinquent charges is receiving or applying for service until all delinquent charges are paid, regardless of the particular property to which the delinquent charges relate. 
(d)  Spouses receiving service to premises they jointly own or occupy are deemed to be joint customers of record, notwithstanding that only one spouse may have signed an application and shall be jointly and severally liable as provided by law for unpaid delinquent charges incurred by the other spouse even if the other spouse did not receive the benefit of the services. 
(Ord. No. 790 , § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 40-9. - Delinquent utility charges-Lien authorized. 
(a)  If charges for utility service amounting to $50.00 or more incurred by the owner of the property served remain unpaid for 90 days, and the city manager or designee complies with the filing procedures specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, such customer's charges, together with applicable delinquency and late charges, shall be a lien against the real property for which the city provided utility service. 
(b)  A lien for delinquent and utility service charges may be filed any time after the conditions specified in subsection (a) of this section occur. 
(1)  The form of lien shall be promulgated by the city manager and approved by its legal counsel. The form shall contain: 
a.  A statement indicating the purpose of the lien; 
b.  The address of the property which is the subject of the lien; 
c.  A complete legal description of the property which is the subject of the lien; 
d.  The amount of delinquent charges incurred upon the property as of the date of execution of the lien including penalties, interest, and collection costs if any; and 
e.  The city customer account number for the delinquent charges. 
(2)  Each lien that is filed shall be executed by the city manager or designee and acknowledged by a notary public of the state and filed in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located. 
(3)  Should additional delinquent charges be incurred subsequent to the date of the original lien, additional liens may be executed and filed, in the form provided under subsection (b)(1), above, fixing the additional delinquent charges. 
(4)  City may file suit to judicially foreclose the lien or liens in a state court of competent jurisdiction. 
(5)  When all delinquent charges which existed against the property have been fully paid, the city manager or designee is authorized to execute a release of the lien. The release shall be prepared by counsel for city and shall be duly acknowledged. After execution, the release shall be made available to the customer so that the customer may record such release in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located. 
(6)  No utility services shall be provided to property encumbered by a lien filed pursuant to this section, provided, however, the city shall be authorized to reconnect utility services if the customer or owner agrees in writing to pay the accrued delinquent utility charges for such property together with all costs incurred by the city in accordance with a payment schedule acceptable to the city manager and applicable reconnection fees. 
(7)  This section is cumulative of any other remedies, methods of collection, or security available to the city under the charter and ordinances of the city or under state law. This section does not affect the authority of the city to refuse or to furnish service when delinquent charges exist. 
(8)  The lien authorized by this section is superior to all other liens except a bona fide mortgage lien recorded prior to the recording of the city's lien in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located. 
(9)  The debt for which the lien is created shall bear ten percent per annum interest, the city shall add to the charges for which any lien is filed pursuant to this section the amount of the filing fee charged by the county clerk for filing that lien and an administrative expense cost of $75.00. 
(c)  Notice of lien. At least seven days prior to recording of a lien for delinquent utility charges, the city shall send notice that a lien will be recorded on the subject property, in accordance with law. The notice shall provide a means by which the charges constituting the lien may be paid or disputed. The notice must be mailed by prepaid certified mail, return receipt requested, and sent to the customer in whose name the account for service at the property exists. 
(1)  The customer or owner may file a written protest concerning the lien for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The charges assessed are not owed to the city; 
b.  The charges assessed are for utility service at a site other than the property described in the notice; 
c.  The property to be subject to the lien is exempt as a homestead under the state constitution; or 
d.  The charges incurred are for services connected in a tenant's name and the property in question is rental property. 
(2)  In the event of any such protest, the city manager or designee shall determine the validity of such protest. 
(3)  Absence of receipt of notice required under this section by customer or owner does not affect the enforceability of the lien or the city's right to record the lien. 
(4)  Rental property. The owner of any property whose property is rented to a tenant and which tenant carries the city's utility service in the tenant's name, unless otherwise obligated by law or other provision of this section, shall not be liable for the payment of delinquent utility service charges for service to that property incurred by the tenant and the property shall not be subject to the lien provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 790 , § 2, 9-25-2018) 
Secs. 40-10-40-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATERWORKS SYSTEM 

Sec. 40-33. - Violations of article unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person or any agent or employee thereof to violate any of the rules, regulations, or provisions of this article or any part of it, by an act either of omission or commission, or cause a violation to be done. 
(Code 1992, § 20-26; Ord. No. 368, § 14, 3-17-1980) 
Sec. 40-34. - Director appointed; responsibilities; duties; term; compensation. 
(a)  There shall be appointed by the city manager a director of waterworks, who shall be the administrative officer of the waterworks system. The waterworks director of the city shall have general supervision over all employees of the waterworks system and shall be responsible for all property, machinery, and equipment used in or connected with the waterworks system including, but not limited to, all pump houses, engines, pumps, reservoirs, standpipes, elevated tanks, pipelines, fire hydrants, wrenches, testing equipment, and all water inventory. He shall make frequent trips of inspection, as may be necessary from time to time, over all pipelines and all other property used in or connected with the waterworks system, and shall direct repairs deemed necessary and consistent with his duties. 
(b)  He shall also report all violations of this article to the city manager or his designated representative, and the city manager shall forthwith proceed to prosecute offenders as set forth in this article or any amendment. 
(c)  He shall also control the water supply and at all times protect the sufficiency thereof, and shall, except in cases of emergency, notify the city manager or his designated representative whenever he learns of the necessity to shut off the water from any line of the system for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, connections, etc. 
(d)  In the performance of his duties as required by this section, the director shall be subject at all times to the city Charter, city ordinances, and rules and regulations of the city. He shall serve for such term and receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city manager. 
(Code 1992, § 20-27; Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-17-1980) 
Sec. 40-35. - City employees to report all waste, violations. 
    It shall be the duty of all employees of the city to report to the director of the waterworks system any leaks or unnecessary waste of water that may come to their attention, also any violations of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 20-28; Ord. No. 368, § 5, 3-17-1980) 
Sec. 40-36. - Rules and regulations for public water systems. 
(a)  The city waterworks system is responsible for protecting the drinking water supply from contamination or pollution which could result from improper plumbing practices. 
(b)  One of the purposes of the city waterworks system is to protect the drinking water supply from contamination or pollution. There are hereby approved and adopted rules and regulations for public water systems, and mandated by the Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 341, subch. C (Texas Health and Safety Code § 341.031 et seq.) and as further described in exhibit "A" and attached to Ordinance No. 580 and made a part of this section. 
(Ord. No. 580, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-1998) 
Sec. 40-37. - Drought contingency plan. 
    The city drought contingency plan attached to Ordinance No. 603 as exhibit "A" and made part hereof for all purposes is hereby adopted as the official policy of the city. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 1, 9-26-2000) 
Sec. 40-38. - Unlawful activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do, commit, or assist in committing or doing any of the following things or acts within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  Opening or closing any fire hydrant or stopcock connected with the waterworks system of the city or lifting or removing the covers of any gate valves or shutoffs thereof, without the permission of the director of waterworks, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the fire department; 
(2)  Interfering with, destroying, defacing, impairing, injuring, or wantonly forcing open any gate, or door, or in any manner or form whatsoever destroying, injuring, or defacing any part of any engine house, reservoir, standpipe, elevated tank, building or buildings, or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs or fixtures or property pertaining to the waterworks system; 
(3)  Going upon or ascending the stairway or steps on any elevated water storage tank or standpipe of the waterworks system, except by permission of the waterworks director, the city manager, or his designated representative; 
(4)  Placing any telegraph, telephone, electric light pole, or any obstruction whatsoever within three feet of any fire hydrant; 
(5)  Resorting to any fraudulent device or arrangements for the purposes of procuring water for himself or another from private connections on premises contrary to the city regulations or ordinances; 
(6)  Interfering with or injuring any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant, pipe, cock, valve, or other apparatus pertaining to the waterworks system, or turning on or off without authority the water in any street hydrant or other water fixtures, or hitching or tying an animal thereto; 
(7)  Making or permitting to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the waterworks system or turning off or on the use of the water of the system without first obtaining a permit therefor; 
(8)  Covering or concealing from view any water valve box, service or meter box; 
(9)  Removing any water meter that has been placed by the city or in any manner changing, interfering with, or tampering with any water meter, providing that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the city when acting in their official capacity, except effecting repairs in an emergency (i.e., homeowner, plumber); or 
(10)  Turning on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly charge or for the violation of any rule or ordinance governing the waterworks system. 
(Code 1971, § 18-2; Code 1992, § 20-29; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 3-17-1980) 
Sec. 40-39. - Separate connections required; exception. 
    Each consumer of water living in a separate house must have a separate connection and meter for each house, except that where a residence is not within reach of a city water main, arrangements may be made, at the option of the city, to secure water from another user of city water, in which case, the minimum monthly charge shall be made for each additional residence taking water through such meter. Each minimum will entitle the user to 3,000 gallons per month. The regular minimum, the additional minimum, and all water used over the minimum by such consumer shall be charged to the customer having the meter. 
(Code 1992, § 20-30; Ord. No. 368, § 7, 3-17-1980) 
Sec. 40-40. - Application for service required; connection fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to the mains or pipes of the waterworks system of the city without first making application to the city, stating fully the several and various uses for which water is requested, and giving the name of the street and house number of the service address. Upon payment of the tapping fee, the director shall make, or have made, the necessary connections and furnish a cast-iron meter box and curb cock, the cost of which is included in the tapping fee; and every premises connected with any water main or being supplied with any water from the city waterworks, shall have a separate service connection meter. If the application is approved by the director, a permit will be issued. All fees and charges shall be paid for at amounts and rates fixed by this article or by resolutions of the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 20-31; Ord. No. 368, § 3, 3-17-1980) 
Sec. 40-41. - Taps. 
    For each service connection tap on noncommercial permanent, single-family dwellings within the corporate limits of the city constructed in accordance with the city housing code, the city waterworks system shall furnish, if necessary, 100 feet of pipe extension, or pipe extension to the service connection property line, whichever is less, at no charge to the consumer. If more than 100 feet of pipe extension is necessary, the customer will pay for the difference at actual cost. Any customer desiring water service outside the city limits will be required to furnish all pipe and materials. The materials used shall be of equal quality to the materials used by the city waterworks system. The materials used and the construction of the line outside the city limits shall be subject to the supervision of the waterworks director or his assistants. The customer shall then convey the completed waterline to the city waterworks system. All customers desiring water service outside the city limits shall comply with all of the rules and regulations provided in this section or the service will not be extended. 
Sec. 40-42. - Meters set by city; charged for average use if inoperative. 
    All water meters shall be set by employees of this city. If the meter gets out of order and fails to operate and register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily consumption, as shown by the meter when it was in order. 
(Code 1992, § 20-34; Ord. No. 368, § 6, 3-17-1980) 
Sec. 40-43. - Water rates. 
    The schedule of rates to be charged and paid for consumption of water supplied through the city's water system shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 18-21; Code 1992, § 20-35; Ord. No. 469, 6-28-1988; Ord. No. 518, 10-29-1991; Ord. No. 565, 3-21-1996; Ord. No. 601, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-2000; Ord. No. 637, § 1, 7-8-2003; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 6-28-2005; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 5-30-2006; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 700, § I, 6-14-2011; Ord. No. 736, § I, 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 749, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 757, § I, 9-27-2016) 
Sec. 40-44. - Payment of monthly bills; delinquency. 
    All charges for water service furnished or rendered by the city waterworks shall be due and payable at the office of the utilities department on or before the date indicated as the due date on the customer's monthly bill. The city reserves the right to cut off and discontinue water service to the premises without further notice, and the same shall not be reconnected and no additional water furnished until all past due accounts and charges are paid in full. 
(Code 1992, § 20-36; Ord. No. 368, § 10, 3-17-1980; Ord. No. 449, 1-13-1987; Ord. No. 741, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 40-45. - Temporary disconnection of water service. 
    Whenever a person wishes to temporarily discontinue the use of water supplies from the waterworks system, he must give notice thereof to the city. 
(Code 1992, § 20-37; Ord. No. 368, § 4, 3-17-1980; Ord. No. 448, 1-13-1987) 
Sec. 40-46. - Plumbing regulations. 
(a)  There shall be a cut-off valve six inches from the water meter on the house side to control all water in the building. Each commode shall be controlled with a stop above the floor. 
(b)  To prevent the possibility of back siphonage, every outlet, or opening, or termination of any hot or cold water piping, including every faucet, stopcock, ballcock, valve, or similar appliance through which water is discharged shall be not less than three-quarters inch above the level at which the fixtures would overflow on the floor. 
(c)  Water heaters shall not be installed in bedrooms, bathrooms, or attics, or in closets opening into these rooms. If the water heater is set in a closet not prohibited by this section, the closet shall be vented at the bottom of the door or the wall with either holes or grill to give at least 30 square inches of ventilation. The heater vent which is usually located at the top of the heater shall be vented to the outside of the house. 
(Code 1992, § 20-38; Ord. No. 368, § 12, 3-17-1980) 
Secs. 40-47-40-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for sanitary sewer system and require connection to the system, Texas Local Government Code § 214.013. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-66. - Construction of privy; use of septic tank prohibited if sewer line available. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or construct any dry closet, privy, or privy vault either above or below the ground in the city on any lot or land, the property line of which at any point extends to within 50 feet of a sanitary sewer line, or to use any such dry closet, privy or privy vault built or constructed. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or construct or use any toilet or water closet facilities which empty into a septic tank in the city on any lot or land, the property line of which at any point extends to within 50 feet of a sanitary sewer line. 
(Code 1992, § 20-56; Ord. No. 437-A, § 5, 5-13-1986) 
Sec. 40-67. - All premises creating sewage to be connected; exception. 
    The use of any premises in the city in such a manner as to create sewage thereon not discharged into the sewerage system of the city is hereby declared to be unlawful and a nuisance. Every toilet or privy connected and used in any building, not connected with the sewerage system is hereby declared to be unlawful and a nuisance, provided that this section shall be inapplicable to premises where connection with the city sewerage system is not feasible. Such connection with the city sewerage system is hereby declared to be feasible as to any premises in any section of the city where sanitary sewers exist and where the property line of the land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within 50 feet of any such sewerage system in which any line of the sewerage system of the city sufficient to handle the sewage exists. 
(Code 1992, § 20-57; Ord. No. 437, § 5, 4-16-1986; Ord. No. 437-A, § 1, 5-13-1986) 
Sec. 40-68. - Connection to new lines required; time limited; charges. 
    Where city sewerage services are not presently available, but subsequently are laid therein as set out in section 40-67, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the property within 60 days after the services become available, to connect therewith. These connections must be made subject to the applicable charges provided by the then current ordinances of the city. All persons within the city limits and within 50 feet of the city sewer system will be charged the prevailing sewer system user charge. 
(Code 1992, § 20-58; Ord. No. 437, § 4, 4-16-1986; Ord. No. 437-A, § 3, 5-13-1986) 
Sec. 40-69. - City inspector to supervise connections, ensure compliance. 
    Any person required by this article to construct or cause to be constructed suitable toilets or privy on his property and connect the same to the city sewage system shall do so under the supervision of the city inspector. Such connections must be made within 60 days after notice from the city inspector or a city health official has been served upon any such owner or occupant notifying him to make such connection. It shall be the duty of the city inspector to give notice of violations and ensure compliance. 
(Code 1992, § 20-59; Ord. No. 437, § 3, 4-16-1986; Ord. No. 437-A, § 4, 5-13-1986) 
Sec. 40-70. - Connections expense of owner, occupant. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning or occupying improved property within the city limits which can be feasibly connected to the city sewerage system as set out in section 40-67 to connect at his own expense such property and the improvements thereon to the city sewerage system. 
(Code 1992, § 20-60; Ord. No. 437-A, § 2, 5-13-1986) 
Sec. 40-71. - Sewer rates. 
    The charges for connections and monthly sewer rates and collected by the city from all customers obtaining service from the sewer system of the city are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1971, § 18-22; Code 1992, § 20-62) 
Sec. 40-72. - Tampering with sewer system prohibited. 
    No person shall remove any section of any manhole, lamphole, flush tank, catch basin, or any other part of the city's sewer system, or throw or deposit, or cause to be deposited or thrown in any sewer opening or receptacle connecting with the sewer system, any garbage, offal, dead animals, vegetable parings, ashes, cinders, rags or other matter or thing whatsoever, except feces, urine and the necessary waste toilet paper, liquid house and mill slops. 
(Code 1971, § 18-1; Code 1992, § 20-63) 
Sec. 40-73. - Mandatory water hookup. 
    Each household, business, dwelling, etc., shall be connected to the city water system if that system is available or accessible to the property. 
(Code 1992, § 20-64; Ord. No. 507, 4-9-1991) 
Secs. 40-74-40-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 40-105. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
    B.O.D. (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Centigrade. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
    City means the city of Carrizo Springs, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
    C.O.D. (chemical oxygen demand) means the measure of oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
    Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/l, and BOD is not more than 200 mg/l. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    Person includes a corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal (base ten) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter. 
    Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries surface waters and stormwaters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
    Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the city, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Suspended solids means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes, or other harmful substances. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  Not more than ten mg/l each of suspended solids and B.O.D.; and 
(6)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in the term "standard methods." 
    Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1971, § 18-41; Code 1992, § 20-81) 
Sec. 40-106. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. 
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this section may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1971, § 18-62; Code 1992, § 20-82) 
Sec. 40-107. - Conditions of permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause, provided that the person has: 
(1)  Submitted an application within ten days after April 12, 1977, on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secured approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and 
(3)  Complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and 
(4)  Provided a sampling point subject to the provisions of this division and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Code 1971, § 18-61; Code 1992, § 20-83) 
Sec. 40-108. - Notice of violation. 
    The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this division with written notice stating the nature of the violation, and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Code 1971, § 18-64; Code 1992, § 20-84) 
Sec. 40-109. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
    No person may continue discharging in violation of this division beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1971, § 18-65; Code 1992, § 20-85) 
Sec. 40-110. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to continue to violate the prohibited discharge provisions. 
(b)  The city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Code 1971, § 18-66; Code 1992, § 20-86) 
Sec. 40-111. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated, or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report, and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Code 1971, § 18-63; Code 1992, § 20-87) 
Sec. 40-112. - Industrial wastes-Payment and agreement required. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(Code 1971, § 18-56; Code 1992, § 20-88) 
Sec. 40-113. - Same-Charge; added costs. 
(a)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does not cause overloading of the sewage collection, treatment, or disposal facilities of the city, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the schedule of charges. 
(b)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires that wastewater collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste. 
(c)  The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste. 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense. 
(Code 1971, § 18-57; Code 1992, § 20-89) 
Sec. 40-114. - Same-Adjustment of charges. 
(a)  The city shall adjust charges for industrial wastes at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of sampling and testing. 
(b)  Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two billing periods and shall continue for six billing periods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased. 
(c)  The city shall review not less than annually the basis for determining charges, and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience. 
(d)  The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer charges. 
(Code 1971, § 18-59; Code 1992, § 20-91) 
Sec. 40-115. - Same-Limited exempted discharges. 
    A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to April 12, 1977, may continue without penalty as long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge, without permission of the approving authority; 
(2)  Had discharged the industrial waste at least six months prior to April 12, 1977; and 
(3)  Applied for and was granted a permit no later than 30 days after April 12, 1977. 
(Code 1971, § 18-60; Code 1992, § 20-92) 
Sec. 40-116. - Failure to pay for services. 
    In addition to sanctions provided for by this division, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1971, § 18-67; Code 1992, § 20-93) 
Sec. 40-117. - General discharge of wastewater, industrial waste, and polluted liquids. 
(a)  Unless an exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the state water quality board, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 1971, § 18-50; Code 1992, § 20-94) 
Sec. 40-118. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers; interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or excessive loading of treatment facilities. Discharges prohibited by this subsection include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  B.O.D., C.O.D., or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substances that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (b) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Code 1971, §§ 18-42(a), 18-49(a)-(d), (f); Code 1992, § 20-95) 
Sec. 40-119. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 1971, § 18-46; Code 1992, § 20-96) 
Sec. 40-120. - Chemical discharge restrictions. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 4.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Centigrade); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 40-118(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Code 1971, § 18-43; Code 1992, § 20-97) 
Sec. 40-121. - Heavy metals and toxic material restrictions. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with standard methods are: 
(1)  Arsenic ..... 0.05 mg/l 
(2)  Barium ..... 5.0 mg/l 
(3)  Boron ..... 1.0 mg/l 
(4)  Cadmium ..... 0.02 mg/l 
(5)  Chromium (total) ..... 5.0 mg/l 
(6)  Copper ..... 1.0 mg/l 
(7)  Lead ..... 0.1 mg/l 
(8)  Manganese ..... 1.0 mg/l 
(9)  Mercury ..... 0.005 mg/l 
(10)  Nickel ..... 1.0 mg/l 
(11)  Selenium ..... 0.02 mg/l 
(12)  Silver ..... 0.1 mg/l 
(13)  Zinc ..... 5.0 mg/l 
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony; 
(2)  Beryllium; 
(3)  Bismuth; 
(4)  Cobalt; 
(5)  Molybdenum; 
(6)  Uranyl ion; 
(7)  Rhenium; 
(8)  Strontium; 
(9)  Tellurium; 
(10)  Herbicides; 
(11)  Fungicides; and 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1971, § 18-44; Code 1992, § 20-98) 
Sec. 40-122. - Garbage discharge requirements. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1971, § 18-45; Code 1992, § 20-99) 
Sec. 40-123. - Temperature of discharges. 
    No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1971, § 18-47; Code 1992, § 20-100) 
Sec. 40-124. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for the discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1971, § 18-48; Code 1992, § 20-101) 
Sec. 40-125. - Authority to regulate slugs. 
(a)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1971, §§ 18-42(b), 18-49(e); Code 1992, § 20-102) 
Sec. 40-126. - Approving authority requirements for certain discharges. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 18-51; Code 1992, § 20-103) 
Sec. 40-127. - Approving authority review and approval of pretreatment and flow-equalizing facilities. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve the design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Code 1971, § 18-52; Code 1992, § 20-104) 
Sec. 40-128. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1971, § 18-53; Code 1992, § 20-105) 
Sec. 40-129. - Requirements for building sewers. 
    Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1971, § 18-54; Code 1992, § 20-106) 
Sec. 40-130. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH). 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this division shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of standard methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  B.O.D. and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling. 
(d)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, B.O.D., and suspended solids. 
(e)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Code 1971, § 18-55; Code 1992, § 20-107) 
Secs. 40-131-40-158. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIQUID WASTE 

Sec. 40-159. - License required. 
    Each person, firm or corporation, duly registered with the state to remove liquid waste, who hereafter removes liquid waste from a private sewage facility within the city for hire shall first obtain a license from the city clerk and shall pay an annual fee as established by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 20-116; Ord. No. 519, § 1, 11-12-1991) 
Sec. 40-160. - Disposal into city wastewater collection and treatment system required of licensees. 
    Each person, firm or corporation required to obtain a license shall dispose of liquid waste removed from private sewage facilities within the city only into the city's wastewater collection and treatment system at places designated by the director of public works. 
(Code 1992, § 20-117; Ord. No. 519, § 2, 11-12-1991) 
Sec. 40-161. - Rates. 
    Each person, firm or corporation who disposes liquid waste collected from private sewage facilities into the city's wastewater collection and treatment system shall pay to the city a fee as established by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 20-118; Ord. No. 519, § 3, 11-12-1991) 
Sec. 40-162. - Disposition other than into city wastewater collection and treatment system prohibited. 
    Disposition of liquid waste removed from septic tanks and other private sewage facilities within the city other than as prescribed hereinabove is prohibited. 
(Code 1992, § 20-119; Ord. No. 519, § 4, 11-12-1991) 
Secs. 40-163-40-183. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS SYSTEM 

Sec. 40-184. - Unauthorized tampering and defacement of fixtures and property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with or deface any fixture or property belonging to the city's gas system. 
(Code 1971, § 18-3; Code 1992, § 20-121) 
Sec. 40-185. - Gas rates. 
    The charges for connection and the monthly rates for natural gas from the gas distribution system of the city shall be as established by the city and are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1971, § 18-23; Code 1992, § 20-122) 
Sec. 40-186. - Disbursement of funds from natural gas sales. 
(a)  Part of the money received by the city for the sale of natural gas through its utilities department will be placed in a trust fund entitled city gas trust fund. 
(b)  The amount of money to be placed in the city gas trust fund will be an amount equal to the excess of the rates as billed by the state gas utilities company over the rates provided for in the contract by and between the state gas utilities company and the city, dated February 9, 1967, on the natural gas delivered by the state gas utilities company to the city each month. 
(c)  If it is determined that the city is required to pay the state gas utilities company for the natural gas at rates in excess of the amounts provided for in the contract by and between the state gas utilities company, as seller, and the city as buyer, dated February 9, 1967, the money in the city gas trust fund may be used by the city to pay such increased rates. Any and all money in the city gas trust fund that is not used to purchase gas from the state gas utilities company will be paid out of the city gas trust fund and into the appropriate utilities fund of the city and used by the city either to improve the city gas utilities system or to effect a reduction in the future rates charged by the city for the sale of natural gas through its utilities department. If such reduction is effected, it will be applied to the then current charges being made by the city for the sale of natural gas. The city gas trust fund is the property of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 18-23-1; Code 1992, § 20-123) 
Sec. 40-187. - Natural gas billing procedure established. 
    The following provisions apply to natural gas service: 
(1)  For each defined customer class, monthly bills shall be comprised of two components, a minimum charge and a consumption charge. 
(2)  Minimum charges will be assessed to all active accounts irrespective of consumption. 
(3)  Consumption charges shall be based on metered natural gas consumption converted into therms. This conversion shall be calculated each month by multiplying the metered natural gas consumption expressed in CCFs, or 100s of cubic feet, by the energy factor of the natural gas. 
(4)  The energy factor of the natural gas shall be derived from the corresponding monthly statement provided by the city's wholesale natural gas supplier. 
(5)  By billing in therms, natural gas customers will pay for the heating value of their natural gas, not the volume of gas used. 
(6)  Customers shall be assessed a fuel adjustment charge for each metered them. The fuel adjustment charge shall be defined in the wholesale billing statement provided by the city's natural gas provider for the corresponding billing month. The fuel adjustment charge shall be added to the consumption charge for the purpose of calculating the customer's monthly bill. The sum of the customer's minimum charge, consumption charge, and fuel adjustment charge will equal the total amount payable. 
(Ord. No. 757, § I, 9-27-2016) 
Appendix A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
    AN ORDINANCE TO REGULATE AND RESTRICT THE LOCATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND LAND FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE, AND OTHER PURPOSES; TO REGULATE AND LIMIT THE HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; TO REGULATE AND DETERMINE THE AREA OF YARDS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES ABOUT BUILDINGS; TO REGULATE AND DETERMINE THE DENSITY OF USE OF LAND AND LOT AREAS, AND FOR THE SAID PURPOSE TO DIVIDE THE CITY INTO DISTRICTS; TO PROVIDE FOR ITS ENFORCEMENT AND FOR A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; TO PROVIDE FOR CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS, AND TO PRESCRIBE PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CARRIZO SPRINGS, TEXAS: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the City of Carrizo Springs, adopted April 12, 1957. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning authority, Texas Local Government Code § 211.011 et seq. 

Section I. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "Carrizo Springs Zoning Ordinance." 
Section II. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Accessory building and use: A subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the premises. An accessory use is one which is incidental to the main use of the premises. 
(2)  Alley: A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
(3)  Building: The word building shall include the word structure; any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property. Structure shall also include an oil or gas well and/or drilling equipment as defined by this ordinance. 
(4)  Building, height of: The vertical distance from the grade (elevation of the curb, sidewalk or average elevation of the ground around the structure) to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. 
(5)  Drilling : Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil, gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
(6)  Drilling equipment: The derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling. 
(7)  Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential purposes. 
(8)  Dwelling, single-family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family as a residence. 
(9)  Dwelling, two-family or duplex: A building designed for or occupied by two (2) families, living independently of each other, for residential purposes. 
(10)  Dwelling, multiple: A building designed or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more families, living independently of each other, for residential purposes. 
(11)  Family: One (1) or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, or hotel as herein defined. 
(12)  Filling station or service station: Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. When the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, or retail store, the premises is classified as a public garage or retail store. 
(13)  Garage, private: A building used for the housing of motor vehicles, which are the property of and for the private use of the occupants of the lot on which it is located. Not more than one (1) of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than three (3) tons capacity. 
(14)  Garage, public: A garage other than a private garage where motor vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
(15)  Gas well or oil well: Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil, natural gas or other hydrocarbons. 
(16)  Home occupation: Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupants of a dwelling not involving the conduct of a retail business, and not including any occupation conducted in any building on the premises excepting the building which is used by the occupant as his or her private dwelling. Home occupations shall include, in general, personal services such as furnished by an architect, lawyer, physician, dentist, musician, artist, and seamstress, when performed by the person occupying the building as his or her private dwelling and not including a partnership or the employment of more than one (1) assistant in the performance of such services. 
(17)  Hotel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boardinghouse, a lodging-house, or an apartment house. 
(18)  Lodginghouse, boardinghouse: A building other than a hotel where lodging and/or meals for three (3) or more persons are provided for compensation. 
(19)  Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this ordinance, including one (1) main building together with its accessory building, open spaces, and parking spaces required by this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street. 
(20)  Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) intersecting streets at their intersection. 
(21)  Lot, depth of: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
(22)  Lot width: The mean horizontal distance measured at right angles to its depth. 
(23)  Lot of record: A lot or parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Dimmit County, Texas, prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
(24)  Nonconforming use: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this ordinance which does not conform with the regulations of the district within which it is located. 
(25)  Parking space: An area enclosed or unenclosed containing not less than one hundred sixty (160) square feet exclusive of the driveways connecting said space with a street or alley. Said parking space and connecting driveway shall be durably surfaced and so arranged to permit satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile. 
(26)  Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
(27)  Street: A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(28)  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground. 
(29)  Structural alteration: Any change in structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 
(30)  Tourist court: (Auto courts, motels, or motor lodges). A group of attached, semidetached, or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists, or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit and offering to the public daily as well as other longer term rental rates, and maintaining a register of guests and/or their vehicles. 
(31)  Trailer camp or trailer coach park: Any lot or parcel of land which is used or offered for the accommodation of one (1) or more trailers which are used for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes. 
(32)  Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
(33)  Yard, front: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the road line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps, terraces, unenclosed porches or entranceways. 
(34)  Yard, rear: A yard extending across the rear of the lot, measured between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projection other than steps, unenclosed porches or entranceways. 
(35)  Yard, side: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
(Ord. No. 707, § I, 12-13-2011) 
Section III. - District boundaries and general regulations. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, the city is divided into six (6) zoning districts to be known as follows: 
    "R-1" Residential district. 
    "R-2" Duplex and multiple-family dwelling district. 
    "R-3" Mobile home district. 
    "B-1" Business district. 
    "B-2" Business district for the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages. 
    "I" Industrial district. 
    The boundaries of the districts are shown upon a map which is made a part of this ordinance and which map is designated as the "District Map." The district map and all the information shown thereon is a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the district map and all information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein. The original of this map is properly attested and on file with the city clerk. 
    No building shall be erected or structurally altered, nor shall any building or premises by used for any purpose other than permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located. No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that yards shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance, nor shall the lot area per family be reduced in any manner except in conformity with the regulations hereby established for the district in which such building is located. 
    Other than as it may be permitted by special permit under this ordinance in certain district(s), the use of land or buildings for drilling or the operation of drilling equipment or the placement of a gas well is not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-14-1987; Ord. No. 707, § II, 12-13-2011) 
State Law reference- Districts, Texas Local Government Code § 211.005. 
Section IV. - "R-1" Residential district use regulation. 
    In any "R-1" residential district, the following uses only are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Churches and schools. 
(3)  Institutions of an educational, religious, eleemosynary, philanthropic or similar nature, but not penal or mental institutions. 
(4)  Home occupations where no nameplate is used in connection with said use which exceeds two (2) square feet in area. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses. The term accessory building should also include church, school, and similar bulletin boards, or signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of the building or premises, or the sale of products grown only on the premises and provided further that such boards or signs shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased or sold, or the sale of produce completed, but in no event shall more than one (1) sign of the above character be permitted upon any lot, except for the display of construction signs during the time a job is under construction. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-14-1987) 
Section V. - "R-2" Duplex and multiple-family dwelling district use regulation. 
    In any "R-2" second residential district, the following uses only are permitted: 
(1)  Duplex or multiple-family dwellings. 
(2)  Apartment houses. 
(3)  Boardinghouses, lodginghouses and roominghouses. 
(4)  Hospitals, excepting tubercular, liquor, narcotic, insane and feebleminded or animal hospitals. 
(5)  Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges excepting those, the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
(6)  Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-14-1987) 
State Law reference- Districts, Texas Local Government Code § 211.005. 
Section VI. - "R-3" Mobile home district use regulation. 
    In any "R-3" [residential district], the following are permitted: 
(1)  Mobile homes. 
(2)  Mobile home parks. Mobile homes are to be allowed only in those areas designated as trailer home parks. Requests for location of mobile homes on privately owned lots other than a mobile home park shall each be considered on an individual basis as a nonconforming use in the zoning ordinance. Nonconforming permits, at the discretion of the planning and zoning commission, will be issued only to those residents that own the lot where the mobile home is to be located, must be the owner of the mobile home and they must be the ones residing therein. 
A special nonconforming use permit will be issued only after the following procedure has been followed: 
a.  The person desiring to locate one (1) mobile home on land (or lot) to be purchased will first make an application to the city manager or city clerk. Such application shall give the size and condition of the mobile home. He shall also state the location where he plans to locate the mobile home and present evidence that there are no objections from the property owners on either side, in front of, behind or across a street or alley from the proposed mobile home location. The mobile home owner shall be advised that the wheels must be removed from the mobile home and that it must be placed on a permanent foundation. The size of the lot and the front and side yard requirement as outlined for single-family residences must be complied with. 
b.  Each individual request shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission at their earliest convenience. A report from the commission shall be presented to the city council at their next regular meeting. Final approval of the special nonconforming use permit shall come from the city council. A written permit issued by the city clerk must be secured by the applicant before moving the mobile home onto the property. 
Mobile home parks. The following list of trailer parks and areas will be considered as placement areas for mobile homes: 
A.  Spanish Key. 
B.  Peaceful Acres. 
C.  Valley Trailer Park. 
D.  Mobile Home Estates. 
E.  Central Trailer Park. 
F.  S & S Trailer Park. 
G.  Lozano Trailer Park. 
H.  Yucca Trailer Park. 
I.  Ponderosa Trailer Park. 
J.  Triple "B" Trailer Park. 
K.  The area south of U.S. 277 and west of 22nd Street to Valley Street including both sides of Valley Street. 
Section VII. - "B-1" Business district use regulations. 
    In any "B-1" business district, the following uses only are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the "R-2" duplex and multiple-family dwelling district. 
(2)  Stores and shops where goods are sold and services are rendered primarily at retail. 
(3)  Hotels and lodginghouses. 
(4)  Tourist courts and motels. 
(5)  Offices. 
(6)  Off-street parking lots for the parking of automobiles. 
(7)  Public buildings, theaters (except drive-in theaters), assembly halls and cafes. 
(8)  Public garages, filling stations, and automobile repair shops. 
(9)  Plumbing shops. 
(10)  Printing shops. 
(11)  Shoe, tire, or electrical repair shops or similar trade. 
(12)  Wholesale merchandising. 
(13)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses. 
(14)  Storage, provided it is limited to a reasonable supply of those articles which are to be used, displayed, or sold on the premises. 
(15)  Advertising signs, billboards and bulletin boards. 
(16)  Drive-in theaters, when approved by and subject to such requirements as the planning and zoning commission may consider necessary to protect adjacent property and prevent conditions which may become objectionable. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-14-1987) 
State Law reference- Districts, Texas Local Government Code § 211.005. 
Section VIII. - "B-2" Business district use regulations. 
(a)  Boundaries. "B-2" business district for the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is the zoning district with boundaries further described as follows: Within the corporate limits of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, on each side of and within one-half block on each side of the seven (7) streets and highways named and further defined as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  On Pena Street from its intersection with United States Highway 83 to its intersection with 16th Street. 
(2)  On United States Highway 83 from the corporate limits of the City of Carrizo Springs south to the corporate limits of the City of Carrizo Springs north. 
(3)  On Texas Highway 85 from its intersection with United States Highway 83 east to Carrizo Creek. On that part of Texas Highway 85, covered hereby, the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is restricted to restaurants and grocery stores. 
(4)  On Nopal Street from its intersection with 5th Street east to its intersection with United States Highway 83. On that part of Nopal Street covered hereby, the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is restricted to restaurants and grocery stores. 
(5)  On Thompson Street from its intersection with 9th Street to its intersection with United States Highway 83. On that part of Thompson Street covered hereby, the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is restricted to restaurants and grocery stores. 
(6)  On 9th Street from its intersection with Eaton Street to its intersection with Thompson Street. On that part of 9th Street covered hereby, the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is restricted to restaurants and grocery stores. 
(7)  On 5th Street from its intersection with Pena Street to its intersection with English Street. On that part of 5th Street covered hereby the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is restricted to restaurants and grocery stores. 
(8)  On South of 5th Street past the intersection of Pena Street and 5th Street to the intersection of Hospital Drive. On that part of 5th Street covered hereby the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is restricted to off-premises sales only. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is hereby permitted within the said "B-2" business district as herein defined under the terms of the Texas Liquor Control Act as amended. The sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is hereby restricted to the said "B-2" business district, and the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages in any other district or zone in the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, is prohibited. 
(c)  Proximity to churches, schools, hospitals. The sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, where the place of business or of such sale is within three hundred (300) feet of any church, public school or public hospital, the measurements to be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door and in direct line across intersections where they occur. 
(d)  Exemptions. Any business engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages that shall be in noncompliance due to the passage of this ordinance shall be exempt until such time that the present owner either sells or transfers the business. The new owners must then request a special permit from the planning and zoning commission. 
(e)  Application. 
(A)  Any applicant for a permit under the requirements of this section shall file with the City Clerk's Office of Carrizo Springs, Texas, an application for such permit. The processing of the application shall follow the administrative procedures for amendment to the zoning map. 
(B)  Each application for a permit shall be submitted on a form, as approved by the City Clerk, and contain at a minimum the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner. 
2.  If the property is owned by a business entity, a copy of Articles of Incorporation or other documentation of that legal entity. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of the business owner (if different from property owner). 
4.  Affidavit authorizing representation if the property owner will be represented by the business owner (i.e., Leasee) or other person. 
5.  A complete Copy of Recorded Deed showing the ownership of the property. 
6.  Provide Tax Certificates showing taxes have been paid and are current. 
7.  Site plan of the subject property showing existing and proposed features including but not limited to buildings, roads, alleys, utilities, landscaping, fencing, sidewalks, access and egress, parking and any other features which are relevant to adequately analyze the site for the intended use. 
(g)  Restaurants serving alcohol in residential/office district and community business district. 
(A)  No restaurant serving alcohol may operate in Residential/Office, Limited District or Community Business District without a Permit granted by the City Council of the City of Carrizo Springs. A restaurant which is already located and operating in one of these Zones who wishes to serve alcohol service is required to apply for a permit. 
(B)  The City Council may grant the Permit for a restaurant serving alcohol in Residential/Office District, Limited Commercial District and Community Business District under the following conditions: 
1.  Establishments serving alcohol shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any church, public school, public park, residential structure or residential district. The measurement is to be made from the front door of the establishment serving alcohol to the nearest property line (by shortest route) to the front door of the church, public school, entrance to the public park, front door of the residential structure or district boundary in the direct line across intersections wherever they occur and consistent with the measurement methodology as has been adopted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
2.  Establishments located within the Residential/Office District shall not exceed 3,000 sq. ft. in floor area. 
3.  Lighting of property shall be screened to avoid adverse impact on adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
4.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the City of Carrizo Springs Code. 
5.  At all times the restaurant is open to the public for business, it shall continually maintain and serve food from its full service menu. 
6.  The restaurant shall not exceed the "Occupant Load" as set forth in the Certificate of Occupancy with Occupant Load. 
7.  The restaurant shall during all hours of operation, maintain, free from obstruction or impediment to full instant use in case of fire or any other emergency, all exit accesses exit or exit discharges. 
8.  The restaurant shall undergo an annual Fire Inspection. 
9.  All permits, licenses, certifications and inspections required by the Codes and Ordinances of the City of Carrizo Springs shall be kept up to date and current including but not limited to: 
a.  Food Manager License (annual). 
b.  Food Handler's Permit (annual). 
c.  Certificate of Occupant Load, Occupant Load being approved capacity of a building or portion thereof. 
10.  The Special Use Permit shall be issued to the restaurant owner/operator and only be transferred upon application to and with the express permission of the City Council. 
11.  Additional conditions may be imposed by City Council as deemed necessary for the safety and general welfare of the public. 
(h)  Definitions. 
    Bar shall mean an establishment whose primary business is the serving of alcoholic beverages for public consumption on the premises whether or not entertainment, dancing or food items are also provided. For purposes of this definition, primary business means the establishment derives in excess of fifty percent (50%) of its gross revenue on a quarterly basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code (as amended) for on-premises consumption. This definition does not include bona fide restaurants, hotels, motels, or sports related facilities such as golf courses, bowling alleys or sport arenas, or the serving of alcoholic beverages at publicly or privately sponsored events such as weddings, public celebrations, quinceaneras or the like. 
    Restaurant shall mean any establishment which has its primary purpose the serving of food to its customers from a kitchen that is separated from the main dining area and the prepared food is for on-premises sales and consumption, the establishment maintains a full service menu with a variety of entrees (eight or more), maintains adequate kitchen facilities (i.e., contains a stove and oven in working order, refrigerator storage with food inventory and contains necessary equipment for food preparation) and where alcoholic beverages may be sold as incidental activity to the sale of food. Establishments which serve prepared food but derive more than fifty [percent] (50%) of their quarterly gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages are deemed to be a bar. Customers may be served at tables, at a drive-through window, or in their cars. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-14-1987; Ord. No. 530, 10-13-1992; Ord. No. 723, §§ 1-3, 4-9-2013) 
State Law reference- Districts, Texas Local Government Code § 211.005. 
Section VIIIA. - "B-3" Business district use regulations. 
[(a)  Boundaries. ] "B-3" business district for the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is the zoning district with boundaries further described as follows: Within the corporate limits of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, on each side of and within one-half block on each side of the seven (7) streets and highways named and further defined as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  On Pena Street from its intersection with United States Highway 83 to its intersection with 16th Street. 
(2)  On United States Highway 83 from its intersection with United States Highway 277 north to the corporate limits of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas. 
(3)  On Texas Highway 85 from its intersection with United States Highway 83 east to Carrizo Creek. 
(4)  On Nopal Street from its intersection with 5th Street east to its intersection with United States Highway 83. 
(5)  On Thompson Street from its intersection with 9th Street to its intersection with United States Highway 83. 
(6)  On 9th Street from its intersection with Eaton Street to its intersection with Thompson Street. 
(7)  On 5th Street from its intersection with Pena Street to its intersection with English Street. On that part of 5th Street covered hereby the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is restricted to restaurants and grocery stores. 
[(b)  Permitted uses. ] The sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is hereby permitted within the said "B-3" business district as herein defined under the terms of the Texas Liquor Control Act as amended. The sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is hereby restricted to the said "B-3" business district, and the sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages in any other district or zone in the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, is prohibited. 
[(c)  Proximity to churches, schools, hospitals. ] The sale of alcoholic beverages, liquor and intoxicating beverages is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, where the place of business or of such sale is within three hundred (300) feet of any church, public school or public hospital, the measurements to be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door and in direct line across intersections where they occur. 
State Law reference- Districts, Texas Local Government Code § 211.005. 
Section IX. - "I" Industrial district use regulations. 
    In any "I" industrial district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the "B-1" business district. 
(2)  And, in general, any use not in conflict with the enacted laws of the State of Texas, or any ordinances of the City of Carrizo Springs except any trade, industry, or purposes which, in the opinion of the board of adjustment, when conducted under proper and adequate conditions and safeguards may not create corrosive, toxic, or noxious fumes, gas, smoke, or odors, or offensive dust, vapor, noise or vibration. Provided, further, that no building or premises shall be used for any of the following specific purposes until approved by and subject to such requirements as the board of adjustment may consider necessary to protect adjacent property and prevent conditions which may become objectionable or offensive: 
(a)  Acid manufacture. 
(b)  Dead animals, reduction of. 
(c)  Distillation of bones. 
(d)  Fat rendering. 
(e)  Fertilizer, manufacture of. 
(f)  Garbage, disposal. 
(g)  Glue, manufacture of. 
(h)  Stockyards or slaughtering of animals. 
(i)  Wholesale storage of gasoline. 
(j)  Any other use of buildings, or land that would be extremely hazardous to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-14-1987) 
State Law reference- Districts, Texas Local Government Code § 211.005. 
Section X. - Area and height regulations for all districts. 
    Except as provided in section XIII and subsection 2 of this section, the regulations for area and height are as set forth in the following Table A, and the size and width of the lots and yards shall be not less, nor the building heights more than stipulated for the respective districts: 
TABLE A 
Intensity of Land Use Minimum Yards Max. Heights of Buildings District Min. 
Lot 
Area Min. 
Lot 
Area 
Per 
Family Min. 
Aver. 
Width Front 
Yard 
(Ft.) Side 
Yard 
(Ft.) Stories Feet "R-1" Residence single-family 6000 6000 50 25 6 21/2 35 "R-2" Residence single-family 5000 5000 50 25 5 21/2 35 "A" Duplex and multi-family dwelling:  Single-family 6000 6000 50 25 6 21/2 35  Duplex 7200 3600 60 25 7 21/2 35  Multiple-family 9000 3000 75 25 9 21/2 35 "B-1" Business (1) (1) (1) 20 (1) 21/2 35 "B-2" Business (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 3 45 "I" Industrial (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 3 45  
1.  None required for commercial or industrial except as provided in subsection 2 of this section. However, when improved for residential use, every lot shall have an area and dimension not less per family than that prescribed for "R-1" residence district. 
2.  The regulations hereinafter set forth qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing in Table A: 
(a)  Intensity of use: Any lot of record and separately owned at the time of the passage of this ordinance having less area or width than herein required may be used only for a single-family dwelling, or any of the nondwelling uses permitted in the district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Front yard: When thirty (30) percent or more of the lots on the same side of the street within the same block and within two hundred (200) feet are improved with buildings that have observed a greater or less depth of front yard than specified in Table A, then no portion of a new building shall project beyond a straight line drawn between the point closest to the street line of the building upon either side of the proposed building, or if there is a building upon only one side, then beyond the straight line projected from the front of the two nearest buildings, but this regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front yard of more than one hundred (100) feet in a residence district, nor more than fifty (50) feet in a business or industrial district. Where the road is curved, the setback line shall be parallel to the curve of the road and not be a straight line. Double frontage lots must have the required front yard on both streets. A corner lot will have a front yard on each street side of such lot except that the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than forty (40) feet, and no accessory buildings shall project beyond the front yard line along either street. 
(c)  Side yard: A side yard shall be provided on each side of a building in accordance with Table A of this section, except that the buildable width of a lot of record having less width than herein required shall not be reduced to less than forty (40) feet, but in no case shall the side yard be reduced to less than five (5) feet. For any nondwelling use in the business or industrial district a side yard is not required unless the lot abuts on a residence district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. 
(d)  Rear yard: In the "R-1," "R-2" residence districts, and the "A" duplex and apartment dwelling district, the depth of the rear yard shall be at least twenty-five (25) percent of the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than twenty-five (25) feet. For any nondwelling use in any business or industrial district, a rear yard is not required unless the lot abuts on a residence district, in which case the rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(e)  Height of building: When a building in the industrial district is located on a lot that abuts on a residence district or a publicly owned area other than a street, the height of the building shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet, unless the required yards are increased one (1) foot for each foot of additional height above forty-five (45) feet. 
State Law reference- Districts, Texas Local Government Code § 211.005. 
Section XI. - Vehicle parking space. 
    No building shall be erected or altered or land used for any purpose which will result in customers, employees or residents parking autos or trucks on the road or street right-of-way unless space for parking such vehicles is provided and maintained on the lot or tract of land used at the rate of one (1) space for each resident family, one (1) space for every three (3) employees, and one (1) space for every two hundred (200) square feet of floor area in any commercial structure. 
Section XII. - Nonconforming uses. 
1.  The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions herein. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification. The foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming uses in districts as may be hereafter changed. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. 
2.  No building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its value shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
3.  In the event that the nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued or its normal operation stopped for a period of one (1) year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
4.  A nonconforming use occupying only a portion of a building may be extended throughout the building if the same has been lawfully acquired and actually devoted to such use previous to the adoption of this ordinance or to any affecting amendment thereof. 
5.  The city council of the City of Carrizo Springs may, by special permit, after public hearing and subject to such protective restrictions that are deemed necessary, authorize the location, extension or structural alteration of any of the following buildings or uses, or an increase in their height, in any district from which they are prohibited or limited by this ordinance: 
(a)  Any public building erected and used by any department of a municipal, county, state or federal government. 
(b)  Hospitals, clinics and institutions except institutions for criminals or those for persons who are mentally ill or have contagious diseases; provided, however, that such buildings may occupy not over fifty (50) percent of the total area of the lot or tract and will not have any serious and depreciating effect upon the value of the surrounding property; and provided, further, that the buildings shall be set back from all yard lines heretofore established an additional distance of not less than one (1) foot for every foot of building height, and that adequate off-street parking space will be provided. 
(c)  Cemetery or mausoleum. 
(d)  Landing field, or landing strip for aircraft. 
(e)  Greenhouses, provided that any such structures shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet from all property lines. 
(f)  Nurseries. 
(g)  Roadside stands, commercial amusement or recreational developments for temporary or seasonal periods. 
(h)  Removal of gravel, topsoil, or similar materials. 
(i)  Riding stables. 
(j)  Parking lots on land not more than three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of any commercial or industrial district, under such conditions as will protect the character of surrounding property. 
(k)  Areas for the dumping or disposal of trash. 
(l)  Radio towers and radio broadcasting stations. 
(m)  Junkyards and automobile salvage yards. 
(n)  Two-family and multiple-family dwellings, provided they conform to the requirements provided in Table A. 
(o)  Any use that is not a nuisance per se and which is generally similar to the uses permitted in the district in which such use is located by special permit. 
6.  The city council of the City of Carrizo Springs may, by special permit, after public hearings and subject to such protective restrictions that are deemed necessary, authorize the following buildings or uses within the "I" Industrial District: 
a.  Drilling; 
b.  The operation of drilling equipment; 
c.  The operation or location of a gas well or oil well; or 
d.  Similar extraction activities. 
Effect of approval or denial. Special use permits for drilling shall expire one (1) year after the date of city council approval unless a well permit has been issued and drilling activity has commenced. One (1) extension of not more than one (1) year from the date of expiration may be granted by the city manager upon receipt of a written request showing good cause for the extension. When "drilling activity has commenced" or when "good cause" exists will be determined in the sole discretion of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 707, § III, 12-13-2011) 
Section XIII. - Exceptions and variations of the use, height, and area regulations. 
    The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance. 
1.  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet and churches may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one (1) foot for each foot additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is located. 
2.  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, church steeples, radio towers or necessary mechanical apparatus, may be erected to any safe height not in conflict with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the City of Carrizo Springs. 
3.  Accessory buildings may be built in a required rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall have the same minimum side yard as is required for the main building or the main use of the premises to which the accessory building is incidental. Any accessory building shall not be nearer than five (5) feet to any rear lot line. Nor shall any accessory building occupy any more than thirty (30) percent of the total area of the rear yard. 
4.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has actually commenced and no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by domestic servants employed on the premises. 
5.  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for accessory buildings in the rear yard and except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features projecting not to exceed twelve (12) inches. 
6.  Fences constructed of solid wood or stone may be erected to a height not exceeding five (5) feet along the boundaries of a lot, except that no such fence shall be erected within fifty (50) feet of a street intersection, nor shall such a fence be erected in a front yard. Wire fences and other fences in which the openings between the materials of which the fence is constructed represents more than seventy (70) percent of the total fence area may be erected to a height of six (6) feet except that no fence or hedge that cannot be viewed through or over from a five-foot height above the traveled street shall be constructed or planted within fifty (50) feet of a street intersection. 
7.  For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family, group house or a multiple dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot. 
8.  Buildings that are to be used for storage purposes only may exceed the maximum number of stories permitted in the district in which they are located but such buildings shall not exceed the number of feet of building height permitted in such districts. 
9.  Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period the work is under way, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon the completion of the construction work as determined by the administrative officer. 
10.  More than one (1) industrial, commercial, multiple-dwelling or institutional building may be erected upon a single lot or tract, but the yards and open spaces required around the boundaries of the lot or tract shall not be encroached upon by any such buildings nor shall there be any change in the intensity of use regulations. 
11.  Railroad rights-of-way: On all existing rights-of-way of railroad companies, regardless of the zoning district in which such right-of-way is located, railroad trackage and accessories to railroad movement may be constructed or maintained. 
State Law reference- Authority of board of adjustment, special exceptions, variances, etc., Texas Local Government Code § 211.009. 
Section XIV. - Board of adjustment. 
1.  A board of adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. The term of the members shall be for five (5) years each, except that the members first appointed shall have a term of membership which varies from one (1) to five (5) years in order that not more than one (1) term shall expire each year. 
2.  The board shall meet at the call of the chairman and all hearings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
3.  An appeal may be taken to the board of adjustment by any person, firm, or corporation or by any officer or department affected by a decision of the administrative officer. The board may refuse or affirm or may modify or amend the decision made by the administrative officer and to that end the board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is made. 
4.  The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty: 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(b)  Upon application by a property owner to permit exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance as follows: 
(1)  To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot held in a single ownership at the time of the passage of this ordinance. 
(2)  To interpret the provisions of this ordinance in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the maps fixing the several districts accompanying and made a part of this ordinance where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
(3)  To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its fair market value, where the board finds some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use, and the primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming use is not to continue a monopoly. 
(4)  To permit a variation in the yard requirements of any district where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot, topographic or other conditions, provided such variation will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare. 
(5)  To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises for railroads and for public utility purposes. 
(c)  To authorize upon application whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this ordinance relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land will impose upon him practical difficulties or particular hardship, such variations of the strict application of the terms of this ordinance as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent, but only when the board is satisfied that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable, and unusual, hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variation from the comprehensive plan as established by this ordinance and at the same time the surrounding property will be properly protected. 
    The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent, or by attorney. 
State Law reference- Board of adjustment, Texas Local Government Code § 211.008. 
Section XV. - Occupancy permits. 
1.  Subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance, no change in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or occupancy in an existing building, except solely for single-family dwelling purposes, shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied for any purpose until a certificate has been issued by the administrative officer. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  No permit for excavation for or the erection or alteration of any building shall be issued before the application has been made and approved for a certificate of occupancy and compliance and no building or premises shall be occupied until that certificate and permit is issued. The city council shall determine the fee that shall be charged for certificates and permits. 
Section XVI. - Plats. 
1.  Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, or duplicate prints thereof, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape and location of the building to be erected, the size, shape and location of any existing buildings, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. A record of applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the administrative officer. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning and development, Texas Local Government Code ch. 371. 
Section XVII. - Boundaries of districts. 
1.  Rules where uncertainty may arise. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance, the following rules apply: 
(a)  The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
(b)  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. 
(c)  In any unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the district map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
Editor's note- The zoning map is not included herein but is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference- Districts, Texas Local Government Code § 211.005. 
Section XVIII. - Enforcement. 
1.  It shall be the duty of the person designated by the mayor as the administrative officer to enforce this ordinance. Appeal from the decision of the administrative officer may be made to the board of adjustment. 
Section XIX. - Changes and amendments. 
1.  The regulations imposed and the districts created by this ordinance may be amended from time to time, but no such amendments shall be made without a public hearing before the city council or until the [planning and] zoning commission has studied and reported upon the change. The request for variance to be presented to the planning and zoning commission must be accompanied by fifty dollars ($50.00). At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a recognized paper of general circulation in the City of Carrizo Springs. In case of written protest against any proposed amendment, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage proposed to be altered or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to such regulations or district, and filed with the city clerk of the City of Carrizo Springs, or if the planning and zoning commission recommends against it, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city council of the City of Carrizo Springs. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 2, 7-10-1984) 
Section XX. - Interpretation, purpose, and conflict. 
1.  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morale, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinances, agreements, or covenants, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
State Law reference- Conflict with other laws, Texas Local Government Code § 211.013. 
Section XXI. - Violation and penalty. 
1.  Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
2.  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the administrative officer, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the City of Carrizo Springs to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises. 
State Law reference- Enforcement, penalty, remedies, Texas Local Government Code § 211.012. 
Section XXII. - Validity. 
1.  Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
Section XXIII. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Section XXIV. - Date of effect. 
    This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and due publication. 
    Passed and approved this the 12th day of April, 1957.   
  
  
  
Bruce E. Leonard 
Mayor, City of Carrizo Springs  
Appendix B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
    ADOPTING ARTICLE 974a, REVISED CIVIL STATUTES OF TEXAS; REGULATING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND SITUATED WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF CARRIZO SPRINGS OR WITHIN 1 MILE THEREOF; ESTABLISHING SUBDIVISIONS DESIGN STANDARDS; PROVIDING IMPROVEMENTS TO BE MADE OR GUARANTEED TO BE MADE BY THE SUBDIVIDER AND PRESCRIBING THE SPECIFICATIONS OF SUCH IMPROVEMENTS; REQUIRING AND REGULATING THE PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION OF PLATS TO THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION AND SETTING FORTH THE PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION ON APPLYING THESE RULES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS IN ORDER TO PROCURE THEIR APPROVAL; PROVIDING A SAVING CLAUSE AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CARRIZO SPRINGS, TEXAS: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision regulations of the City of Carrizo Springs, Ordinance No. 339 adopted May 9, 1978. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Regulation of subdivision and property development, Texas Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq.; municipal planning and development, Texas Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - SCOPE OF ORDINANCE AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 1. - Scope of ordinance. 
1-1  Short title. This ordinance shall be known as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas." 
1-2  Jurisdiction. No person shall create a subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Carrizo Springs, or within one (1) mile thereof, without complying with the provisions of these regulations. All plats and subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations herein set forth. The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been approved by the city council and been duly recorded in the office of the county clerk of Dimmit County, Texas, prior to the effective date of these regulations, unless such lot or lots are to be divided or replatted. However, plats recorded prior to passage of the ordinance may be subjected to conditions of this ordinance if mutually accepted by developer and city. 
1-3  Interpretation and purpose. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to be minimal in nature, and whenever the principles, standards or requirements of any other applicable provisions of other ordinances of the City of Carrizo Springs which are higher or more restrictive, the latter shall control. The purpose of this ordinance is to achieve orderly urban development through land subdivision; to promote and develop the utilization of land to assure the best possible community environment in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the City of Carrizo Springs; to provide for adequate municipal services and safe streets; and to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
1-4  Authority. This ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including particularly Chapters 231, Acts of the 40th Legislature, Regular Session, 1927, as heretofore or hereafter amended (compiled as Article 974a, V.T.C.S.) [Texas Local Government Code § 212.041], and the provisions of Section 4 of the Municipal Annexation Act as heretofore or hereafter amended (compiled as Article 970a, V.T.C.S.) [Texas Local Government Code §§ 42.001 et seq., 212.003]. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Article XII, Planning and Zoning, Section 123(ii) of the Charter of the City. 
Section 2. - Definitions. 
    2-1 \ Alley means a minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a public street. 
    2-2 Building line means a line beyond which buildings must be set back from the street line. 
    2-3 City manager means the duly appointed city official whose jurisdiction is applicable to the approval, specification, or item concerned. 
    2-4 Commission means the city planning commission of the City of Carrizo Springs. 
    2-5 Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive or master plan of the city and includes any unit or part of such plan separately and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof. 
    2-6 Crosswalk means a public right-of-way between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
    2-7 Developer means any subdivider, as defined herein, or his agent, constructing or proposing to furnish or construct any public works improvements in a subdivision. 
    2-8 Easement means a right granted for the purpose of limited public or semipublic use across, over, or under private land. 
    2-9 Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage or public access on a public street and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed on record. 
    2-10 Low density subdivision means and includes all subdivisions which includes lots of one (1) acre or more in average square footage. 
    2-11 Neighborhood means a complete and distinct residential development designated as a neighborhood unit in the comprehensive plan. 
    2-12 Plat means the map, drawing or chart on which a subdivider's plan of a subdivision is presented, which he submits for approval and a copy of which he intends to record in final form. 
    2-13 Street means a public right-of-way which provides vehicular circulation and/or access to adjacent land, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, avenue, lane, boulevard, road, place, drive or however otherwise designated. 
A.  Cul-de-sac means a short minor street having but one (1) vehicular access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
B.  Dead-end street means a street other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) vehicular access to another street. 
C.  Street width means the shortest horizontal distance between the lines which delineate the right-of-way of a street. 
D.  Roadway or paving width means the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, the portion between the face or curbs. 
E.  An arterial street primarily provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the city. 
F.  A collector street primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas. 
G.  A residential street is one used primarily for access to abutting residential property. 
    2-14 Subdivider means any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner, or land sought to be subdivided. 
    2-15 Subdivision means the division of any lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or sites for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It also includes resubdivision of land or lots. Division of land in parcels of three (3) or more acres each shall not be included in this definition of subdivision, unless any such division of three (3) or more acres includes the planning or development of a new street or access easement. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 

Section 3. - Standard procedure. 
3-1  General. In order to secure the review and approval of a proposed subdivision by the commission, the prospective subdivider shall, prior to making any street improvements or installation of utilities, submit to the commission a preliminary (plat) plan. On approval of said preliminary (plat) plan, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of a final plat, and such other plans and documents as required by this ordinance: 
A.  Preapplication conference. Prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may seek the advice of the planning commission in order to determine feasibility of the proposal, acquaint himself with any plans and requirements for the area and the availability of utilities and sewer extensions, and to ascertain that the proposed subdivision meets the primary objectives of these regulations before substantial expense is incurred. This step does not require formal application, fee, or filing of any plat with the planning commission. 
    The following information should be furnished by the subdivider at the pre-application conference: 
(1)  General subdivision information: A description of existing conditions of the site and the proposed development, data on existing zoning and covenants, land characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, information describing the proposed number and size of lots, price range, business areas, public areas, proposed protective covenants and physical improvements. 
(2)  Location map: A sketch map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities within one-mile radius, including shopping centers, public schools, playgrounds and the development name and location, scale, north arrow, and date. 
(3)  Sketch plan: A sketch showing the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features which may be a freehand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey. 
3-2  Preliminary plan; filing procedure. After agreeing informally on the objective of his program, the subdivider can have prepared a preliminary plan. All plans submitted for action by the city planning commission shall be filed with the city manager not less than ten (10) days prior to the next meeting of the commission at which it is to be considered. A certificate of filing shall be maintained by the city manager and a copy of such certificate shall be given to the party filing the plan. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The commission shall approve or disapprove any preliminary plan within sixty (60) days from the date it is filed. Approval of the preliminary plan as such shall not constitute final acceptance or approval of the subdivision. When a preliminary plan has been approved by the commission, the plat, as defined in paragraph (d), shall be submitted within six (6) months thereafter; otherwise, approval of the preliminary plan shall terminate unless the time for filing of the plan is extended by the commission at the request of the subdivider. 
State Law reference- Approval procedure, Texas Local Government Code § 212.009. 
3-3  Preliminary plan; specifications. When the subdivision is a portion of a tract later to be subdivided in its entirety, a general development plan of the entire subdivision, showing a schematic layout of the entire tract, shall be submitted with the preliminary plan of the portion first to be subdivided. A preliminary plan of any proposed subdivision shall consist of a drawing on tracing paper drawn to a scale of fifty (50) or one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch with the following information: 
A.  The date, scale, and north point; a key plan showing location of the tract; the title under which the plat is to be recorded, and the names of the owner and engineer or surveyor. 
B.  The existing boundary lines and acreage of the land to be subdivided, and the property lines and names of owners of adjacent properties. 
C.  The location of the centerline of existing utilities, watercourses, railroads and other similar drainage and transportation features, and the location and sizes of existing streets, alleys, easements, lots and public areas on or adjoining any part of the land. 
D.  Topographical information approximately equivalent to one-foot contour lines, such contour lines to be not more than one hundred (100) horizontal feet apart, and based on city standard datum, or U.S.G.S. datum, which shall be specified on the plat. 
E.  The location, size and flow line of all existing drainage structures on the land being subdivided and on adjoining tracts. 
F.  The names, locations, widths and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks, and other public spaces; sites for all private uses other than single-family dwellings, lot lines, building lines, lot and block numbers. 
G.  Existing zoning use classifications including [a] statement [as to] whether plat is in any designated floodprone areas. 
H.  Index sheet if plat is drawn on more than one (1) sheet, showing the entire subdivision at a suitable scale. 
State Law reference- Standards for approval, V.T.CA., Local Government Code § 212.010. 
3-4  Final plat; procedure and specification. Upon approval of the preliminary plan as herein set forth, or if the preliminary plan meets the requirements herein set forth for a plat, the commission may, on request of the subdivider, consider such preliminary plan as a plat and approve or disapprove the same as such; provided, such action is taken within sixty (60) [thirty (30)] days from the date of its filing. If the preliminary plan is approved only as such, a plat shall be delivered to the city manager who shall file it with the commission at its next regular meeting. Each plat shall be accompanied by certificates from the city and county tax collectors that all taxes on the land being subdivided have been paid to the current year, and when the plat is also considered as a preliminary plan, the required filing fee. The final plat will include the following information: 
A.  Date, subdivision title, scale, and north point. 
B.  The lines and names of all proposed streets or other ways or easements (including a statement of the purpose for which such easements are dedicated), and other open spaces to be dedicated for public use or granted for use of the inhabitants of the subdivision. 
C.  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street, lot line, boundary line, block line and building line, whether curved or straight, and including true north point. This shall include the radius, central angle, and tangent distance for the property lines of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. 
D.  The location of all permanent monuments or control points. 
E.  Suitable primary control points to which all dimensions, bearings and similar data shall be referred. Dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot. 
F.  Restrictive covenants in form for recording imposed on the land, if desired by the subdivider. 
G.  A statement signed and acknowledged by the owner dedicating all streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces to public use, or when the subdivider has made provision for perpetual maintenance thereof, to the inhabitants of the subdivision. 
H.  The signatures and data [date] of the mayor and city secretary attesting approval of the plat. 
I.  A certificate bearing the signature, data [date] and seal of the engineer or surveyor who made the survey certifying that the requirements hereof have been complied with. 
J.  If the subdivision is not to be served immediately by a water utility, a restriction prohibiting occupancy of any lot until water satisfactory for human consumption is available from a source on the land, community source, or a public utility source, in adequate and sufficient supply for family use and operation of a septic tank and/or sewerage system. 
K.  If the subdivision is not to be served immediately by a sewage collecting system connected to a community septic tank or treatment plant, or to a public sewer system, a restriction prohibiting occupancy of any lot until a septic tank with a tank of not less than five hundred (500) gallons capacity and with a drain field of no less than one hundred fifty (150) feet has been installed on such lot and has been inspected and approved by the city manager. In this regard, the city manager will utilize criteria developed by the state department of health resources to determine whether septic tanks can be used. 
L.  Number to identify each lot, site, and block. 
M.  Purpose for which all sites other than residential lots are dedicated or reserved. 
N.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
O.  A statement signed and knowledge by the owner indicating the plat and all subsequent development of the subdivision will be in accordance to the subdivision ordinance of the City of Carrizo Springs, and all appropriate local, state and federal regulations. 
P.  Elevation data of the property sufficient to determine drainage patterns and a determination of a 100-year flood zone, if any exists. If no flood zone exists, a statement as such by the engineer would then be required. 
State Law reference- Procedure for approving plats, Texas Local Government Code § 212.009. 
3-5  Council approval. Within sixty (60) days from the filing of any plat, the city planning commission shall disapprove such plat unless: 
A.  The plat complies with the provisions of this article; 
B.  The subdivider has complied with the required standards of design; and 
C.  The developer has made provision, by cash, corporate bond or depositing money in escrow, each in an amount equal to the estimated cost of materials, that in the event of the failure of subdivider to pay for such improvements, the same will be constructed and installed in the subdivision. 
    When the commission is satisfied that the technical requirements of any such subdivision plat have been complied with by the subdivider, the commission shall enter an order approving the plat subject to action of the governing body of the city with reference to such utility contracts, street construction, drainage and other matters as the governing body may lawfully review. 
    Upon taking such action, the city planning commission shall cause the plat to be forwarded to the city without delay accompanied by a copy of the commission's action with reference thereto, together with a written statement of any grievance or disagreement which the subdivider has requested that the governing body act upon. After the city is satisfied that the subdivider will comply with all requirements for utilities and street construction and has returned the plat to the city planning commission, indicating such action as the governing body may have taken in regard to the plat, then the commission shall enter its order giving final approval of such plat. 
    Any plat not disapproved within sixty (60) days from the date of its filing with the commission shall be deemed to have been approved; and a certificate showing said filing date, and the failure to take action thereon within sixty (60) days from said filing shall on demand be issued by the city council, and said certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other evidence on approval. 
3-6  Recordation. After a plat has been approved, the developer shall cause such plat to be recorded in the plat records of the county. 
State Law reference- Acceptance of plat by county clerk, Texas Local Government Code § 212.017. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS OF DESIGN 

Section 4. - Conformity with comprehensive plan. 
    Subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city. 
Section 5. - Relationship to street system. 
    Streets of new subdivisions shall be in line with existing streets in adjoining property, except where in the opinion of the commission the comprehensive plan, topography, requirements of traffic circulation or other considerations make it desirable to depart from such alignment. However, in no case should street jogs be offset less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet on centerline. 
Section 6. - Access to lots. 
    Every lot shall be provided with adequate access to a public street either by direct frontage on such street, or by a public pedestrian accessway approved by the planning commission. Rear and/or side driveway access to major thoroughfares shall be prohibited. 
Section 7. - Street right-of-way widths. 
    Street right-of-way widths shall be in conformity with the requirements of the comprehensive plan. In no event, however, shall such widths be less than fifty (50) feet for residential streets, sixty (60) feet for collector streets, one hundred (100) feet for arterial streets. Where topographical conditions, drainage channels, proposed limited development on one (1) side of the street, or other special conditions warrant a street of less than fifty (50) feet in width, a lesser width may be approved by the commission. When deemed necessary by the planning commission, temporary rights-of-way shall be provided for certain uses or locations, such as the provision of turnarounds on projected streets, such temporary rights-of-way shall revert to the abutting property owners when no longer required for its original purpose. 
Section 8. - Boundary streets. 
    When the land proposed to be subdivided is partially or totally bounded on one (1) or more sides by a street, way or major street having a width less than that specified in section 7 hereof, such land shall be laid out so as to provide street widths specified herein. 
    In the case of residential streets, no new half-streets shall be platted. Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing half-street, the remaining half of the street shall be platted. In the case of major arterials, a half-street may be platted, if necessary, in conformance with the comprehensive plan. A provisional one-foot reserve shall be used along the side or end of streets that abut property not subdivided. 
Section 9. - Street names. 
    New streets shall be named so as to provide continuity of names with existing streets and so as to prevent conflict with identical or similar names in other parts of the city. 
Section 10. - Street monuments and property markers. 
    Concrete monuments shall be placed at all corners of boundary lines of a subdivision, and in any case not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart. Such monuments shall be eight (8) inches in diameter, and shall be thirty (30) inches deep except where rock is encountered within fourteen (14) inches of the surface, in which case such monument shall be countersunk four (4) inches in such rock. The exact intersection point on the monument shall be marked three (3) inches in the monument. The top of the monument shall be placed flush with the natural ground. 
    Intermediate property corners, curve points and angle points shall be marked by iron stakes, not less than twelve (12) inches in length, driven flush with the ground or countersunk if necessary in order to avoid being disturbed. 
Section 11. - Street intersections. 
    Acute angles between streets at their intersection shall be avoided. However, when intersecting angles sharper than eighty (80) degrees are deemed necessary by the commission, the property line in the small angle of the intersection shall be rounded so as to permit the construction of curbs having a radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet without decreasing the normal width of the sidewalk area. 
Section 12. - Easements and alleys. 
    Alleys shall be twenty (20) feet in width. Easements for utilities or open drainageways shall not be less than five (5) feet in width. 
    All such easements shall be so aligned as to permit construction of utilities therein at the minimum cost. Appropriate alleys or service ways, not less than twenty (20) feet in width, shall be provided to serve commercial and industrial sites. When the city manager finds that easements in areas adjoining a proposed subdivision are necessary to provide adequate drainage thereof or to serve such division with utilities, the subdivider shall obtain such easements or shall make arrangements with the city to obtain them. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided; where necessary, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities, as determined by the city manager. 
Section 13. - Dead-end and private streets. 
    Private streets which serve more than one (1) residential lot, or one (1) or more multifamily structures owned by more than one (1) person or corporation are forbidden. All such streets shall be dedicated to the public in accordance with these regulations. When the commission finds that topographical or other unusual conditions, or development of the most desirable residential plan require laying out a dead-end street, the street shall terminate in a cul-de-sac with a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet, and should be no more than four hundred (400) feet long unless necessitated by topography. 
Section 14. - Block lengths. 
    Block lengths shall be determined primarily by the requirements of adequate vehicular and pedestrian circulation into, out of, and through such new subdivision. Residential blocks shall be approximately one thousand (1,000) feet long, but this length will be a minimum of three hundred (300) feet and a maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet, and may be varied according to the requirements of circulation, topography and provisions of the comprehensive plan. 
Section 15. - Block widths. 
    Block widths shall be such as to allow for two (2) tiers of lot back to back, except where abutting a major street to which access to the lots is prohibited, or where prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property. 
Section 16. - Lots. 
16-1  Area. The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the neighborhood in which the subdivision is located, and for the type of development and use contemplated, to assure provision of proper open space, and prevent overcrowding. 
16-2  Dimensions. Lot dimensions shall conform to the zoning ordinance or the following requirements, if more restrictive: 
A.  Where all lots of the subdivision are to be served immediately by a sewage collecting system connected to a public sanitary sewer or a central disposal unit, the minimum dimensions for interior residential lots shall be fifty (50) feet for width and one hundred ten (110) feet for depth; provided that a decrease in depth may be made if the lot width is increased so as to provide for a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet. The minimum width of residential corner lots not adjacent to a collector street shall be sixty (60) feet and the minimum area of corner lots shall be six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet. Where adjacent to a major street this shall be increased to seventy (70) feet or seven thousand seven hundred (7,700) square feet. In residential lots not served by the public sewerage system and located in a subdivision which will not be served immediately by a central disposal, the city planning commission shall request the city manager to cause a percolation test to be made, and shall require such lot area as the city manager deems necessary. The county health officer shall cause such percolation test to be conducted and make reports for all subdivisions without public sanitary sewers which are located beyond the jurisdiction of the city manager. 
B.  Depth and width of properties laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
C.  Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit the required building setback and proper orientation to both streets. Lots abutting on crosswalks shall be treated as corner lots. 
D.  Where a residential lot backs up to a railroad right-of-way, high pressure gas line, industrial area or any other land use which may have a depreciating effect on residential property, and where no marginal access street or other street is provided at the rear of such lot, additional depth of not less than eighty (80) feet is required. Where a lot sides to any of the above, additional width of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be required. A no-access easement of at least ten (10) feet shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other disadvantageous land use. 
E.  If a residential lot faces an arterial, it shall be at least ten (10) feet deeper than otherwise required. 
F.  Radial residential lots shall be at least fifty (50) feet wide at the building line or less than forty (40) feet wide at the street right-of-way line. 
16-3  Orientation. Residential lots shall be oriented to take advantage of topography and the best relationship to the overall design of the neighborhood, and to minimize the effects of any surrounding depreciating land uses: 
A.  The placing of residential lots facing directly upon a major thoroughfare shall be avoided, unless lots face a marginal access street parallel to such major thoroughfare. Lots should side or back to major thoroughfares and other depreciating land uses. 
B.  The placing of lots at right angles to each other, with rear and side lot lines adjacent, shall be avoided. 
C.  Side lot lines shall be as nearly perpendicular as practicable to the street the lot faces, or radial to curved streets. 
16-4  Building lines. Minimum front building setback lines at streets and crosswalks shall be shown on all plats and shall conform to the restrictions, if any, imposed on the subdivision by the subdivider, but in no event shall such setback lines be less than required by the zoning ordinance or the following minimum requirements: 
A.  Interior lots: 
(1)  Fronting on a residential street: Thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Fronting on a collector street: Thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  Fronting on an arterial street or state highway: Forty (40) feet. 
B.  Corner lots: Same as interior lot requirement on each street. 
Section 17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Section 18. - Compliance with construction requirements. 
18-1  Public works improvements. No plat of any subdivision shall receive final approval unless the subdivider has complied or provided for compliance with the policies and procedures set forth in Exhibit A, "Specifications and Design Standards for Public Works Improvements," which is attached hereto and made a part hereof. Until such policies and procedures have been complied with by the subdivider, and the plat approved by the commission as herein required, no building, water, sewer, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the city as to any property in the subdivision. 
18-2  Financing arrangement. As part of the application process, it will be determined by the city staff the cost [sic] of all materials necessary to develop the entire proposed subdivision. Development costs will include all on-site and off-site improvements which will be required to serve the subdivision. The city will have final decision as to what improvements will be necessary. It is required that the developer supply the city with guarantees (as specified below) for payment of all materials. The city will furnish all labor and equipment to install improvements. The city and the developer will arrange a development schedule, but developments should not extend over two (2) years, unless extenuating circumstances exist. 
18-3  Phasing of plat. Where it is found to be advantageous to phase development throughout an entire subdivision, the city can approve phases of a project. However, if limited phases are approved, phases not approved will be required to be resubmitted for application and approval as specified in pertinent sections of this ordinance. 
18-4  Performance bond. Prior to the approval of the subdivision plat, the subdivider must file with the city manager a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State of Texas in an amount equal to the cost of materials for improvements, guaranteeing to the city that such improvements shall be constructed and completed in a satisfactory manner and within a period specified, but such period shall not exceed two (2) years. Said bond shall be approved by the city attorney and shall be made payable to and enforceable by the city. Upon substantial compliance and approval of all improvements as viewed by the city engineer, the bond may be released in writing by the city manager and may be returned to the developer. 
18-5  Where bond not prerequisite to approval. The filing of a performance bond shall not be a condition precedent to the approval of a plat where the subdivider, prior to the last regular meeting of the commission before the expiration of sixty (60) days from the date the plat was filed for approval, has signed and filed with the commission an instrument in substantially the following form: 
    I, ____________ , do hereby agree that, if the proposed plat of ____________ (name of subdivision), filed by me for approval on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ , is approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Carrizo Springs, Texas, the City Manager may retain said plat in his possession, without recording same, until I have either constructed all site improvements required under the provisions of the City of Carrizo Springs Subdivision Regulations, or have filed with the City Manager a bond in an amount equal to the cost of all such uncompleted improvements, as estimated by the City Engineer, guaranteeing that all such uncompleted improvements will be constructed within two (2) years from the date of such bond, or have placed into escrow an amount necessary to cover the cost of all materials necessary to construct required improvements. 
    Executed this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 19. - Serving subdivisions with utilities. 
    Unless and until a plat of a subdivision has been approved, and the subdivider has constructed the streets, curbs, gutters, paving, utilities and drainage facilities therein, in the manner provided for in this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any official of the city to serve or connect any public utilities owned, controlled, or distributed by the city to any land, or any part thereof, covered by said plat, or to the owners or purchasers of said land, or any part thereof. 
Section 20. - Dedication and maintenance of streets. 
    Disapproval of a plat by the commission shall be deemed a refusal by the city to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed an acceptance of the proposed dedications, and shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning the maintenance of or improvements of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the city have actually appropriated the same by entry, use or improvement. It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to enter upon or maintain the streets in an urban subdivision; and the city will not accept or maintain said streets unless and until such streets have been surfaced, curbed and guttered, and the required utilities and drainage facilities have been installed, and such improvements have been accepted by the city, with such acceptance evidenced in writing by written certificate of the city engineer. 
Section 21. - Rules and regulations of commission. 
    The city planning commission may adopt rules of procedure to govern its actions. After public hearing thereon, the city planning commission may adopt rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions. Such rules shall be consistent with the provisions of this ordinance and shall become effective upon being filed with the city clerk. 
Section 22. - Neighborhood unit. 
    Where it is proposed to develop a mass housing project or similar neighborhood unit, the city planning commission may vary the specific requirements of this ordinance if there is a building development planned with adequate provisions for light and air, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and recreational facilities, equal to or better than the detailed requirements of this ordinance. 
Section 23. - Variance. 
    The planning commission may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the planning commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest. No variance shall be granted unless the planning commission finds: 
A.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of these regulations would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
B.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant. 
C.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area. 
D.  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
Such findings of the planning commission, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the planning commission meeting at which such variance is granted. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
Section 24. - Enforcement. 
24-1  Permits shall not be issued for the building or repair of any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved in the manner prescribed herein and duly recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
24-2  The city and county shall withhold all public improvements and services of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets, sewerage facilities and water, gas and electric service from all subdivisions which have not been approved in the manner prescribed herein, and from all areas dedicated to the public which have not been accepted by the governing body of the city. 
24-3  Any subdivision of land in violation of the terms and provisions of these regulations is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and appropriate officers of the city or county are hereby authorized to institute any action which may be necessary to restrain or abate such violation. 
24-4  No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat or a subdivision after approval has been given by the planning commission and endorsed on the plat in writing, unless said change, modification or revision is first submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
Section 25. - Appeal from commission action. 
    Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding or action of the city planning commission which is lawfully subject to review by the governing body of the city shall appeal to the governing body within thirty (30) days from the date of such finding or action, and not thereafter. Nothing in this section shall prevent a right of review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 26. - Repeal and savings clause. 
    All ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed. Provided, however, that this ordinance shall be construed to be a continuation of the consistent provisions of such ordinances and all action commenced pursuant thereto and all plats filed with the commission prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be governed by the above described ordinances, except that no such plats shall be finally approved by the commission until the provisions of Article IV, Section 18(b) of this ordinance have been complied with. 
Section 27. - Severability clause. 
    If any provision of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 
EXHIBIT A. - SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 28. - General provisions. 
28-1  All subdivisions shall comply with the specifications and design standards as hereinafter outlined. Low density subdivisions shall comply with the specifications and standards, with the exception of such items as curbs and gutters. 
28-2  Two (2) copies of plans and profiles for streets, alleys, sidewalks and drainage easements, including the following information, shall be submitted with each subdivision plat. 
Section 29. - Streets and alleys. 
29-1  Plans. 
A.  Typical sections showing the proposed pavement width, type, thickness and crown; the proposed curb or curb and gutter type as required, location in relation to centerline and exposure; the proposed sidewalk dimensions and location in relation to curbs and property lines; the proposed street grading slopes, for each of the different types of streets and alleys in the subdivision. 
B.  Alignment of each street, alley, sidewalk and crosswalkway showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the centerline and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another street, alley or drainage easement; the station and radius of each curb return; the location of adjacent right-of-way lines; the location and limits of sidewalks and curbs of each street; the location of monuments. 
C.  Location, description, and elevation of benchmarks; the top of curb grade at each curb end, each fifty-foot station and each end of each curb return; the centerline grade at each end and at each fifty-foot station of alleys; the gradient of each tangent grade and the location and length of each vertical curve; the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection; the profiles of streets, alleys, and drainage ditches shall show the natural ground at adjacent property lines and the proposed centerline. 
D.  Scale, north arrow and date. Plan and profile shall be drawn to scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontally, and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertically. 
E.  All street and alley plans and profiles shall bear the seal of a registered professional engineer. 
29-2  Design standards. 
A.  At each street intersection, the curb shall be rounded with a curve of radius "R," varying with the interior angle as specified in Table 1 (not required in rural subdivisions). 
B.  At each intersection, the property lines at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve or[of] radius "R," varying with the interior angle as specified in Table 1. 
C.  Street and alley grades shall, in general, conform to the terrain, and shall not exceed the grades specified in Table 2. No street or alley grade shall be less than three-tenths of one (1) percent, unless otherwise specified by the city engineer. 
D.  Horizontal curve radii shall not be less than those specified in Table 2. 
29-3  Construction requirements. The subdivider shall excavate, fill and grade all alleys and new streets, including sidewalk areas where required within the subdivision, so that pavements and sidewalks may be constructed along lines and grades approved by the city engineer. In general, the grades of sidewalk areas shall be so established that no extreme or abrupt changes in grade are encountered within blocks, but variations may be allowed where because of soil conditions, topography, or valuable trees, the establishment of such grades would result in undue hardship. New streets and alleys shall be surfaced in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and constructed under his supervision. No street shall be surfaced until the underground utilities which are to be installed in the portions of the streets intended for vehicular traffic have been installed. 
New streets (including previously dedicated rights-of-way) and existing unpaved streets abutting both sides to a new subdivision or resubdivision shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in this exhibit and the following requirements: 
A.  Subgrade preparation: Subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications of the City of Carrizo Springs and compacted to a Proctor dry density of not less than ninety (90) percent. When fill is required it shall be placed in uniform lifts not to exceed six (6) inches in depth prior to compaction with pneumatic rollers or eight (8) inches prior to compaction with other types of rollers. Each lift shall be compacted to ninety (90) percent Proctor density before succeeding lifts are placed. 
B.  Flexible base: When asphaltic pavement surfaces are used, the base shall be a compacted flexible base constructed to the specifications of the City of Carrizo Springs to the depth shown in Table 3 with a Proctor density of not less than ninety-five (95) percent. 
C.  Stabilized base: As alternate to the flexible base above, a compacted soil-cement base with a Proctor density of ninety-five (95) percent may be used, with soil-cement ratio and thickness to be approved by the city engineer. 
D.  Asphaltic pavement: The compacted surface course shall be applied at the rates specified in Table 3. The paving mixture and construction methods shall conform to the specifications of the city for hot mix, hot laid asphaltic concrete, hot mix cold laid asphaltic concrete or cold mix limestone rock asphalt. 
E.  Concrete pavement: All concrete pavement shall be Portland cement concrete of a depth and compressive strength specified in Table 3 and constructed in accordance with the specifications of the city. Reinforcing steel shall be 6 × 6 wire mesh or Number 3 round steel eighteen (18) inches on centers both ways. 
F.  Curbs, curb and gutters: Curbs or combined curb and gutter sections, where required, shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete and installed in accordance with the specifications of the city on all streets within the subdivision along the lines and grades approved by the city engineer. Curbs or combined curb and gutter shall be provided on both sides of all streets within urban subdivisions and on the side of boundary streets adjacent to the subdivision. 
Section 30. - Drainage and drainage structures. 
30-1  Plans. The required plans shall show the following information: 
A.  Construction details of all drainage structures including dimensions, reinforcing, and components such as grates and manhole covers. 
B.  Alignment of drainage easements showing beginning and ending stations; each deflection angle of the centerline, and the station at the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another drainage easement; the location of each drainage structure, and the location and size of all storm sewers. 
C.  The centerline grade at each end and at each fifty-foot station of drainage ditches, the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection, the flow line elevations of each drainage structure, the flow line elevation of each storm sewer, at each point of change, each end, and at the intervening gradients. 
30-2  Drainage computations. 
A.  Runoff rates shall be computed as determined by the city engineer. In all cases, runoff rates shall be computed on the basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed contributing runoff water to the proposed subdivision, on the basis of concrete lined channels and streets carrying stormwater in the contributing area. 
B.  Streets may be used to carry stormwater if the calculated flow does not exceed that required by the engineer, or the velocity does not exceed ten (10) feet per second. Minor streets shall be designed on a five-year frequency and all other streets on a ten-year frequency. Where streets are not capable of meeting the above requirements, drainage structures shall be provided. Street widths shall not be widened beyond width determined by street classification. 
C.  Concrete and earth lined channels and storm sewers shall be designed on the basis of twenty-five-year frequency. 
D.  Alleys shall be designed on the basis of a five-year frequency to carry stormwater from only the lots within the blocks abutting the alleys. 
30-3  Construction standards. 
A.  All drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications and to the lines and grades established or approved by the city engineer. 
B.  All concrete used in drainage structures shall develop a comprehensive strength of three thousand (3,000) p.s.i. in twenty-eight (28) days. All castings shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Gray Iron Castings A.S.T.M. Designation A-48 for Class 2 Gray Cast Iron. 
C.  Drainage ditches: In concrete lined ditches, the lining shall extend one (1) foot beyond the height of the design flow line. Between the top of the lining and the top of the ditch and earth sodded side slopes, not steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical may be used. Vertical concrete walls shall not exceed two (2) feet in height unless properly fenced or enclosed. Earth sodded channels shall be mulch sodded over the entire surface area of the channel, and the side slope shall not be steeper than [three] (3) horizontal to [one] (1) vertical. 
Section 31. - Sanitary sewers. 
31-1  All gravity sewers shall be sewer pipe (recommended local standard) conforming to A.S.T.M. Standards, and installed in conformance with the specifications of the city. Concrete sewer pipe may be used in areas in which there will be no industrial waste carried, upon approval of the engineer. 
31-2  The minimum size of lateral sewer mains in residential areas shall be six (6) inches in diameter. Minimum grades shall be sufficient to produce a velocity of one and five-tenths (1.5) feet per second. 
31-3  All outfall mains shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the maximum anticipated flow from the entire area tributary to the line, as determined by the city manager. 
31-4  Lift stations shall be furnished where necessary, of such size and design as determined by the city manager. 
Section 32. - Water mains. 
32-1  All water distribution mains shall be pipe (recommended local standard), installed in conformance with the specifications of the city. Other suitable material may be used when authorized by the city engineer. 
32-2  The minimum size of lateral water mains shall be six (6) inches in diameter. 
32-3  All principal mains shall be of sufficient size to meet all anticipated requirements of the system as determined by the city manager. 
32-4  The layout of mains shall assure two-way flow at all points in the system, with the exception of extensions on cul-de-sacs and other deadends approved by the city engineer. 
TABLE 1. - CURB AND BLOCK CORNER RETURNS 
Intersection of Minor or Secondary Streets Intersection of Minor or Secondary with Major Thoroughfare Intersection of Major Thoroughfares Interior Angle in Degrees Curb 
R Corner 
R Curb 
R Corner 
R Curb 
R Corner 
R 150-145 15 12 25 15 25 15 145-140 15 12 25 15 28 18 140-135 15 12 25 15 30 20 135-85 15 12 25 20 35 25 85-75 20 20 30 25 50 40 75-65 25 30 35 40 80 70 65-55 30 40 40 50 90 80 55-45 35 50 45 70 110 100 45-0 35 75 45 90 150 140  
TABLE 2. - GRADES AND HORIZONTAL CURVES 
Street Classification Percent Grade Center Line Radius With .05
Superelevation With .10
Superelevation Arterial 6 1200' 400' Collector 7 700' 285' No Superelevation Residential 10 100' Alley 10  
TABLE 3. - BASE AND SURFACE STANDARDS-URBAN SUBDIVISION 
Street Classification Base Surface Arterial 12" flexible Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid, 200 lb. per sq. yd. 6' reinforced concrete 3500 psi, with 6 × 6 mesh or equivalent #3 steel Collector 8" flexible Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid 175 lb. per sq. yard 6" reinforced concrete 3500 psi. with 6 × 6 mesh or equivalent #3 steel Residential 6" flexible Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid, or hot mix cold laid, 150 lb. per sq. yd. 6" unreinforced concrete, 3500 psi. Commercial alley Same as residential street Residential alley Same as residential street  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1971 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Code of sections of the 1971 Code. Sections of the 1971 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1971 Code 
Section Code 
Section 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-2 1-4 1-9 1-5 1-12 1-7 1-15 1-8 1-14 2-1 2-66 2-2 18-19 2-3 22-1 2-5-1(a) 4-1 2-5-1(b) 4-3 2-16 2-167 2-17 2-168 2-18 2-169 3-1 24-40 3-2 24-41 3-3 24-42 4-1 6-1 4-2 6-2 4-3 6-3 4-18 6-4 4-19 6-31 4-20 6-32 4-21 6-33 5-1 8-27 5-36 8-58 5-37 8-149 5-38 8-79 5-39 8-80 5-40 8-81 5-42 8-81 5-43 8-87 5-44 8-82 5-45 8-83 5-46 8-84 5-47 8-85 5-48 8-86 5-49 8-125 5-50 8-154 5-51 8-155 5-52 8-59 5-62 8-118 5-63 8-119 5-64 8-120 5-65 8-121 5-66 8-122 5-67 8-123 5-68 8-123 5-69 8-124 5-70 8-124 5-71 8-123 5-81 8-179 5-82 8-180 5-83 8-181 5-84 8-182 5-85 8-183 5-91 8-150 5-92 8-151 5-93 8-152 5-94 8-153 5-106 8-205 5-117 8-234 5-118 8-235 5-129 18-42 5-130 18-43 5-131 18-44 5-147 16-1 5-148 16-44 5-149 16-44 5-150 16-44 5-151 16-44 5-152 16-64 5-153 16-66 5-154 16-65 5-155 16-65 5-156 16-65 5-157 16-65 5-158 16-65 5-159 16-65 5-160 16-65 5-161 16-65 5-162 16-10 7-1 14-1 7-2 14-2 7-3 14-3 7-4 14-4 7-5 14-6 7-6 14-7 7-21 14-34 7-22 14-33 7-23 14-35 7-24 14-36 7-25 14-37 7-27 14-41 7-28 14-42 7-29 14-43 7-30 14-44 7-31 14-38 7-32 14-39 7-33 14-40 7-34 14-45 7-46 14-66 7-47 14-67 7-54 14-68 7-55 14-69 7-56 14-70 7-57 14-71 8-16 24-73 8-17 24-105 8-18 24-106 8-19 24-107 9-17 32-55 9-18 32-56 10-1 26-1 10-2 26-2 10-16 30-19 10-17 30-20 10-18 30-21 10-19 30-22 10-20 30-23 10-21 30-24 10-22 30-25 10-23 30-26 10-34 24-193 10-35 24-195 10-36 24-196 10-37 24-197 10-38 24-198 10-39 24-199 10-40 24-200 10-41 24-201 10-42 24-202 10-43 24-203 10-54 24-230 10-55 24-231 10-56 24-232 10-57 24-233 10-58 24-234 10-59 24-235 10-60 24-236 10-61 24-237 10-62 24-194 10-73 12-36 10-74 12-93 10-75 12-94 10-76 12-95 10-77 12-96 10-78 12-97 10-79 12-98 10-80 12-99 10-81 12-100 10-82 12-101 10-83 12-102 10-84 12-103 10-85 12-104 10-86 12-105 10-87 12-35 10-98 12-61 10-99 12-62 10-100 12-63 10-101 12-64 10-102 12-65 10-103 12-66 10-104 12-67 11-1 30-57 11-2 30-58 11-3 30-59 11-4 30-60 11-5 30-61 11-6 30-62 11-7 30-63 11-8 30-64 11-9 30-65 11-10 30-66 11-11 30-67 11-12 30-69 11-13 30-68 11-14 30-56 12-1 24-128 12-16 24-155 12-17 24-156 12-18 24-157 12-19 24-158 12-20 24-159 12-21 24-162 12-22 24-160 12-23 24-161 14-2 34-1 14-3 34-2 14-4 34-3 14-5 34-5 14-6 34-4 14-7 34-33 14-8 34-34 14-9 34-35 14-12 34-6 14-13 34-36 15-6 36-73 15-7 36-75 15-8 36-98 16-1 38-1 16-2 38-2 16-3 38-3 16-4 38-4 16-5 38-5 16-7 38-6 16-9 38-7 16-10 38-8 16-11 38-9 16-12 38-10 16-13 38-11 16-15 38-175 16-35 38-41 16-45 38-42 16-49 38-43 16-50 38-44 16-54 38-45 16-58 38-46 16-59 38-47 16-60 38-48 16-61 38-49 16-73 38-78 16-74 38-79 16-75 38-80 16-78 38-81 16-82 38-82 16-97 38-108 16-101 38-109 16-113 38-134 16-114 38-135 16-115 38-136 16-116 38-137 16-117 38-138 16-118 38-139 16-119 38-140 16-120 38-141 16-121 38-144 16-122 38-142 16-133 20-19 16-148 38-174 18-1 40-72 18-2 40-38 18-3 40-184 18-21 40-43 18-22 40-71 18-23 40-185 18-23-1 40-186 18-41 40-105 18-42(a) 40-118 18-42(b) 40-125 18-43 40-120 18-44 40-121 18-45 40-122 18-46 40-119 18-47 40-123 18-48 40-124 18-49(a) 40-118 18-49(b) 40-118 18-49(c) 40-118 18-49(d) 40-118 18-49(e) 40-125 18-49(f) 40-118 18-50 40-117 18-51 40-126 18-52 40-127 18-53 40-128 18-54 40-129 18-55 40-130 18-56 40-112 18-57 40-113 18-59 40-114 18-60 40-115 18-61 40-107 18-62 40-106 18-63 40-111 18-64 40-108 18-65 40-109 18-66 40-110 18-67 40-116  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1992 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Code of sections of the 1992 Code, as supplemented through November 11, 1994, included herein. Sections of the 1992 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1992 Code 
Section Code 
Section 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-12 1-11 1-13 1-12 1-14 1-13 1-15 2-1 2-1 2-66 2-66 2-121 2-167 2-122 2-168 2-123 2-169 3-1 4-1 3-2 4-2 3-3 4-3 3-4 4-4 4-1 6-1 4-2 6-2 4-3 6-3 4-4 6-4 4-5 6-5 4-26 6-29 4-27 6-30 4-28 6-31 4-29 6-32 4-30 6-33 4-31 6-34 4-33 6-35 4-211 8-264 4-212 8-265 4-213 8-266 4-214 8-267 4-215 8-268 4-216 8-269 4-217 8-270 5-30 8-27 5-46 8-58 5-47 8-59 5-66 8-79 5-67 8-80 5-68 8-81 5-69 8-82 5-70 8-83 5-71 8-84 5-72 8-85 5-73 8-86 5-74 8-87 5-91 8-118 5-92 8-119 5-93 8-120 5-94 8-121 5-95 8-122 5-96 8-123 5-97 8-124 5-98 8-125 5-116 8-149 5-117 8-150 5-118 8-151 5-119 8-152 5-120 8-153 5-121 8-154 5-122 8-155 5-141 8-179 5-142 8-180 5-143 8-181 5-144 8-182 5-145 8-183 5-171 8-205 5-191 8-234 5-192 8-235 7-1 14-1 7-2 14-2 7-3 14-3 7-4 14-4 7-5 14-5 7-6 14-6 7-7 14-7 7-26 14-33 7-27 14-34 7-28 14-35 7-29 14-36 7-30 14-37 7-31 14-38 7-32 14-39 7-33 14-40 7-34 14-41 7-35 14-42 7-36 14-43 7-37 14-44 7-38 14-45 7-39 14-46 7-56 14-66 7-57 14-67 7-58 14-68 7-59 14-69 7-60 14-70 7-61 14-71 8-1 16-1 8-2 16-2 8-3 16-3 8-4 16-4 8-5 16-5 8-6 16-6 8-7 16-7 8-8 16-8 8-9 16-9 8-10 16-10 8-11 16-11 8-26 16-41 8-27 16-42 8-28 16-43 8-29 16-44 8-30 16-45 8-46 16-64 8-47 16-65 8-48 16-66 9-26 18-19 9-46 18-42 9-47 18-43 9-48 18-44 10-26 20-19 10-61 20-20 10-62 20-21 10-63 20-22 10-64 20-23 10-65 20-24 11-1 22-1 12-41 24-40 12-42 24-41 12-43 24-42 12-61 24-73 12-76 24-105 12-77 24-106 12-78 24-107 12-96 12-35 12-97 12-36 12-111 12-61 12-112 12-62 12-113 12-63 12-114 12-64 12-115 12-65 12-116 12-66 12-117 12-67 12-131 12-93 12-132 12-94 12-133 12-95 12-134 12-96 12-135 12-97 12-136 12-98 12-137 12-99 12-138 12-100 12-139 12-101 12-140 12-102 12-141 12-103 12-142 12-104 12-143 12-105 12-161 24-128 12-176 24-155 12-177 24-156 12-178 24-157 12-179 24-158 12-180 24-159 12-181 24-160 12-182 24-161 12-183 24-162 12-206 24-193 12-207 24-194 12-208 24-195 12-209 24-196 12-210 24-197 12-211 24-198 12-212 24-199 12-213 24-200 12-214 24-201 12-215 24-202 12-216 24-203 12-231 24-230 12-232 24-231 12-233 24-232 12-234 24-233 12-235 24-234 12-236 24-235 12-237 24-236 12-238 24-237 12-261 24-268 12-262 24-269 12-263 24-270 12-264 24-271 12-265 24-272 12-266 24-273 12-267 24-274 12-268 24-275 12-269 24-276 12-270 24-277 12-271 24-278 13-1 26-1 13-2 26-2 14-1 28-1 14-2 28-2 14-3 28-3 14-4 28-4 14-5 28-5 14-6 28-6 14-7 28-7 14-8 28-8 14-9 28-9 15-25 30-19 15-26 30-20 15-27 30-21 15-28 30-22 15-29 30-23 15-30 30-24 15-31 30-25 15-32 30-26 15-51 30-56 15-52 30-57 15-53 30-58 15-54 30-59 15-55 30-60 15-56 30-61 15-57 30-62 15-58 30-63 15-59 30-64 15-60 30-65 15-61 30-66 15-62 30-67 15-63 30-68 15-64 30-69 16-61 32-55 16-62 32-56 16-63 32-57 16-64 32-58 16-65 32-59 17-1 34-1 17-2 34-2 17-3 34-3 17-4 34-4 17-5 34-5 17-8 34-6 17-9 34-7 17-26 34-33 17-27 34-34 17-28 34-35 17-29 34-36 18-41 36-42 18-66 36-73 18-67 36-74 18-68 36-75 18-69 36-76 18-70 36-77 18-86 36-98 18-87 36-99 18-101 36-126 18-102 36-127 18-103 36-128 18-104 36-129 18-105 36-130 18-106 36-131 18-107 36-132 18-108 36-133 18-110 36-134 19-1 38-1 19-2 38-2 19-3 38-3 19-4 38-4 19-5 38-5 19-7 38-6 19-9 38-7 19-10 38-8 19-11 38-9 19-12 38-10 19-13 38-11 19-42 38-41 19-52 38-42 19-56 38-43 19-57 38-44 19-61 38-45 19-65 38-46 19-66 38-47 19-67 38-48 19-68 38-49 19-69 38-50 19-70 38-51 19-71 38-52 19-86 38-78 19-87 38-79 19-88 38-80 19-91 38-81 19-96 38-82 19-123 38-108 19-125 38-109 19-148 38-134 19-149 38-135 19-150 38-136 19-151 38-137 19-152 38-138 19-153 38-139 19-154 38-140 19-155 38-141 19-156 38-142 19-157 38-143 19-158 38-144 19-176 38-174 19-178 38-175 20-26 40-33 20-27 40-34 20-28 40-35 20-29 40-38 20-30 40-39 20-31 40-40 20-34 40-42 20-35 40-43 20-36 40-44 20-37 40-45 20-38 40-46 20-56 40-66 20-57 40-67 20-58 40-68 20-59 40-69 20-60 40-70 20-62 40-71 20-63 40-72 20-64 40-73 20-81 40-105 20-82 40-106 20-83 40-107 20-84 40-108 20-85 40-109 20-86 40-110 20-87 40-111 20-88 40-112 20-89 40-113 20-91 40-114 20-92 40-115 20-93 40-116 20-94 40-117 20-95 40-118 20-96 40-119 20-97 40-120 20-98 40-121 20-99 40-122 20-100 40-123 20-101 40-124 20-102 40-125 20-103 40-126 20-104 40-127 20-105 40-128 20-106 40-129 20-107 40-130 20-116 40-159 20-117 40-160 20-118 40-161 20-119 40-162 20-121 40-184 20-122 40-185 20-123 40-186  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within the Code of ordinances and other legislation. 
Legislation Date Section Code 
Section Ord. No. 94 11-13-1951 1 14-5 2 14-5 3 14-5 Ord. No. 368 3-17-1980 1 40-34 2 40-38 3 40-40 4 40-45 5 40-35 6 40-42 7 40-39 10 40-44 12 40-46 14 40-33 Ord. No. 371 7-8-1980 1 36-73 2 36-73 3 36-75 4 36-76 5 36-74 6 36-77 Ord. No. 381 12-8-1981 1 4-1 2 4-2 3 4-3 Ord. No. 409 3-13-1984 1 32-57 2 32-58 Ord. No. 413 5-8-1984 4.17 6-4 4.18 6-5 4.19 6-29 4.20 6-31 4.21 6-32 4.22 6-33 4.23 6-34 4.24 6-35 4.25 6-30 Ord. No. 414 6-12-1984 - 8-235 Ord. No. 415 6-12-1984 - 8-181 Ord. No. 418 6-12-1984 2 8-179 Ord. No. 417 7-10-1984 2 App. A, § XIX Ord. No. 450 2-10-1986 - 8-264-8-270 Ord. No. 437 4-16-1986 3 40-69 4 40-68 5 40-67 Ord. No. 437-A 5-13-1986 1 40-67 2 40-70 3 40-68 4 40-69 5 40-66 Ord. No. 444 12-9-1986 - 8-235 Ord. No. 445 12-9-1986 - 8-181 Ord. No. 448 1-13-1987 - 40-45 Ord. No. 449 1-13-1987 - 40-44 Ord. No. 451 2-10-1987 16-133 20-19 16-140 20-22 16-141 20-23 16-142 20-24 16-143 20-21 16-144 20-20 Ord. No. 453 2-10-1987 art. 1, § A 16-2 art. 1, § B 16-3 art. 1, § C 16-4 art. 1, § D 16-11 art. 2 16-1 art. 3, § A 16-5 art. 3, § B 16-10 art. 3, § C 16-43 art. 3, § D 16-6 art. 3, § E 16-7 art. 3, § F 16-8 art. 3, § G 16-9 art. 4, § A 16-41 art. 4, § B 16-42 art. 4, § C 16-44 art. 4, § D 16-45 art. 5, § A 16-64 art. 5, § B 16-65 art. 5, § C 16-66 Ord. No. 455 4-14-1987 - App. A, § III - App. A, § IV - App. A, § V - App. A, § VII - App. A, § VIII - App. A, § IX Ord. No. 457 8-11-1987 - 36-42 Ord. No. 463 5-10-1988 1 36-99 Ord. No. 469 6-28-1988 - 40-43 Ord. No. 470 8-9-1988 1 14-71 Ord. No. 471 8-15-1988 art. 2 14-2 art. 3 14-3 art. 4 14-4 art. 5 14-35 art. 6 14-37 art. 7 14-38 art. 8 14-39 art. 9 14-40 Ord. No. 463 10-1-1988 1 36-99 Ord. No. 487 1-9-1990 1 24-268 2 24-269 3 24-270 4 24-271 5 24-272 6 24-273 7 24-274 8 24-275 9 24-276 10 24-277 11 24-278 Ord. No. 491 3-12-1990 2 14-2 3 14-3 4 14-4 5 14-35 6 14-37 7 14-46 Ord. No. 493 3-12-1990 1 36-126 2 36-127 3 36-128 4 36-129 5 36-130 6 36-131 7 36-132 8 36-133 10 36-134 Ord. No. 506 3-12-1991 1 14-5 2 14-5 3 14-5 4 14-5 5 14-5 6 14-5 Ord. No. 507 4-9-1991 - 40-73 Ord. No. 511 6-28-1991 1 34-7 2 34-7 3 34-7 Ord. No. 512 7-18-1991 1 32-59 Ord. No. 515 10-8-1991 art. 2 14-4 Ord. No. 516 10-29-1991 1 4-4 Ord. No. 518 10-29-1991 - 40-43 Ord. No. 519 11-12-1991 1 40-159 2 40-160 3 40-161 4 40-162 Ord. No. 528 9-8-1992 1 2-1 2 2-1 3 2-1 4 2-1 5 2-1 Ord. No. 530 10-13-1992 - App. A, § VIII Ord. No. 531 10-13-1992 - 8-152 Ord. No. 532 2-9-1993 1 4-4 2A 4-4 2B 4-4 Ord. No. 535 11-9-1993 1 28-1 2 28-2 3 28-3 4 28-4 5 28-5 6 28-6 7 28-7 8 28-8 9 28-9 Ord. No. 541 1-11-1994 1 36-126 Ord. No. 547 8-9-1994 1 36-19 Ord. No. 550 11-8-1994 1 26-4 2 26-4 Ord. No. 565 3-21-1996 - 40-43 Ord. No. 570 8-13-1996 - 38-49 Ord. No. 572 10-8-1996 - 38-49 Ord. No. 580 3-19-1998 1 40-36 2 40-36 Ord. No. 593 2-8-2000 1 18-62 2 18-63 3 18-64 4 18-65 5 18-66 6 18-67 7 18-68 8 18-69 9 18-70 10 18-71 11 18-72 12 18-73 13 18-74 Ord. No. 597 4-11-2000 1 14-5 Ord. No. 600 8-29-2000 - 32-59 Ord. No. 601 8-29-2000 1 40-43 2 40-43 3 40-2 Ord. No. 603 9-26-2000 1 40-37 Ord. No. 614 10-9-2001 1 32-59 Ord. No. 628 11-12-2002 1 8-3 Ord. No. 629 11-12-2002 - 38-110 Ord. No. 635 3-11-2003 1 10-1 2 10-2 3 10-3 4 10-4 5 10-5 6 10-6 7 10-7 8 10-8 10 10-9 Ord. No. 637 7-8-2003 1 40-43 Ord. No. 655 6-28-2005 1 40-43 Ord. No. 658 9-13-2005 1 8-25 2 8-26 Ord. No. 659 9-13-2005 - 10-10 Ord. No. 664 5-30-2006 1 40-43 Ord. No. 667 6-27-2006 1 40-4 2 40-4 3 40-4 4 40-4 5 40-4 6 40-4 Ord. No. 673 6-19-2007 1 40-43 Ord. No. 675 6-19-2007 1 32-59 Ord. No. 680 4-8-2008 4.28 6-57-6-60 Ord. No. 700 6-14-2011 I 40-43 Ord. No. 702 9-13-2011 1 24-300 2 24-301 3 24-302 4 24-303 5 24-304 6 24-305 7 24-306 8 24-307 9 24-308 10 24-309 11 24-310 12 24-311 13 24-312 14 24-313 14.1 24-314 14.2 24-315 15 24-316 16 24-317 17 24-318 18 24-319 18.1 24-320 19 24-321 20 24-322 21 24-323 22 24-324 23 24-325 Ord. No. 706 12-13-2011 2 2-2 Ord. No. 707 12-13-2011 I App. A, § II II App. A, § III III App. A, § XII Ord. No. 713 5-8-2012 1 12-1 2 12-1 3 12-1 4 12-1 5 12-1 6 12-1 7 12-1 Ord. No. 716 6-12-2012 art. 1 2-3 art. 2 2-3 Ord. No. 723 4-9-2013 §§ 1-3 App. A, § VIII Ord. No. 734 8-5-2014 19-159 38-145 Ord. No. 735 8-5-2014 19.183 38-197 19.184 38-198 19.185 38-199 19.186 38-200 19.187 38-201 19.188 38-202 19.189 38-203 19.190 38-204 19.191 38-205 19.192 38-206 19.193 38-207 Ord. No. 736 8-5-2014 I 40-43 Ord. No. 741 1-20-2015 - 40-44 Ord. No. 749 10-13-2015 1 40-43 2 40-43 3 40-2 Ord. No. 757 9-27-2016 I 40-43 - 40-187 Ord. No. 763 3-14-2017 1(15.65) 30-70 Ord. No. 765 5-30-2017 1 8-2 2 8-2 Ord. No. 767 7-11-2017 intro. 2-77 1 2-78 2 2-79 3 2-80 4 2-81 5 2-82 6 2-83 7 2-84 8 2-85 9 2-86 Ord. No. 769 7-11-2017 - 40-3-40-7 Ord. No. 771 12-12-2017 1 32-19 2 32-20 3 32-21 4 32-22 5 32-23 6 32-24 7 32-25 8 32-26 9 32-27 10 32-28 11 32-29 12 32-30 13 32-31 14 32-32 15 32-33 Ord. No. 776 1-31-2018 1 26-3 2 26-3 3 26-3 4 26-3 5 26-3 Ord. No. 777 4-10-2018 1 2-4 2 2-4 3 2-4 4 2-4 5 2-4 Ord. No. 789  9-25-2018 1       Added 6-61 Ord. No. 790  9-25-2018 1       Added 40-8 2       Added 40-9 Ord. No. 791  9-27-2018 Adopting Ord., p. xi  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Texas Codes. 
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 11.38 4-3 29.01 4-1 61.36 4-3 70.01 4-1 105.03 4-1, 4-2 105.05 4-1, 4-2 - 4-4 105.06 4-1  
Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section Section 
this Code 101.101 2-1  
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure 
Article Section 
this Code 103.0031 2-2  
Texas Education Code 
Section Section 
this Code 61.003 36-126  
Texas Family Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 31 26-3 51.08 26-3  
Texas Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 171 2-85 ch. 211 2-86 ch. 212 2-86 311.005 1-2 311.014 1-2 ch. 417 Ch. 14 (note) ch. 418 Ch. 10 (note) - 10-2 418.101 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 441.121 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) - 22-1 ch. 501 20-19 606.021 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 851.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 852.001 et seq. 2-196  
Texas Health and Safety Code 
Section Section 
this Code 241.001 et seq. 24-301 242.031 24-301 341.031 et seq. 40-36 ch. 342 Ch. 30 342.001 et seq. 30-20 342.003 30-19 342.004 30-21 342.005 30-26 342.006 30-22-30-24 342.007 30-25 ch. 361 Ch. 32 361.061 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. III 361.801(2) 12-1 ch. 362 Ch. 32 (note) ch. 363 Ch. 32 (note) 363.064 Ch. 32, Art. II 363.111 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. II ch. 365 Ch. 30 (note) - Ch. 32 (note) ch. 431 Ch. 24, Art. III ch. 433 Ch. 24, Art. III ch. 437 Ch. 24, Art. III 753.003 14-42 ch. 791 Ch. 14 (note) ch. 826 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-4  
Texas Human Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 42 24-301  
Texas Local Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 5.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 42.001 et seq. App. B, § 1 51.001 24-300 51.072 24-300 53.001 1-1 54.001 1-16 54.004 Ch. 14 (note) ch. 211 2-77 - 24-312 211.005 App. A, § III - App. A, § V - App. A, § VII- 
App. A, § X - App. A, § XVII - App. A, § VIIIA 211.007 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 3 211.008 App. A, § XIV 211.009 App. A, § XIII 211.011 et seq. App. A (note) 211.012 App. A, § XXI 211.013 App. A, § XX 212.001 et seq. App. B (note) 212.003 App. B, § 1 212.009 App. B, § 3 212.010 App. B, § 3 212.017 App. B, § 3 212.041 App. B, § 1 214.001 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. VI 214.013 Ch. 40, Art. III 215.032 Ch. 24, Art. II 215.074 Ch. 24, Art. II 215.075 Ch. 24 (note) 217.042 Ch. 30 (note) 229.001 26-1 ch. 243 24-300 311.001 et seq. 2-66 370.002 26-3 ch. 371 App. A, § XVI 371.001 et seq. App. B (note) 391.003 2-66 ch. 392 Ch. 18, Art. II 392.001 et seq. 18-19 402.001 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 551.005 12-1  
Texas Natural Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 113 Ch. 14, Art. III 81.001 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II 91.101 32-20  
Texas Occupations Code 
Section Section 
this Code 53.021 Ch. 24 (note) 53.0211 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 1201.001 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 1201.008 Ch. 28 (note) 1201.252 Ch. 28 (note) ch. 1305 Ch. 8, Art. III, Div. 3 1305.201(b) 8-120 ch. 1956 Ch. 24, Art. V ch. 2154 14-5 2154.004 14-5  
Texas Parks and Wildlife Code 
Section Section 
this Code 31.055 20-19  
Texas Penal Code 
Section Section 
this Code 6.02(f) Adopting Ord. - 1-16 ch. 21 24-304 21.02 24-309 ch. 22 24-304 ch. 25 24-304 42.01(a)(8) 26-1 42.09 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) ch. 43 24-304  
Texas Property Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 301 Ch. 18, Art. IV 301.003 18-63 301.021 18-64 301.022 18-64 301.027 18-66 301.041 et seq. 18-67  
Texas Tax Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) - Ch. 36, Art. II 11.13 36-73 11.13(e) Ch. 36, Art. II, Div. 3 31.05(b) 36-42 152.001 36-126 301.001 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 321.001 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. III 321.105 36-98 321.210 36-99 ch. 351 Ch. 36 (note) - Ch. 36, Art. IV 351.006 36-127  
Texas Transportation Code 
Section Section 
this Code 311.001 Ch. 34 (note) 311.004 Ch. 34 (note) 316.001 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) 396.001 Ch. 24, Art. V 502.257 38-199 504.201 38-145 - 38-200 521.292(b) 24-275 541.001 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 542.202 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 542.202(a)(1) Ch. 38, Art. III 542.202(a)(2) 38-3 - 38-49 - Ch. 38, Art. V - Ch. 38, Art. VII 542.202(a)(3) 38-45 542.202(a)(7) 38-41 542.202(a)(8) 38-51, 38-52 542.202(a)(10) 38-42 - 38-52 542.501 38-5 ch. 544 Ch. 38, Art. III 544.001 38-78 545.301 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. V 545.303 38-138 545.305 Ch. 20, Art. II 545.351 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. IV 545.356 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. IV 545.356 38-108 ch. 552 Ch. 38, Art. VI 552.009 38-175 600.001 38-10 681.009 38-145 683.001 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 683.071 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 683.072 20-22 683.073 20-22 683.074 et seq. 20-23 683.075 20-19 683.077 20-19 683.078 20-24  
Texas Water Code 
Section Section 
this Code 16.311 et seq. 16-2 16.315 Ch. 16 (note) ch. 26 32-20  
Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. 
Article Section 
this Code 6701d, § 181 38-8  
