CITY OF CENTER, TEXAS
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-22 (REVISED COPY)
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CENTER, TEXAS, ADOPTING A COMPREHENSIVE ZONING PLAN AND ZONING MAP AND DIVIDING THE CITY INTO SEVERAL DISTRICTS; ESTABLISHING AND PROVIDING FOR ZONING REGULATIONS AND CREATING ZONING DISTRICTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS REGULATING THE USE OF LAND, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; REGULATING THE HEIGHT, SIZE, AND LOCATIONS OF BUILDINGS; ESTABLISHING DENSITY, OPEN SPACE, SCREENING, AND MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS; REGULATING THE ERECTION, REPAIR, AND ALTERATION OF ALL BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; PROVIDING FOR SPECIFIC USE PERMITS FOR CERTAIN USES; RECOGNIZING NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES AND PROVIDING RULES FOR THE REGULATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE; DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS; PROVIDING A METHOD OF AMENDMENT; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SUCH ORDINANCE AND FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF TO PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE VIOLATION OF SAID ORDINANCE; PROVIDING A SAVING CLAUSE; ESTABLISHING THAT THE MEETING AND PUBLIC HEARING FOR ADOPTION OF THIS ORDINANCE WERE PUBLISHED IN CONFORMANCE WITH STATE LAW AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TEXAS OPEN MEETINGS ACT; and PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Center desires to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the property and citizens of the City of Center under authority granted by Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code in accordance with the City’s most recent Comprehensive Plan;
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Center created the Planning and Zoning Commission by Ordinance 2005-1 with the intent to investigate and draft a proposed zoning ordinance;
WHEREAS, the Center Planning and Zoning Commission has met during the course of the last sixteen months to develop and review regulations governing land uses and property requirements to create a final recommendation to the City Council;
WHEREAS, a public hearing as required by Ch. 211 of the Local Government Code was held during an open meeting and published in accordance with the laws governing the adoption of zoning regulations within the City.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CENTER, TEXAS, THAT:
SECTION 1. The City of Center Zoning Regulations, attached hereto and considered included as a part of this ordinance as if incorporated fully herein, are approved and adopted as the regulations governing land use and zoning within the City of Center.
SECTION 2. The City of Center Zoning Map, dated October 23, 2006 and considered included
as a part of this ordinance as if incorporated fully herein, is approved and adopted as the zoning map for all properties within the City of Center.
SECTION 3. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. This ordinance shall be deemed and interpreted to override or amend any other ordinances, regulations, policies or laws with which it is in conflict and any and all such ordinance, regulations, policies and laws shall be deemed temporarily suspended until this ordinance is repealed by official action of the City Council of the City of Center.
SECTION 5. That the City Secretary is hereby ordered and directed to cause this ordinance to be published in conformity with the City Charter and laws of the State of Texas.
SECTION 6. That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2007.
SECTION 7. That the meetings at which this ordinance was considered, discussed and approved and the public hearing on this ordinance were open to the public and properly posted in conformity to the Texas Open Meetings Act and other laws of the State of Texas and the City Charter.
RECOMMENDED FOR ACCEPTANCE by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Center, Texas, on the _____ day of _________, 200__.
ATTEST: SIGNED:
_____________________________ _____________________
Larry Smith, Vice Chair Stephen Shires, Chairman
PASSED AND APPROVED by vote of the City Council of the City of Center, Texas, on this the ___ day of ___________, 2006.
ATTEST: SIGNED:
________________________ _______________________
Terre Noble, City Secretary John D. Windham, Mayor
CITY OF CENTER
ZONING REGULATIONS
CURRENT PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Stephen Shires – Chairman
John Howard – Vice Chairman
Lee Lunsford
Rachel Campbell
Alma Jaimes
Lori Oliver
Larry Ballard
Deborah Johnson
ORIGINAL PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Stephen Shires – Chairman
Larry Smith – Vice Chairman
Buster Bounds
Lisa Christian
Jack Hawkins
John Howard
Joyce Johnson
Rochelle McClelland
Mattie Perkins
FINANCED THROUGH THE OFFICE OF RURAL COMMUNITY AFFAIRS OF THE STATE OF TEXAS
The preparation of this document was financed through provisions of a Texas Community Development Program Grant from the U.S. Department of Housing and Community Affairs.
The Texas Office of Rural Community Affairs (ORCA) in conjunction with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, furnished financial support to the activity described in the publication which does not necessarily indicate the concurrence of ORCA or of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, with the statements or conclusions in this publication.
This ordinance was developed with the assistance of Gary Traylor and Associates, Tyler, Texas and Tim F. Glendening and Associates, Plano, Texas.
-4-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 TITLE
SECTION 2 PURPOSE
SECTION 3 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
3.1 Zoning Districts Identified
3.2 Description and Purpose of Zoning Districts
SECTION 4 ZONING DISTRICT MAP
4.1 Zoning District Boundaries Delineated on Zoning District Map
4.2. Regulations for Maintaining Zoning District Map
SECTION 5 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
5.1. Rules for Determining District Boundaries
SECTION 6 ZONING OF ANNEXED TERRITORY
6.1 Permanent Zoning Concurrent With Zoning
6.2 Temporary Classification
6.3 Regulations in Areas Temporarily Classified
SECTION 7 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS
7.1 Compliance With Zoning Regulations Required
7.2 Building Permits Prohibited Without Plat
7.3 Exclusions
7.4 Main Buildings
SECTION 8 A -- AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
8.1. General Purpose and Description
8.2. Permitted Uses
8.3. Permitted Specific Uses
8.4. Height and Area Regulations
8.5 Parking Regulations
SECTION 9 SF-E -- SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - ESTATE DISTRICT
9.1 General Purpose and Description
9.2 Permitted Uses
9.3 Permitted Specific Uses
9.4 Height and Area Regulations
9.5 Parking Regulations
SECTION 10 SF-1 -- SINGE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - 1
10.1 General Purpose and Description
-5-
10.2 Permitted Uses
10.3 Permitted Specific Uses
10.4 Height and Area Regulations
10.5 Parking Regulations
SECTION 11 SF-2 -- SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT -- 2
11.1 General Purpose and Description
11.2 Permitted Uses
11.3 Permitted Specific Uses
11.4 Height and Area Regulations
11.5 Parking Regulations
SECTION 12 TF -- TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (DUPLEX) DISTRICT
12.1 General Purpose and Description
12.2 Permitted Uses
12.3 Permitted Specific Uses
12.4 Height and Area Regulations
12.5 Parking Regulations
SECTION 13 MH-1 -- MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT
13.1 General Purpose and Description
13.2 Permitted Uses
13.3 Permitted Specific Uses
13.4 Height and Area Regulations
13.5 Parking Requirements
13.6 Additional Restrictions Applicable to MH-1 District
SECTION 14 MH-2 -- MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT
14.1 General Purpose and Description
14.2 Permitted Uses
14.3 Permitted Specific Uses
14.4 Height and Area Regulations
14.5 Parking Requirements
14.6 Additional Restrictions Applicable to Mobile Home Park District
SECTION 15 MF -- MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
15.1 General Purpose and Description
15.2 Permitted Uses
15.3 Permitted Specific Uses
15.4 Height and Area Regulations
15.5 Parking Regulations
15.6 Refuse Facilities
15.7 Screening Fence
15.8 Special Fire Protection Requirements
-6-
SECTION 16 C-1 -- COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - OFFICE, LIGHT RETAIL, AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES
16.1 General Purpose and Description
16.2 Permitted Uses
16.3 Permitted Specific Uses
16.4 Height and Area Regulations
16.5 Parking Regulations
SECTION 17 C-2 -- GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
17.1 General Purpose and Description
17.2 Permitted Uses
17.3 Permitted Specific Uses
17.4 Height and Area Regulation
17.5 Parking Requirements
17.6 Fencing Regulations
SECTION 18 M-1 -- MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT -- LIGHT
18.1 General Purpose and Description
18.2 Permitted Uses
18.3 Permitted Specific Uses
18.4 Height and Area Regulations
18.5 Parking Regulations
SECTION 19 M-2 -- MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT -- HEAVY
19.1 General Purpose and Description
19.2 Permitting Uses
19.3 Permitted Specific Uses
19.4 Height and Area Regulations
19.5 Parking Regulations
SECTION 20 PD -- PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
20.1 General Purpose and Description
20.2 Permitted Uses
20.3 Development Standards
20.4 Conceptual and Development Plan
20.5 Written Report May Be Required
20.6 Planned Developments To Be Recorded
SECTION 21 FP -- FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
21.1 General Purpose and Description
21.2 Permitted Uses
21.3 City Council Approval Required
SECTION 22 USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
-7-
SECTION 23 DESCRIPTIONS/DEFINITIONS OF USES
23.1 Residential Users
23.2 Educational, Institutional, and Special Uses
23.3 Transportation, Utility and Communications Uses
23.4 Automobile and Related Service Uses
23.5 Retail and Service Type Uses
23.6 Manufacturing, Storage, and Warehousing Uses
23.7 Accessory Uses
SECTION 24 SPECIAL USES
24.1 Child Care Centers
24.2 Construction Yards, Field Offices, and Other Temporary Buildings
24.3 Radio, Television, and Microwave Towers
24.4 Residence Hotels
24.5 Garden (Patio) Homes
24.6 Multifamily Residence
24.7 Service Stations
24.8 Swimming Pools
24.9 Fences
24.10 Off Premises Signs
24.11 Portable/Pre-Manufactured Buildings
SECTION 25 SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
25.1 General Provision
25.2 Specific Use Permit Regulations
SECTION 26 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
26.1 Purpose
26.2 Special Off-Street Parking Provisions - All Districts
26.3 Size of Space
26.4 Parking Area Standards
26.5 Off-Street Parking Incidental to Main Use
26.6 Schedule of Parking Requirements Based on Use
26.7 Off-Street Parking Requirements for Uses Not Listed
26.8 Rules for Computing Number of Parking Spaces
26.9 Location of Parking Spaces
26.10 Use of Parking Spaces - All Districts
26.11 Special Off-Street Parking Regulations
26.12 Design Standards For Parking Structures
26.13 Off-Street Loading
26.14 Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Facilities
SECTION 27 ACCESSORY BUILDING REGULATIONS
-8-
27.1 Height
27.2 Area Regulations for Accessory Buildings or Structures in Residential and Apartment Districts
SECTION 28 PLATTING PROPERTY IS PERMANENTLY ZONED
28.1 Zoning Required Prior to Approval of Plat
28.2 Annexation Prior to Approval of Plat
28.3 Contemporaneous Action on Zoning and Annexation
SECTION 29 CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES
29.1 Procedure For Classifying New/Unlisted Uses
SECTION 30 CREATION OF BUILDING SITE
30.1 Procedure for Creating Building Site/Lot
SECTION 31 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
31.1 Uses in Existence at Time of Adoption of Ordinance
31.2 Expansion of Non-Conforming Use Prohibited
31.3 Repairs/Normal Maintenance on Non-Conforming Uses Permitted
31.4 Change of Non-Conforming to Conforming Use
31.5 Abandonment/Discontinuation of Non-Conforming Use
31.6 Accidental Destruction of Non-Conforming Use
31.7 Replacement of Non-Conforming HUD-Code Manufactured Home
31.8 Transfer of Property with a Non-Conforming Use
SECTION 32 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
32.1 Organization and Appointment
32.2 Duties and Authority
SECTION 33 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
33.1 Creation, Membership and Procedures
33.2 Powers and Duties of Board
33.3 Appeals
33.4 Variances
35.5 Changes
SECTION 34 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL DEFINITIONS
34.1 General Rules of Construction
34.2 Special Definitions
SECTION 35 BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
35.1 General Requirements
35.2 Procedure for New or Altered Buildings
35.3 Procedure for Vacant Land or a Change in Use
-9-
35.4 Contents of Certificate of Occupancy
35.5 Temporary Certificate
35.6 Certificates for Non-Conforming Uses
SECTION 36 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO ALL ZONING ORDINANCES AND DISTRICTS AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
36.1 Declaration of Policy
36.2 Authority to Amend Ordinance
36.3 Public Hearing and Notice
36.4 Action of the City Council
36.5 Effect of Denial of Petition
36.6 Final approval and Ordinance Adoption
36.7 Changes in Zoning Regulations
SECTION 37 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
SECTION 38 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
SECTION 39 VALIDITY, SEVERANCE AND CONFLICT
SECTION 40 EFFECTIVITY DATE
-10-
SECTION 1 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Center Zoning Ordinance".
-11-
SECTION 2 PURPOSE
Zoning Regulations and Districts are herein established in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, well-being and general welfare of the citizens of the City. They are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, and to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been established with reasonable consideration for the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
-12-
SECTION 3 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
3.1 Zoning Districts Identified
The City of Center, Texas, is hereby divided into zoning districts as listed in the section.
ABBREVIATED
DESIGNATION ZONING DISTRICT NAME
A Agricultural District
SF-E Single Family Residential District - Estate
SF-1 Single Family Residential District - 1
SF-2 Single Family Residential District - 2
TF Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
MH-1 Manufactured Home District
MH-2 Manufactured Home Park District
MF Multifamily District
C-1 Commercial District - Office, Light Retail, and Neighborhood Services
C-2 Commercial District - General
M-1 Manufacturing/Industrial District – Light
M-2 Manufacturing/Industrial District - Heavy
PD Planned Development District
FP Flood Plain District
3.2 Description and Purpose of Zoning Districts
A -- Agricultural District: This district provides for the continuance of farming, ranching, and gardening activities on land being utilized for these purposes. When land in an Agricultural District is needed for urban purposes, it is anticipated the zoning will be changed to the appropriate zoning district(s) to provide for orderly growth and development in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. See Section 8 for A --
-13-
Agricultural District regulations.
SF-E -- Single Family Residential District - Estate: The SF-E district provides for residential development on large lots with a minimum building site of 35,000 square feet. Density in this district will be no greater than two (2) units per one (1) gross acres. See Section 9 for SF-E -- Single Family Residential District - Estate regulations.
SF-1 -- Single Family Residential District - 1: The SF-1 district provides for a minimum residential building site of 7,500 square feet. Density in this district will be no greater than four (4) units per gross acre. See Section 10 for SF-1 -- Single Family Residential District regulations.
SF-2 -- Single Family Residential District - 2: The SF-2 district provides for a minimum residential building site of 5,000 square feet and permits residential development of densities not to exceed six (6) units per gross acre. See Section 11 for SF-2 -- Single Family Residential District regulations.
TF -- Two Family Residential (Duplex) District: The TF district provides for stable, quality residential development, including duplex, garden (patio) home, and similar residential development with densities not exceeding twelve (12) units per gross acre. See Section 12 for TF -- Two Family Residential (Duplex) District regulations. 2 Units = 1 Duplex.
MH-1 -- Manufactured Home District. The MH-1 district provides an area for the placement of manufactured home and modular home units in subdivisions in which most lots and housing units are owner-occupied. Densities in this district will be comparable to that of the SF-2 District. See Section 13 for MH-1 -- Manufactured Home Subdivision District regulations.
MH-2 -- Manufactured Home Park District. The MH-2 district establishes a category in which manufactured home park development with a maximum density of approximately eight (8) - ten (10) units per gross acre can occur. See Section 14 for MH-2 -- Manufactured Home Park District regulations.
MF -- Multifamily District. The MF district permits multifamily developments of maximum densities of fifteen (15) units per acre, except under special mitigation conditions. See Section 15 for MF -- Multiple-Family Dwelling District regulations.
C-1 -- Commercial District - Office, Light, Retail, and Neighborhood Services. Retail, commercial, and office uses developed under the standards of the C-1 District are designed to provide a compatible relationship between the C-1 development and adjacent residential areas. See Section 16 for C-1 Commercial District - Office, Light Retail, and Neighborhood Services regulations.
C-2 -- Commercial District - General: Uses which require considerable space for
-14-
display, sales, or open storage, or by the nature of the use are generally not compatible with residential uses are located in the C-2 Commercial District. See Section 17 for C-2 -- General Commercial District regulations.
M-1 -- Manufacturing/Industrial District - Light: The Light Manufacturing/Industrial District is established to accommodate uses of a non-nuisance type located in relative proximity to residential and C-1 business areas. Development in the M-1 district is limited primarily to certain wholesale, jobbing and warehouse uses and certain specialized manufacturing and research uses of a type which will not create nuisances. See Section 18 for M-1 -- Manufacturing/Industrial District - Light regulations.
M-2 -- Manufacturing/Industrial District - Heavy: The Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial District is established to accommodate industrial uses not appropriate for inclusion in the M-1 district and likely to create noise, traffic, odor and/or other conditions incompatible with most residential and commercial uses. See Section 19 for M-2 -- Manufacturing/Industrial District - Heavy regulations.
PD -- Planned Development District: The Planned Development District provides a zoning category for the planning and development of larger tracts of land for tracts of land with unique characteristics for a single use or combination of uses requiring flexibility and variety in design to achieve orderly development with due respect to the protection of surrounding property. See Section 20 for PD - Planned Development District regulations.
FP -- Flood Plain District: Zoning districts located in flood hazard areas which are subject to periodic inundation shall be preceded by the prefix FP, indicating a sub-district. Areas designated FP may be used only for those uses listed n the provisions of Section 21 until a use in any area or any portion thereof located in FP sub-district has been approved by the City Council. Approval shall only be given after engineering studies determine that the area, or any portion thereof, is suitable for uses in the district, and building construction or development would not create an obstruction to drainage nor a hazard to life or property, and that such construction is not contrary to the public interest. See Section 21 for FP -- Flood Plain District regulations.
-15-
SECTION 4 ZONING DISTRICT MAP
4.1. Zoning District Boundaries Delineated on Zoning District Map
The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the Zoning District Map of the City of Center, Texas, said map being hereby adopted as part of this ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.
4.2. Regulations for Maintaining Zoning District Map
Two (2) original, official, and identical copies of the Zoning District Map are hereby adopted bearing the signature of the Mayor and attestation of the City Secretary and shall be filed and maintained as follows:
4.2.1. One copy shall be filed with the City Secretary, to be retained as the original record and shall not be changed in any manner.
4.2.2. One copy shall be filed with the Building Official and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments for observation in issuing building permits and for enforcing the Zoning Ordinance. A written record (logbook) shall be kept by the Building Official of all changes made to the Zoning District Map.
4.2.3. Reproductions of the official Zoning District Map may be made for information purposes.
-16-
SECTION 5 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
5.1. Rules for Determining District Boundaries
The district boundary lines shown on the zoning district map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
5.1.1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerline of such street, highway, or alley.
5.1.2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines.
5.1.3. Boundaries indicted as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits.
5.1.4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad or utility lines shall be construed to be the centerline of the right-of-way; if no centerline is established, the boundary shall be interpreted to be midway between the right-of-way lines.
5.1.5. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in 5.1.1. through 5.1.5. above shall be construed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, by official action. Distances not specifically indicated on the original Zoning Map shall be determined for the graphic scale on the map.
5.1.6. Reserved
5.1.7 Whenever a street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council, or whenever a street or alley area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley, or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley, or way, and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
5.1.8. Where physical features of the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning district map, or if there arises a question as to how a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections 5.1.1. through 5.1.7., or the zoning of property is invalidated by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the property shall be considered as classified A -- Agricultural District, temporarily. In an area determined to be temporarily classified as A -- Agricultural District, no person shall construct, add or to alter any building or structure or cause the sale to be
-17-
done, nor shall any use be located therein or on the land which is not permitted in an A -- Agricultural District, unless and until such territory has been zoned to permit such use by the City Council. It shall be the duty of the City Council to determine a permanent zoning for such area as soon as practicable, generally within sixty (60) days, absent extenuating circumstances.
-18-
SECTION 6 ZONING OF ANNEXED TERRITORY
6.1. Permanent Zoning Concurrent With Zoning
An area or areas being annexed to the City of Center shall be given permanent zoning concurrently with the annexation.
6.2. Temporary Classification
In instances in which the zoning of an annexed territory concurrently with the annexation is impractical, due to litigation or other extenuating circumstances, the annexed territory shall be temporarily classified as A -- Agricultural District, until permanent zoning is established by the City Council. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations. The City Council shall determine a permanent zoning for such area as soon as practicable after annexation.
6.3. Regulations in Areas Temporarily Classified
In an area temporarily classified as A -- Agricultural District:
6.3.1. No person shall erect, construct, or proceed or continue with the erection or construction of any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the City of Center without first applying for and obtaining a building permit or certificate of occupancy from the building official or the City Council, as may be required.
6.3.2. No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the Building Official other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building permitted in a zoning district other than the Agricultural District in the manner prescribed by law.
-19-
SECTION 7 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS
7.1 Compliance With Zoning Regulations Required
All land, buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereon located within the City of Center which are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished, or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished, or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located as hereinafter provided, including causing a non-compliant use to cease immediately and/or causing any structure to be made compliant with these zoning ordinances.
7.1.1 Should any be converted in a manner not in compliance, the City Attorney is authorized to seek an immediate injunction to remedy the non-compliance.
7.2 Building Permits Prohibited Without Plat
No permit for the construction or placement of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued unless the plot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council and filed in the Plat Records of county or counties in which the plot or tract is located. (Ord. No. 2007-16 § 9a, 10-22-07)
7.3 Exclusions
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of a building under construction at the time of the passage of this ordinance and which entire building shall be completed within one (1) year from the date of passage of this ordinance.
7.4 7.4 Main Buildings (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 1, 05-12-2008)
7.4.1 Definitions (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 1, 05-12-2008)
For Section 7.4, the following terms are defined:
“Lot” or “Tract” is defined as a unit, piece, or parcel of divided real property, which has been denoted and described in a written instrument of conveyance that has been duly and properly filed with the Shelby County Clerk in the Real property, Probate, or Public Records of Shelby County, Texas. (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 1, 05-12-2008)
“Main Building” is defined as the building on a lot or tract that is occupied by the primary use of the lot or tract. (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 1, 05-12-2008)
7.4.2 Residential Districts
-20-
Only one main building for one family or two family use, with permitted accessory buildings, may be located upon a lot or tract in residential districts. Every dwelling shall face or front upon a public street or approved place other than an alley, which street or approved place shall have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet and generally meet construction standards and specifications. (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 1, 05-12-2008)
7.4.3 Commercial and Manufacturing Districts
There may be more than one main building in a commercial or manufacturing district. Whenever two or more main buildings, or portions thereof, are placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings will not face upon a public street, the same may be permitted only when the site plan for such development is approved by the City Council. If one or more of the multiple main buildings are manufactured buildings, they must meet the requirements set forth in Section 27.3.2. (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 1, 05-12-2008)
7.5 Computation of Required Open Space
No parking area, storage area, or required open space for one building shall be computed as being the open space, yard, or area requirements for any other dwelling or other use.
7.6 Remedy will be to authorize the City Attorney to file an ex parte injunction.
-21-
SECTION 8 A -- AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
8.1. General Purpose and Description
The Agricultural District is intended to apply to land situated on the fringe of an urban area, used for agricultural purposes, and which may become an urban area in the future. Therefore, the agricultural activities conducted in the Agricultural District should not be detrimental to urban land uses and intensity of use permitted in this district is intended to encourage and protect agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate change in district classification is made.
8.2. Permitted Uses
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes:
8.2.1. Single-family dwellings on building lots of two (2) acres or more in areas where said dwellings can be adequately served by city utilities or septic tanks located on the building lot.
8.2.2 Telephone exchange and utility service building, provided no public business and repair or outside storage facilities are maintained; gas lines; and gas regulating stations.
8.2.3. Accessory buildings and structures clearly incidental to agricultural operations, including but not limited to barns, stables, equipment sheds, granaries, private garages, pump houses, and servants quarters not for rent, provided that the total area of buildings and structures shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the gross land area of tract.
8.2.4. Metal buildings of less than six hundred (600) square feet which are used for tool and supply storage.
8.2.5. Riding academy or other equestrian related activities.
8.2.6. Other uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
8.3. Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific use shall be permitted in the Agricultural District, when granted in accordance with Section 25:
8.3.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
8.4. Height and Area Regulations
-22-
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
-23-
SECTION 9 SF-E -- SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - ESTATE DISTRICT
9.1. General Purpose and Description
The Single Family Residential - Estate District is designed to accommodate single family residential development on large lots. The district can be appropriately located in proximity to agricultural and standard single family residential uses. Densities in this district will not exceed two (2) units per gross acre.
9.2. Permitted Uses
A building or premise in an SF-E District shall be used only for the following purposes:
9.2.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
9.3. Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in an SF-E District, when granted in accordance with Section 25;
9.3.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
9.4. Height and Area Regulations
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
9.5. Parking Regulations
A minimum of two (2) parking spaces for single family dwelling units. Other off-street parking space regulations are set forth in Section 26.
-24-
SECTION 10 SF-1 -- SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - 1
10.1. General Purpose and Description
The Single Family Residential District - 1 is designed to accommodate the standard single family residential development. The district can be appropriately located in proximity to multifamily residential areas and certain neighborhood local retail and office uses. Densities in this district will not exceed four (4) units per gross acre.
10.2 Permitted Uses.
A building or premise in an SF-1 District shall be used only for the following purposes:
10.2.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
10.3. Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in an SF-1 District, when granted in accordance with Section 25:
10.3.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
10.4 Height and Area Regulations:
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
10.5 Parking Regulations
A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided per unit behind the building line. Other off-street parking space regulations are set forth in Section 26.
-25-
SECTION 11 SF-2 -- SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT -- 2
11.1 General Purpose and Description
The Single Family Residential District - 2 is intended to provide for medium density single family residential development. This district functions as a buffer or transition between major streets, non-residential areas and lower density residential areas. Density in this district will not exceed six (6) units per gross acre.
11.2. Permitted Uses
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes:
11.2.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
11.3. Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in an SF-2 district, when granted in accordance with Section 25:
11.3.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
11.4 Height and Area Regulations:
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, And Coverage Regulations.
11.5. Parking Regulations
A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided per unit behind the front yard line. Other off-street parking space regulations are set forth in Section 26.
-26-
SECTION 12 TF -- TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (DUPLEX) DISTRICT
12.1. General Purpose and Description
The purpose of the Two Family Residential (Duplex) District is to promote stable, quality residential development of slightly increased densities. Consistent with the city's Comprehensive Plan, this district may be used as a "buffer" district between low density and high density districts or between residential and non-residential districts. Density shall not exceed twelve (12) units per acre. (Ord. No. 2007-16 § 9b, 10-22-2007)
12.2 Permitted Uses
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes:
12.2.1. Uses as listed in Section 22.
12.3 Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in the TF District, when granted in accordance with Section 25:
12.3.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
12.4. Height and Area Regulations
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, ad Coverage Regulations.
12.5. Parking Regulations
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for uses set forth in Section 26.
-27-
SECTION 13 MH-1 -- MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT
13.1. General Purpose and Description
The Manufactured Home District is intended to provide for quality mobile home subdivision development containing many of the characteristics and the atmosphere of a standard single family subdivision. Density shall be the same as shown in SF2 District, six (6) units per gross acre.
13.2. Permitted Uses
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes:
13.2.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
13.3. Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in the MH-1 District, when granted in accordance with Section 25:
13.3.1 Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
13.4. Height and Area Regulations
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
13.5 Parking Requirements
Two (2) spaces shall be provided per unit located on the lot plus additional spaces for accessory uses as required in Section 26, and behind the front yard line.
13.6 Additional Restrictions Applicable to MH-1 District
13.6.1. Manufactured housing design and construction will comply with construction and safety standards published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the requirements of the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and all manufactured homes will be subject to inspection by the Building Official.
13.6.2. All manufactured homes shall be set on solid concrete slab of four (4) inches thickness structure or 18" to 20" runners of same materials, or each contact point with the ground will be on eighteen (18) by eighteen (18) by four (4) inch pads, of like or better materials. Additional rooms and enclosed porches shall be constructed on a solid slab of like materials.
13.6.3. Tie-downs will be required and will be secured prior to occupancy.
-28-
13.6.4. Underpinning and skirting of like material and color or better is required and will be installed prior to occupancy.
13.6.5. Accessory buildings will be either manufactured or constructed in accordance with city codes.
13.6.6. All manufactured homes and modular homes shall comply with all regulations of the State of Texas and such regulations are hereby incorporated into this section.
-29-
SECTION 14 MH-2 -- MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT
14.1 General Purpose and Description
The Manufactured Home Park District is intended to provide for quality mobile home park development and maintenance. Manufactured home parks are defined as tracts or units of land under sole ownership where lots are rented or leased as space to be used for placement of a manufactured home.
14.2 Permitted Uses
A building or lot shall be used only for the following purposes:
14.2.1. Manufactured home park of not less than three (3) nor more than ten (10) acres in size.
14.2.2. Uses normally accessory to a manufactured home park, including office and/or maintenance buildings for management and maintenance of the park only, recreation buildings and swimming pools, private clubs, laundry facilities, storage facilities, and recreation areas for use by the residents of the park.
14.2.3. Other uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
14.3 Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in the MH-2 District when granted in accordance with Section 25:
14.3.1. Boat and recreational vehicle and travel trailer storage yard.
14.3.2. Travel trailer and commercial overnight camping park.
14.3.3. Other uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
14.4. Height and Area Regulations
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
14.5. Parking Requirements
Two (2) spaces shall be provided per unit located on the lot plus additional spaces for accessory uses as required in Section 26.
14.6. Additional Restrictions Applicable to Mobile Home Park District
14.6.1. Manufactured housing design and construction will comply with construction and safety standards published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the requirements of the National Mobile Home and
-30-
Safety Standards Act of 1974 and all manufactured homes will be subject to inspection by the Building Official.
14.6.2. All manufactured homes shall be set on a solid slab structure and/or 18" to 20" runners. Additional rooms and enclosed porches shall be constructed on a solid slab.
14.6.3. Tie-downs will be required and will be secured prior to occupancy of all manufactured homes.
14.6.4. Underpinning and skirting of like material and color or better will be required and will be installed prior to occupancy of all manufactured homes.
14.6.5. Accessory buildings will be either manufactured or constructed in accordance with city codes.
14.6.6. All manufactured homes and modular homes shall comply with all regulations of the State of Texas and such regulations are hereby incorporated into this section.
14.6.7 An eight foot (8’) fence that completely screens/obstructs the view of manufactured home parks, from public areas.
( (Ord. No. 2007-16, § 7, 10-22-2007)
-31-
SECTION 15 MF -- MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
15.1 General Purpose and Description
The Multifamily Residential District is intended to provide for medium to higher density residential development. This district functions as a buffer or transition between major streets, non-residential areas, or higher density residential areas and lower density residential areas. Density in this district does not ordinarily exceed fifteen (15) units per gross acre but can reach a maximum of twenty-five (25) units per gross acre if special fire protection requirements are observed (see Section 15.8).
15.2 Permitted Uses
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes:
15.2.1. Three (3) or more single family attached dwelling units, provided that no more than seven (7) dwelling units are attached in one continuous row or group.
15.2.2. Other uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
15.3 Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted when granted in accordance with Section 25:
15.3.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
15.4 Height and Area Regulations
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
When buildings exceed one (1) story in height, such buildings shall be constructed in accordance with existing building and fire codes.
15.5 Parking Regulations
Two and one-half (2.5) off-street parking spaces shall be provided per unit. One (1) and one-half (.5) parking spaces for each dwelling unit, plus one-half (.5) space for each individual bedroom in all dwelling units. No parking spaces shall be provided within the required front yard. Required parking may not be provided within the required front yard. Other off-street parking spaces regulations are set forth in Section 26. (Ord. No. 2009-2, § 1, 02-19-2009)
15.6 Refuse Facilities
Every dwelling unit in a multifamily complex shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian and vehicular travel way. There shall be available at all times at least one six (6) cubic yard refuse
-32-
container on a cement pad per thirty (30) multifamily dwelling units. For complexes with less than thirty (30) units, no less than four (4) cubic yards of refuse container shall be provided. Each refuse facility shall be screened for view on three (3) sides from persons standing at ground level on the site or immediately adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six (6) feet in height or by an enclosure within a building. Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy city public health and sanitary regulations. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies.
15.7 Screening Fence
Border fencing of wood or masonry of not less than six (6) feet in height shall be installed by the builder at the time of construction of any multifamily complex, along the property line on any perimeter not abutting a public street or right-of-way or less restrictive land use. This fence shall be maintained throughout the existence of the multifamily complex by the owner of the complex.
15.8 Special Fire Protection Requirements
Whenever densities of greater than fifteen (15) units per acre are present, each building in the development shall at the time of the construction, and thereafter be operated in accordance with generally accepted model building and fire safety codes, with the approval of the City Fire Marshal.
-33-
SECTION 16 C-1 -- COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - OFFICE, LIGHT RETAIL, AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES
16.1 General Purpose and Description
The Commercial District -1 is intended for office facilities, neighborhood shopping facilities, and retail and commercial facilities of a service character. The C-1 District is established to accommodate the daily and frequent needs of the community. The following regulations shall be applicable to all uses in the district:
(Ord. No. 2007-16 § 9c, 10-22-07)
16.1.1. The business shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building;
16.1.2 Required yards shall not be used for display, sale, or storage or merchandise or for the storage of vehicles, equipment, containers, or waste material;
16.1.3 All merchandise shall be sold at retail on the premises; and
16.1.4 All such use shall not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration, or similar nuisance.
16.2 Permitted Uses
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes:
16.2.1. Discount, variety, or department store of not greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet floor space.
16.2.2. Food store with floor space not greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
16.2.3. Gasoline service station (no garage or automobile repair facilities).
16.2.4. Other uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
16.3 Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in the C-1 District, when granted in accordance with Section 25:
16.3.1. Broadcasting facilities, radios, television, or microwave tower.
16.3.2 Gasoline service station with associated minor automobile repair facility with floor space not greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
16.3.3. Other uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
-34-
16.4 Height and Area Regulations
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
16.5 Parking Regulations
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in Section 26.
16.6 Fencing Regulations
If the business requires twelve (12) or more parking spaces, and abuts a residential district, fencing, in accordance with Section 15.7, is required.
-35-
SECTION 17 C-2 -- GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
17.1 General Purpose and Description
The General Commercial District is intended to provide a zoning category similar to the C-1 District, except that additional uses are permitted which are not generally carried on completely within a building or structure and an expanded range of service and repair uses is permitted.
17.2 Permitted Uses
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes:
17.2.1 Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
17.3 Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in a C-2 District, when granted in accordance with Section 25:
17.3.1. Other uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
17.4 Height and Area Regulation
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
17.5. Parking Requirements
Off-street parking requirements shall be provided in accordance with Section 26.
17.6. Fencing Regulations
Section 15.7 shall be complied with where the property abuts any lower intensity use zone (any residential zone).
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 7, 10-22-2007)
-36-
SECTION 18 M-1 -- MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT -- LIGHT
18.1 General Purpose and Description
The Light Manufacturing/Industrial District is established to accommodate those uses which are a non-nuisance type located in relative proximity to residential areas, and to preserve and protect land designated on the Comprehensive Plan for industrial development and use from the intrusion of certain incompatible uses which might impede the development and use of lands for industrial purposes. Development in the M-1 District is limited primarily to certain storage, wholesale, and industrial uses, such as the fabrication of materials, and specialized manufacturing and research institutions, all of a non-nuisance type. No use or types of uses specifically limited to the M-2 District may be permitted in the M-1 District.
Uses permitted in the M-1 District are subject to the following conditions:
18.1.1. All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street loading, display or merchandise for sale to the public, and establishments of the "drive-in" type, shall be conducted within completely enclosed areas.
18.1.2. All storage within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district, except for motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or completely obscured from view with screening not less than six (6) feet in height, provided no storage located within fifty (50) feet of such screening shall exceed the height of screening.
18.1.3. Permitted uses in the M-1 District shall not disseminate dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or other atmospheric influence.
18.1.4. Permitted uses in the M-1 District shall produce no noise exceeding in intensity, at the boundary of the property, the average intensity of noise of street traffic.
18.1.5. Permitted uses in the M-1 District shall not create fire hazards on surrounding property.
18.2 Permitted Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in the M-1 District:
18.2.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
18.3 Permitted Specific Uses
Other specific uses shall be permitted in the M-1 District when granted in accordance with Section 25:
-37-
18.3.1. Machine shops and fabrication of metal not more than ten (10) gauge in thickness.
18.3.2. Accessory uses, including but not limited to temporary buildings for construction purpose for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction.
18.3.3. Factory outlet retail or wholesale store for the sales and servicing of goods or materials on the same premises as the manufacturing company to which they are related, including sales and service in a separate building or buildings.
18.3.4. Railroad freight terminals, railroad switching and classification yards, repair shops, and roundhouses.
18.3.5. Other uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
18.4 Height and Area Regulations
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
18.5 Parking Regulations
Off-street parking requirements shall be provided in accordance with the specific uses set forth in Section 26.
-38-
SECTION 19 M-2 -- MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT -- HEAVY
19.1 General Purpose and Description
The Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial District is established to accommodate most industrial uses and protect such areas from the intrusion of certain incompatible uses which might impede the development and use of lands for industrial purposes.
Uses permitted in the M-2 District are subject to the following conditions:
19.1.1. All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking, off-street loading, display of merchandise for sale to the public, and establishments of the "drive-in" type, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise indicated.
19.1.2. All storage within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district, except for motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively, screened with screening not less than six (6) feet in height, provided no storage located within fifty (50) feet of such screening shall exceed the height of such screening.
19.1.3. All uses permitted in the M-2 district must meet the following performance standards and any appropriate city ordinances:
19.1.3.a. Smoke: No operation shall be conducted unless it conforms to the standards established by any applicable state and federal health rules and regulations pertaining to emission of particulate matter;
19.1.3.b. Particulate Matter: No operation shall be conducted unless it conforms to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations pertaining to emission of particulate matter;
19.1.3.c. Dust, Odor, Gas, Fumes, Glare, or Vibration: No emission of these matters shall result in a concentration at or beyond the property line which is detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or which causes injury or damage to property; said emissions shall in all cases conform to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations pertaining to said emissions;
19.1.3.d. Radiation Hazards and Electrical Disturbances: No operation shall be conducted unless it conforms to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations pertaining to radiation control;
19.1.3.e. Noise. No operation shall be conducted in a manner so that any noise produced is objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness. Sound levels of noise at the property line shall not exceed 75 db(A) permitted for a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes in any one (1) hour; said operation shall
-39-
in all cases conform to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations and to other city ordinances pertaining to noise; and
19.1.3.f. Water Pollution: No water pollution or wastewater discharge shall be emitted by manufacturing or other processing. In a case in which potential hazards exist, it shall be necessary to install safeguards acceptable to the appropriate State and national health and environmental protection agencies prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The applicant shall have the burden of establishing that said safeguards are acceptable to said agency or agencies.
19.2 Permitting Uses
The following uses shall be permitted:
19.2.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
19.3 Permitted Specific Uses
The following specific uses shall be permitted in the M-2 District when granted in accordance with Section 25:
19.3.1. Uses as listed in Section 22 of this ordinance.
Other manufacturing and industrial uses which do not meet the general definition for manufacturing processes may be permitted by the City Council after public hearing and review of the particular operational characteristics of each such use, and other pertinent data affecting the community's general welfare. Approval of uses under this section shall be made in accordance with Section 33.2.2.6
19.4 Height and Area Regulations
See Appendix 1, Area, Setback, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
19.5 Parking Regulations
Required off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the specific uses set forth in Section 26.
-40-
SECTION 20 PD -- PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
20.1 General Purpose and Description
The Planned Development District "PD" prefix is intended to provide for combining and mixing of uses allowed in various districts with appropriate regulations and to permit flexibility in the use and design of land and buildings in situations where modification of specific provisions of this ordinance is not contrary to its intent and purpose or significantly inconsistent with the planning on which it is based and will not be harmful to the community. A PD District may be used to permit new and innovative concepts in land utilization. While great flexibility is given to provide special restrictions which will allow development not otherwise permitted, procedures are established herein to insure against misuse of the increased flexibility.
20.2. Permitted Uses
Any use specified in the ordinance granting a Planned Development District shall be permitted in that district. The size, location, appearance, and method of operation may be specified to the extent necessary to insure compliance with the purpose of this ordinance.
20.3 Development Standards
20.3.1. Development standards for each separate PD District shall be set forth in the ordinance granting the PD District and may include but shall not be limited to uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management associations, and other requirements as the City Council may deem appropriate.
20.3.2. In the PD District, the particular district(s) to which uses specified in the PD are most similar shall be stated in the granting ordinance. All PD applications shall list all requested variances from the standard requirements set forth throughout this ordinance (applications without this list will be considered incomplete).
20.3.3. The ordinance granting a PD District shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD granted therein. A specific list is required of variances in each district or districts and a general statement citing the reason for the PD request.
20.3.4. The Planned Development District shall conform to all other sections of the ordinance unless specifically exempted in the granting ordinance.
-41-
20.4 Conceptual and Development Plan
In establishing a Planned Development District, the City Council shall approve and file as part of the amending ordinance appropriate plans and standard for each Planned Development District. During the review and public hearing process, the City Council shall require a conceptual plan and a development plan (or detail site plan).
20.4.1 Conceptual Plan
This plan shall be submitted by the applicant. The plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed Planned Development District in a graphic manner and shall be supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development.
20.4.1.1 A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general use, thoroughfares, and preliminary lot arrangements. For residential development which does not propose platted lots, the conceptual plan shall set forth the size, type, and location of buildings and building sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes, screening, parking areas, landscaped areas, and other pertinent development data.
20.4.1.2 A conceptual plan for uses other than residential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. Data which may be submitted by the applicant, or required by the City Council, may include but is not limited to the types of use(s), topography, and boundary of the PD area, physical features of the site, existing streets, alleys, and easements, location of future public facilities, building heights and locations, parking ratios, and other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which is to be used in drafting the final development plan.
20.4.1.3 Changes of detail which do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property and which do not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, building height, or coverage of the site and which do not decrease the off-street parking ratio, reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site, or significantly alter the landscape plans as indicated on the approved conceptual plan may be authorized by the building official or his designated representative. If an agreement cannot be reached regarding whether or not a detail site plan conforms to the original concept plan, the City Council shall determine the conformity.
20.4.2 Development Plan or Detailed Site Plan
This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of the Planned Development District and shall conform to the data presented and approved on the conceptual plan. Approval of the development plan shall be the basis
-42-
for issuance of a building permit. The development plan may be submitted for the total area of the PD or for any section by the City Council. A public hearing on approval of the development plan shall be required at the Council level, unless such a hearing is waived pursuant to Section 20.4.3.1. at the time of conceptual plan approval in the original amending ordinance. The development plan shall include:
20.4.2.1 A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing existing vegetation, natural water courses, creeks or bodies of water, and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development. This should include a delineation of any flood prone areas.
20.4.2.2 A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites or lots; and areas reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites, street widening and street changes; the points of ingress and egress from existing streets; general location and description of existing and proposed utility services, including size of water and sewer mains; the location and width for al curb cuts and the land area of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof on an accurate survey of the tract with the topographical contour interval of not more than five (5) feet.
20.4.2.3 A site plan for proposed building complexes showing the location of separate buildings, and between buildings and property lines, street lines, and alley lines. Also to be included on the site plan is a plan showing the arrangement and provision of off-street parking.
20.4.2.4 A landscape plan showing screening walls, ornamental planting, wooded areas, and trees to be planted.
20.4.2.5 An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to be used throughout the development in all districts except single family and two family may be required by the City Council if deemed appropriate. Any or all of the required information may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is clear and can be evaluated by the building official or his designated representative.
20.4.3. Procedure for Establishment
The procedure for establishing a Planned Development District shall follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in Section 36. This procedure is expanded as follows for approval of conceptual and development plans.
-43-
20.4.3.1 Separate public hearings shall be held by City Council for the approval of the conceptual plan and the development plan or any section of the development plan, unless such requirements is waived by the City Council upon a determination that a single public hearing is adequate. A single public hearing is adequate when:
(a) The applicant submits adequate data with the request for the Planned Development District to fulfill the requirements for both plans; or
(b) Information on the concept plan is sufficient to determine the appropriate use of the land and the detail site plan will not deviate substantially from it; and
(c) The requirement is waived at the time the amending ordinance is approved. If the requirement is waived, the conditions shall be specifically stated in the amending ordinance.
20.4.3.2 The ordinance establishing the Planned Development District shall not be approved until the conceptual plan is approved.
20.4.3.3 The development plan may be approved in sections. When the plan is approved in sections, the separate approvals by the City Council for the initial and subsequent sections will be required.
20.4.3.4 An initial development plan shall be submitted for approval within six (6) months from the approval of the conceptual plan or some portion of the conceptual plan. If the development plan is not submitted within six (6) months, the conceptual plan is subject to reapproval by the City Council. If the entire project is not completed within two (2) years, the City Council may review the original conceptual plan to ensure its continued validity.
20.4.3.5 Regardless of whether the pubic hearing is waived for the development plan, approval by the City Council is still required.
20.5 Written Report May Be Required
When a PD is being considered, a written report may be requested of the applicant discussing the impact on planning, engineering, water utilities, electric, sanitation, building inspection, tax, police, fire, and traffic. Written comments from the applicable public school district and from private utilities may be submitted to the City Council.
-44-
20.6 Planned Developments To Be Recorded
All Planned Development Districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance in its original form, or by subsequent amendment thereto, shall be referenced on the Zoning District Map, and a list of such Planned Development Districts, together with the category of uses permitted therein, shall be maintained in an appendix of this ordinance.
-45-
SECTION 21 FP -- FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
21.1 General Purpose and Description
The Flood Plain District is designed to provide for the appropriate use of land which has a history of inundation or is determined to be subject to flood hazard, and to promote the general welfare and provide protection from flooding portions of certain districts. Such areas are designated with a Flood Plain Prefix, FP.
21.2 Permitted Uses
The permitted uses in that portion of any district having a Flood Plain (FP) prefix shall be limited to the following:
21.2.1 Agricultural activities including the ordinary cultivation or grazing of land and legal types of animal husbandry but excluding construction of barns or other outbuildings.
21.2.2 Off-street parking incidental to any adjacent main use permitted in the district.
21.2.3 Electrical substation.
21.2.4 All types of local utilities including those requiring specific use permits.
21.2.5 Parks, playgrounds, public golf courses (no structures), and other recreational areas.
21.2.6 Private open space as part of a Planned Residential Development.
21.2.7 Structures, installations, and facilities installed, operated, and maintained by public agencies for flood control purposes.
21.2.8 Bridle trail, bicycle, or nature trial.
21.3 City Council Approval Required
No structure shall be erected in that portion of any district designated with a Flood Plain, FP, prefix until and unless such structure has been approved by the City Council after engineering studies have been made and it is ascertained that such building or structure is not subject to damage by flooding and would not constitute an encroachment, hazard, or obstacle to the movement of flood waters and that such construction would not endanger the value and safety of other property or public health and welfare.
-46-
SECTION 22 USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
No land shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted which is arranged or designed to be used for other than those uses specified for the district in which it is located as set forth by the following Schedule of Uses listed in the following tables.
LEGEND FOR INTERPRETING SCHEDULE OF USES
+------------+
¦ X Designates use permitted in district indicated.
+------------¦
¦ Designates use prohibited in district indicated.
+------------¦
¦ S Designates use which may be approved as Specific Use
+------------+ Permit
The numbers in the "note" column refer to description/definitions listed in Section 23 Descriptions/Definitions of Uses. Additional regulations relating to use of land and buildings in individual zoning districts are listed in Sections 8 through 21 and Section 27 of this ordinance.
-47-
SECTION 23 DESCRIPTIONS/DEFINITIONS OF USES
23.1 Residential Uses
23.1.1 Boarding or Rooming House: A building, other than hotel or multiple family dwelling, where lodging is provided to persons for compensation, and where facilities for food preparation are not provided in individual rooms. Facilities usually referred to as "bed and breakfast" arrangements are included in this definition.
23.1.2 Dormitory: A building in which housing is provided for individual students under the general supervision or regulation of an accredited college or university and as distinguished from an apartment, hotel, motel, or rooming house. A dormitory may provide apartment units for guests, faculty, or supervisory personnel on a ratio not to exceed one (1) such apartment unit for each fifty (50) students for which the building is designed. Individual rooms or suites of rooms may have cooking facilities. The dormitory may include facilities such as a commissary and/or snack bar, lounge, and study area, dining halls, and accessory kitchen, recreation facilities, and laundry, provided that these facilities are for the benefit and use of the occupants and their guests and not open to the general public.
23.1.3 Duplex. See Two Family Dwelling, Sec. 23.1.20.
23.1.4 Garden (Patio) Home: A free-standing, detached structure used for residential purposes, built in accordance with standards set out in Section 24.5.
23.1.5 Guest House: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises, such quarters having kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
23.1.6 Manufactured Housing, HUD Code: A structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. All references in this ordinance to manufactured housing or manufactured home(s) shall be references to HUD Code Manufactured Housing, unless otherwise specified.
23.1.7 Manufactured Home Park: Any tract of land under single ownership of not less than three (3) acres and not more than ten (10) acres approved for occupancy by manufactured housing and accessory structures related thereto and designed and operated in accordance with standards herein set forth or as set forth in any
-48-
other ordinance of the City of Center relating to the location, use, construction, operation, or maintenance of manufactured housing.
(Ord. No. 2007-16 § 9d, 10-22-07)
23.1.8 Manufactured Home Subdivision: A tract of land of not less than three (3) acres which has been final platted of record in its entirety in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the City for occupancy primarily by HUD-Code manufactured housing and industrialized housing.
23.1.9 Mobile Home: A structure constructed before June 15 1976, transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
23.1.10 Motel, Motor Hotel, or Motor Lodge: A building or group of buildings designed for and occupied as a temporary dwelling place, providing four (4) or more room units for compensation. A motel, motor hotel, or motor lodge may include restaurants, club rooms, banquet halls, ballrooms and meeting rooms as accessory uses.
23.1.11 Multiple Family Residence. Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased, or let to be occupied as three (3) or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three (3) or more families living in independent dwelling units.
23.1.12 Residence Hotel. A multi-dwelling unit extended stay lodging facility consisting of efficiency units or suites with a complete kitchen suitable for long term occupancy. Customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, telephone, and upkeep of furniture shall be provided. Meeting room, club house and recreational facilities intended for the use of residents and their guests are permitted. This definition shall not include other dwelling units as defined in this ordinance.
23.1.13 Retirement Housing: A development providing dwelling units specifically designed for the needs of ambulatory or retired persons. The following subsidiary uses shall be permitted to provide on-site goods and services for residents and their guests, but are not intended for use by the general public:
a) cafeteria and/or dining room
b) library
c) game room
d) swimming pool and/or Jacuzzi
e) exercise room
f) arts and crafts facilities
g) greenhouse
h) housekeeping service
-49-
i) transportation service
j) snack bar with a maximum of 350 square feet per 100 dwelling units
k) beauty/barber shop with a maximum of 250 square feet per 100 dwelling units or a maximum of 450 square feet per 100 dwelling units
l) convenience retail shop with maximum of 350 square feet per 100 dwelling units to provide for sale of food items, non-prescription drugs, small household items, and gifts.
23.1.14 Servant's, Caretaker's, or Guards' Residence: An accessory building or portion of an accessory building located on the same lot or grounds with the main building, containing not more than one kitchen and at least one bathroom facility and used as living quarters for a person or person employed on the premises for not less than fifty percent (50%) of his/her actual working time, and not otherwise used or designed as a separate place of abode, provided the living area of such quarters shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet.
23.1.15 Single Family Dwelling Attached: A dwelling that is part of a structure containing at least two (2) but not more than four (4) dwellings, each designed and constructed for occupancy by one family, with each dwelling unit attached by a common wall to another with a minimum width of each unit of twenty (20) feet, in which each dwelling is located on a separate platted lot.
23.1.16 Single Family Dwelling, Detached: A detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family, excluding manufactured housing and modular homes.
23.1.17 Townhouse or Row Dwelling: One of a series of not less than three (3) nor more than ten (10) attached one (1) family dwellings under common roof with common exterior wall, and separated from one another by single partition walls without openings from basement to roof. No townhouse dwelling unit is to be constructed above another townhouse dwelling unit and each dwelling is located on a separate platted lot.
23.1.18 Travel Trailer or Recreational Vehicle: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer and when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a width not exceeding eight (8) feet and a body length not exceeding State maximums.
(Ord. No. 2010-7 § 1d, 12-27-10)
23.1.19 Travel Trailer Park: Any tract of land under single ownership, two (2) acres or more, where accommodations are provided for travel trailer use.
23.1.20 Two Family Dwelling: A building designed for occupancy by two (2) individuals
-50-
or families living independently of each other within separate units which have a common wall and are under one (1) roof.
23.1.21 Zero Lot Line House: A residence allowed to have little or no side yard on one side, where the wall on that side has no doors, windows, or other openings and which otherwise qualifies for a one-hour fire rating as defined in the building code.
23.2 Educational, Institutional, and Special Uses
23.2.05 Assisted Living Facility: A non-medical secure residential setting for multiple occupants, providing basic care for elderly or disabled people who are generally independent, but who may need or simply prefer the convenience of assistance with some activities of daily living, having their meals prepared or having nursing staff on call. (Ord. No. 2009-2, § 1D1, 02-09-2009)
23.2.1 Child Care Center: An establishment where four (4) or more children are provided care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for less than 24 hours a day. The term "day care center" shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling, or rehabilitative services and does not apply to any school (Also see Registered Family Home). All child care centers are required to be licensed by the State of Texas.
23.2.2 Church, Rectory, or Place of Worship: A building for regular assembly for religious worship which is used primarily for such purpose and customary accessory activities including a place of residence for ministers, priests, rabbis, teachers, or directors on the premises.
23.2.3 Civic Center: A building or complex of buildings that houses municipal offices and services and which may include cultural, convention and/or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a governmental agency.
23.2.4 College or University. An institution established for educational purposes offering courses of study beyond the secondary education level, but excluding trade and commercial schools.
23.2.5 Community Center, Public: A building or buildings dedicated to social and/or recreational activities, serving the city or a neighborhood and owned and operated by the city or by a non-profit organization dedicated to promoting the education, health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city.
23.2.6 Community Center, Private: A building or buildings dedicated to social and/or recreational activities serving residents of a subdivision or development which is operated by an association or incorporated group for their use and benefit.
23.2.7 Continuing Care Facility: A place as defined in the Texas Continuing Care Facility Disclosure and Rehabilitation Act in which a person provides board and lodging, together with personal care services and nursing services, medical
-51-
services, or other health-related services, regardless of whether the services and lodging are provided at the same location, under an agreement that requires the payment of a fee and that is effective for the life of the individual or for a period of more than one (1) year, such individual or individuals being cared for not being related by consanguinity or affinity to the person providing the care. (Also see Household Care Facility and Household Care Institution, and Personal Care Home).
23.2.8 Country Club (Private): Land and buildings customarily containing a golf course and a clubhouse and available only to specific private membership; such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as private club, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts, and similar recreational or service facilities.
23.2.9 Reserved for future use.
23.2.10 Exhibition Area: An area or space either outside or within a building for the display of topic-specific goods or information.
23.2.11. Fairgrounds: An area where outdoor fairs, circuses or exhibitions are held.
23.2.12. Family Home: A community-based residential home operated by either the State of Texas, a non-profit corporation, a community center organized pursuant to State statute, or an entity which is certified by the State as a provider for a program for the mentally retarded. Family homes provide care for persons who have mental and/or physical impairments that substantially limit one or more major life activities. To qualify as a family home, a home must meet the following requirements:
a. Not more than six (6) disabled persons and two (2) supervisory personnel may reside in a family home at the same time.
b. The home must provide food and shelter, personal guidance, care, rehabilitation services, or supervision.
c. All applicable licensing requirements must be met.
23.2.13 Farm, Ranch, or Orchard: An area of five (5) acres or more which is used for growing of usual farm products and/or raising of usual farm products and animals and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance of law. Farm, ranch, or orchard use shall not cause a hazard to health by reason of unsanitary conditions and shall not be offensive by reason of odors, dust, fumes, noise, or vibrations or be otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
23.2.14 Fraternal Organization, Lodge, or Civic Club: An organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members.
-52-
23.2.15 Golf Course: An area of twenty (20) acres or more improved with trees, greens, fairways, hazards and which may include clubhouses.
23.2.16 Greenhouse or Plant Nursery, Commercial: A place, often including artificially heated and/or cooled buildings, where trees or plants are raised and/or sold including relate storage of equipment for landscape contracting.
23.2.17 Greenhouse, Non-Commercial: A building, often artificially heated and/or cooled, used as a location for cultivating plants which are used by the grower and not sold as a commercial activity.
23.2.18 Hospital (Chronic and Acute Care); Long Term Health Care Facility: An institution providing both in-patient health, personal care, or rehabilitative services over a long period of time to persons chronically ill, aged, or disabled due to injury and disease or to injured patients who need medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life and which is licensed by the State of Texas.
23.2.19 Transitional Care Facility: A dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not more than nine (9) persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are elderly; disabled; orphaned, abandoned, abused, or neglected children; victims of domestic violence; or rendered temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster, or financial adversity; living together with no more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. (See also Household Care Facility, Personal Care Home and Continuing Care Facility.
23.2.20 Kennel: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, cats or other
domestic animals more than four (4) months of age are housed or accepted for
boarding, breeding, training, selling, grooming and/or bathing.
23.2.21 Library: Any institution for the loan or display of books, tapes, objects of art or science which is sponsored by a public or responsible quasi-public agency and which institution is open and available to the general public.
23.2.22 Museum or Art Gallery: An institution for the collection, display and distribution of objects of art or science and which is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and which facility is open to the general public.
23.2.23 Nursery School; Kindergarten: A child care facility offering a program for children who have passed their second birthday but who are under seven years old.
23.2.24 Nursing Home: See Rest Home or Nursing Home.
23.2.25 Park, Playground, or Recreation Center (Public): An open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency and available to the general public.
23.2.26 Park, Playground, or Recreation Center (Private): A privately owned park,
-53-
playground, open space or building dedicated to recreational activities, maintained by a community club, property owner's association, or similar organization.
23.2.27 Personal Care Home (Custodial Care): An owner-occupied, home-operated non-licensed facility for the elderly providing custodial care to not more than three (3) individuals not related to the provider of such care. Custodial care is that care which assists elderly persons who are incapable because of physical or mental limitations of performing routine daily activities and which do not require the continuing attention of trained medical or paramedical personnel. (Also see Continuing Care Facility).
23.2.28 Reserved for future use.
23.2.29 Race Track: A facility used for the racing of motor-driven vehicles and/or animals.
23.2.30 Registered Family Home: A licensed child care facility that regularly provides care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six (6) children under 14 years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children , and that provides care after school hours for not more than six (6) additional elementary school siblings of the other children given care, but the total number of children, including the caretaker's own, does not exceed twelve (12) at any given time. (Also see Child Care Center).
23.2.31 Rehabilitation Care Facility: A dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not more than four (4) persons, regardless of legal relationship, who have demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness or antisocial or criminal conduct living together with not more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit.
23.2.32 Rehabilitation Care Institution: A facility which provides residence and care to five (5) or more persons, regardless of legal relationship , who have demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness or antisocial or criminal conduct together with supervisory personnel.
23.2.33 Rest Home or Nursing Home: A place of residence or care for persons suffering from infirmities of age or illness where care is provided on a prolonged or permanent basis. This term shall include a convalescent home.
23.2.34 School, Private (Primary or Secondary): An institution of learning having a curriculum equivalent to public schools but not including specialty schools such as dancing, music, beauty, mechanical, trade, or commercial schools.
23.2.35 School, Public (Primary or Secondary): An institution under the sponsorship of a public agency which offers instruction in the several branches of learning and
-54-
study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State of Texas but not including specialty schools such as dancing, music, beauty, mechanical, trade, or commercial schools.
23.2.36 School, Trade or Commercial: Establishments, other than public or parochial schools, private primary and secondary schools or colleges, offering training or instruction on a trade, art, or occupation.
23.2.37a Stable, Commercial: A structure housing horses which are boarded or rented to
the public or any stable other than a private stable, but not including a sale
barn, auction or similar trading activity.
23.2.37b Stable, Private: An accessory building set back from adjacent property lines a
minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet and used for quartering horses, not
to exceed one (1) horse per one acre area of a farm or lot.
23.2.38 Stadium or Play field, Public: An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the general public including a baseball field, golf course, football field or stadium which may be lighted for nighttime play.
23.2.39 Swimming Pool, Commercial: A swimming pool with accessory facilities, part of the facilities are available to the general public for a fee.
23.3 Transportation, Utility and Communications Uses
23.3.1 Airport, Landing Field: A place where an aircraft can land and take off, usually
equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various
accommodations for passengers and/or freight.
23.3.2 Electrical Substation: A subsidiary station in which electric current is transformed.
23.3.3 Gas Metering Station: Facility at which natural gas flows are regulated and recorded.
23.3.4 Heliport or Helistop: A landing facility for rotary wind aircraft which may include fueling or servicing facilities for such craft.
23.3.5 Radio, Television, or Microwave Communications Operators, Amateur: The transmission, retransmission, or reception of radio, electromagnetic, or microwave signals for private or personal use and not for the purpose of operating a business and/or financial gain.
23.3.6 Radio, Television, or Microwave Communications Operations, Commercial: The
-55-
transmission, retransmission, or reception of radio, electromagnetic, or microwave signals primarily for the purpose of operating a business and/or financial gain.
23.3.7 Railroad Station: Any premises for the transient parking of trains and the loading and unloading of passengers.
23.3.8 Railroad Team Track and Right-Of-Way: A facility/place for the loading and unloading of materials on trains.
23.3.9 Railroad Track and Right-Of-Way: Includes track and undeveloped right-of-
way, but does not include railroad stations, sidings, team tracks, loading
facilities, dock yards, or maintenance areas.
23.3.10 Service Yard of Governmental Agency: An area for the servicing and storage
of vehicles or other property of a governmental agency.
23.3.11 Shops, Office, and/or Storage Area of Public or Private Utility: The pole yard, maintenance yard, and/or administrative offices of a municipality or franchised utility.
23.3.12 Solid Waste Transfer Station: A facility and/or premises at which solid waste is temporarily deposited prior to ultimate removal to a permanent solid waste storage site.
23.3.13 Telephone Exchange: A switching or transmitting station owned by a public utility but not including business offices, storage, or repair shops or yards.
23.4 Automobile and Related Service Uses
23.4.1 Auto Laundry: See Car Wash.
23.4.2 Auto Leasing: Storage and leasing of automobiles, motorcycles, and light load vehicles.
23.4.3 Auto Parts Sales (Inside): The use of any building or other premise for the display and sale of new or used parts for automobiles, panel trucks, vans, tractor trailers, or recreational vehicles.
23.4.4 Auto Parts Sales (Outside): The use of any land area for the display and sale of new or used parts for automobiles, panel trucks, vans, tractor trailers, or recreation vehicles.
23.4.5 Automobile Repair, Major: General repair or reconditioning of engines and air-conditioning systems for motor vehicles; wrecker service; collision services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; customizing; overall
-56-
painting or paint shop; vehicle steam cleaning; those uses listed under "automobile repair, minor", and other similar uses.
23.4.6 Automobile Repair, Minor: Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes, and batteries; diagnostic services; minor motor services such as grease, oil, spark plug, and filter changing; tune-ups; emergency road service; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses, brake parts; automobile washing and polishing; performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; normal servicing of air-conditioning systems, and other similar minor services for light load vehicles, but not including any operation named under "automobile repair, major" or any other similar use.
23.4.7 Automobile and Trailer Sales, New: Building(s) and associated open area other than a street or required automobile parking space used for the display or sale of primarily new automobiles, light trucks, and trailers, to be displayed and sold on premises, and where no repair work is done except minor reconditioning of the automobiles and trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises, and no dismantling of automobiles or trailers for sale or keeping of used automobile and trailer parts or junk on the premises.
23.4.8 Automobile and Trailer Sales, Used: Building(s) and associated open area other than a street or required automobile parking space used for the display and sale of used automobiles, light trucks, or trailers in operating condition and where no repair work is done except the minor adjustments of the vehicles to be displayed or sold on the premises. A used car sale area shall not be used for the storage of wrecked automobiles or the dismantling of automobiles or the storage of automobile parts or junk on the premises.
23.4.9 Automobile Service Station: A building or place arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used for the primary purpose of dispensing gasoline, oil, diesel fuel, liquefied petroleum gases, greases, batteries, and other automobile accessories at retail direct to the on-premise motor vehicle trade provided that the above services shall not be construed to include major overhaul, the removal and/or rebuilding of an engine, cylinder head, oil pan, transmission, differential, radiator springs, or axles; steam cleaning, body or frame work, painting, upholstering and replacement of glass. If the dispensing or offering for sale of auto fuel at retail is incidental, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. Service stations shall not allow automobiles which are inoperative or are being repaired to remain outside such service station for a period greater than seven (7) days.
23.4.10 Auto Storage: The storage on a lot or tract of operable automobiles for the purpose of holding such vehicles for sale, distribution, or storage.
-57-
23.4.11 Automobile Wrecking Yard or Junk Yard: Any building, structure, or open area used for the dismantling or wrecking of any type of used vehicles or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismounted or wrecked vehicles or their parts and accessories, including any farm vehicles or farm machinery or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition, including the commercial salvaging, storage, and scraping of any other goods, articles, or merchandise.
23.4.12 Bus Terminal: Any premises for the transient housing or parking of motor-driven buses and the loading and unloading of passengers.
23.4.13 Car Wash: Facility or structure used to wash motorcycles, automobiles, vehicles and trucks.
23.4.14 Parking Lot or Parking Garage, Automobile: Area for parking light load vehicles.
23.4.15 Parking Lot or Parking Garage, Truck: Area for parking heavy load vehicles.
23.4.16 Quick Oil Change Facility: A business engaging in the changing of oil, oil filters, and the chassis lubrication of motor vehicles. All new oil shall be dispensed from cans or drums and all old/used oil shall be kept in sumps until removed by pumper trucks.
23.4.17 Quick Tune-up Facility: A business engaging in engine adjustment and minor part replacement for motor vehicles, limited to spark plugs, condensers, spark plug wires, distributor caps, distributor points, PVC valves, air cleaners, fan belts and radiator hoses. Such a facility shall not repair or replace carburetors, starters, alternators, generators, radiators, water pumps, or other major engine parts, brake shoes, or mufflers.
23.4.18 Truck and Bus Leasing: The rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, or motor-driven buses in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
23.4.19 Truck and Bus Repair: An establishment providing major and minor automobile repair services to heavy load vehicles.
23.4.20 Truck or Motor Freight Terminal: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for shipping by motor truck.
23.4.21 Truck Sales: Building(s) and associated open area other than a street or required automobile parking space used for the display or sale of primarily new heavy load vehicles, to be displayed and sold on premises, and where no repair work is done except minor reconditioning of the vehicles to be displayed and sold on the premises, and no dismantling of vehicles for sale or keeping of used vehicle parts or junk on the premises.
-58-
23.5 Retail and Service Type Uses
23.5.1 Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor: A place from which a person performs design, installation, construction, maintenance, service, repair, alteration or modification of a product or of equipment in environmental air conditioning, commercial refrigeration, or process cooling or heating systems, under terms and conditions described in the Texas Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor License Law, Vernon's Ann.Civ.St.,art. 8861.
23.5.2a Amusement, Commercial (Indoor): An establishment providing for activities, services and instruction for the entertainment, exercise and improvement of fitness and health of customers, clients or members but not including hospitals, clinics, massage parlors or arcades. Uses would typically include bowling alleys, ice or roller skating rinks, racquetball and handball courts, indoor tennis courts, weight lifting and nautilus facilities, exercise areas, swimming pools and spas, bingo parlors, martial arts, classrooms and/or practice areas, gymnasiums and indoor running or jogging tracks.
23.5.2b Amusement, Commercial (Outdoor): An outdoor area or structure, open to the public, which provides entertainment or amusement for a fee or admission charge, including but not limited to batting cages, miniature golf, go-kart tracks and carnivals.
23.5.3 Antique Shop: A retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sale and storage occurring inside a building.
23.5.4 Arcade: An establishment in which there are located six (6) or more coin operated skill or pleasure machines.
23.5.5a Bakery and Confectionery, Retail Sales: A place for preparing, cooking, baking and selling of products on the premises.
23.5.5b Bakery and Confectionery, Commercial: A place for preparing, cooking or baking of products primarily intended for off-premise distribution.
23.5.6 Bank, Savings and Loan, Credit Union: An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds.
23.5.7a Barber Shop: A place where barbering, as defined in Texas Barber Act, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes (Vernon's Ann.Civ.St.), art. 8407, is practiced, offered, or attempted to be practiced, except when such place is duly licensed as a barber school or college.
-59-
23.5.7b Barber School or College: A place of training for practice of barbering, as defined in Texas Barber Act, Vernon's Ann.Civ.St., art. 8407, meeting standards established in Section 9 of said Texas Barber Act.
23.5.7c Beauty Culture School; Cosmetology Specialty Shop: A specialized place of training, as defined in the Cosmetology Regulatory Act, Vernon's Ann.Civ.St., art. 8451.
23.5.7d Beauty Shop: A place where cosmetology, as defined in the Cosmetology Regulatory Act, Vernon's Ann.Civ.St., art. 8451, is practiced.
23.5.8 Building Materials, Hardware Sales: The sale of new building materials and supplied indoors with related sales for hardware, carpet, plants, electrical and plumbing supplies all of which are oriented to the retail customer, rather than contractor or wholesale customer.
23.5.9 Business Service. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services not elsewhere classified to business enterprises on a fee contract basis including but not limited to advertising agencies, computer programming and software services, and office equipment rental or leasing.
23.5.10 Cabinet and Upholstering Shop: An establishment used for the production, display and sale of furniture and soft coverings for furniture.
23.5.11 Cleaning and Dyeing, Small Plant or Shop: A custom cleaning shop not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area or a pickup station. (Also see Cleaning and Dyeing; Dry Cleaning Plant).
23.5.12 Clinic, Medical or Dental: A facility or station designed and used for the examination and treatment of persons seeking medical care as outpatients who do not remain on the premises overnight.
23.5.13 Convenience Store: A retail establishment providing for the sale of food items, non-prescription drugs, small household items, and gifts. Gasoline and diesel fuel may be offered for sale provided they are not the primary source of income for the store and that no more than six (6) pumps are offered. Maximum size of the establishment will be no more than 2,500 square feet not including storage areas and administrative offices.
23.5.14 Custom Personal Service Shop: Includes such uses as tailor, shoe repair, barber/beauty shop, health studio, or travel consultant.
23.5.15 Discount, Variety, or Department Store: A retail store offering a wide variety of merchandise in departments and exceeding 7,000 square feet of floor area.
-60-
23.5.16 Feed and Farm Supply Store: An establishment for the selling of food stuffs for animals and including implements and goods related to agricultural processes but not including farm machinery.
23.5.17 Flea Market: A site where space inside or outside a building is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household goods personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects or equipment in small quantities. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal services establishments, food services establishments, retail sales establishments, and auction establishments.
23.5.18 Florist: An establishment displaying plants, flowers, floral supplies, and similar items.
23.5.19 Food Store, Grocery Store: An establishment that displays and sells consumable goods that are not to be eaten on the premises.
23.5.20 Furniture, Appliance Store: Retail stores selling goods used for furnishing the home, including but not limited to furniture, floor coverings, draperies, glass and chinaware, domestic stoves, refrigerators and other household electrical and gas appliances.
23.5.21 Garden Center (Retail Sales): Location including land and buildings at which plants, trees, shrubs, horticultural supplies, and similar items are displayed for sale to the general public. All such displays shall be located behind the front yard line established in the district in which the garden center is located.
23.5.22 General Merchandise Store: Retail stores which sell a number of lines of merchandise including but not limited to dry goods apparel and accessories, furniture and home furnishings, small wares, hardware, and food. The stores included in this group are known as department stores, variety stores, general stores, and other similar stores.
23.5.23 Household Appliance Service and Repair: The maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances customarily used in the home including but not limited to washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and rangers, kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners, and hair dryers.
23.5.24 Laboratory, Scientific or Research: Facilities for research including laboratories, experimental equipment, and operations involving compounding or testing of materials or equipment.
-61-
23.5.25 Laundry and Cleaning Self-Service: An establishment including facilities for laundering and cleaning of clothing and similar items to be operated by the patron; not a commercial laundry or cleaning plant.
23.5.26a Metal Dealer, Secondhand: A place of business in which a person purchases, gathers, collects, solicits, or procures scrap metal or where scrap metal is gathered together or kept for shipment, sale, or transfer, under terms and conditions found in Vernon’s Ann.Civ.St., art.9009. (Also see Junk or Salvage Yard.)
23.5.26b Metal Dealer, Crafted Precious: A place of business in which a person engages in the business of purchasing and selling crafted precious metals, including jewelry, silverware, art objects, or any other thing or object made in whole or in part from gold, silver, platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium, osmium, ruthenium, or heir alloys, including coins and commemorative medallions, under terms and conditions found in Vernon's Ann.Civ.St.,art.990a.
23.5.27 Reserved for future use.
23.5.28 Office Center. A building or complex of buildings used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government, or like activity that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper, or candy stand.
23.5.29 Office, Professional or General Administrative: A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive management, or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations, and association but excluding medical offices.
23.5.30 Office - Showroom/Warehouse: An establishment with a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing not accessible to the public. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas.
23.5.31 Pawn Shop: An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the owner (pawnbroker).
23.5.32 Personal Service Shop: An establishment primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the area of the person or his apparel including but not limited to barber and beauty shops, dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations and reducing salons/health clubs.
23.5.33 Pet Shop or Animal Salon: A retail establishment offering small animals, fish, or
-62-
birds for sale as pets and where all such creatures are housed within the building.
23.5.34 Plumbing, Heating, Refrigeration, or Air-Conditioning Business: An establishment primarily engaged in the sales, service, or installation of equipment pertaining to plumbing, heating, refrigeration, or air conditioning. (Also see Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor).
23.5.35 Plumbing Service: The operation of a business which involves only retail sales and off-premises service, installation, and repair of units and fixtures. The premises shall not include a workshop for repair or fabrication of parts, fixtures, or units. Sheet metal work of any type shall not be permitted. Storage shall be permitted for units and supplies incidental to retail sales, off-premises service and repair only. No outside storage shall be permitted. This section shall not be interpreted to allow a plumbing, heating, refrigeration, or air conditioning contractor or similar type wholesale operation.
23.5.36 Portable Building Sales: An establishment which displays and sells structures which are capable of being carried and transported to another location, not including mobile homes or manufactured housing.
23.5.37 Post Office, Government or Private: Local branch of the United States Postal Service or private commercial venture engaged in the distribution of mail and incidental services.
23.5.38 Print Shop: An establishment which reproduces printed or photographic impressions including but not limited to the process of composition, binding, plate making, microform, type casting, press work, and printmaking.
23.5.39 Racquetball Facilities: Courts housed in an acoustically-treated building and designed for one (1) to four (4) persons to play racquetball, plus subsidiary uses to include office, pro shops, locker rooms, sauna, exercise rooms, waiting area, child nursery, and related uses up to a maximum of forty percent (40%) of the total floor area.
23.5.40 Retail – Alcohol Sales: An establishment offering any types of alcohol as the primary inventory for purchase and requiring consumption off premises, but not including convenience stores or grocery stores for which the sale of alcohol is only a portion of the entire consumer goods offered. These establishments shall also abide by all other laws of the State of Texas and City of Center regulating permitting and location regulations.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 4, 10-22-2007)
23.5.41 Retail Stores and Shops: Establishments offering all types of consumer goods for sale, not elsewhere classified, but excluding the display and sale in the open outside a building of new or used automobiles, heavy machinery, building
-63-
materials, used appliances, furniture, or salvage materials.
23.5.42 Second Hand Store, Furniture or Clothing: An establishment offering for sale used merchandise, with the storage and display of such items wholly contained inside a building or structure.
23.5.43 Service, Retail: An establishment engaged in the selling and/or servicing of goods where a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the floor area is devoted to service, repair or fabrication of such goods. The service area must not be accessible to the general public. Automotive uses and rental stores are specifically excluded.
23.5.44 Shopping Center: A group of primarily retail and service commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, provision of aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements.
23.5.45 Theater (Outdoor): An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion picture or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles.
23.5.46 Trailer, Manufactured Housing, or Mobile Home Display and Sales: The offering for sale, storage, or display of trailers, manufactured housing, or mobile homes on a parcel of land but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis.
23.5.47 Trailer Rental: The display and offering for rent of trailers designed to be towed by passenger cars or other prime movers.
23.5.48 Washateria: A building or place where clothes and linens are washed and thoroughly dried by the use of not exceeding three (3) employees and four (4) automatic single family machines and where the operation of washing and/or drying and/or mangle machines is done exclusively by the customer on a self-service basis, and where the fuel and power for the heating of water and drying shall be smokeless and odorless. (See Laundry and Cleaning, Self-Service).
23.6 Manufacturing, Storage, and Warehousing Uses
23.6.1 Bottling Works: A manufacturing facility designed to place a product into a bottle for distribution.
23.6.2 Cleaning and Dyeing: Dry Cleaning Plant: An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned and substantially non-aqueous organic solvents. (Also see Cleaning and Dyeing, Small Plant or Shop, Section 23.5.11).
-64-
23.6.3 General Commercial Plant: An establishment other than a personal service shop for the treatment and/or processing of products as a service on a for-profit basis including but not limited to newspaper printing, laundry plant, or cleaning and dyeing plant.
23.6.4 General Manufacturing: Manufacturing of finished products and component products or parts from the transformation, treatment, or processing of materials or substances, including basic industrial processing. Such operations must meet the performance standards, bulk controls, and other requirements in this ordinance.
23.6.5 Industrial Park: A large tract of land that has been planned, developed, and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
23.6.6 Junk or Salvage Yard: A lot upon which waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junk yard" includes an automobile wrecking yard and automobile parts yard. A "junk yard" does not include such uses conducted entirely within an enclosed building. (Also see Metal Dealer, Secondhand)
23.6.7 Light Manufacturing: Manufacturing of finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials, including fabrication, assembly, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing.
23.6.8 Self-Storage, Mini-Warehouse: A facility used for storage of goods and/or materials with separate access to individual storage units by persons renting the individual units.
23.6.9 Storage or Wholesale Warehouse, Light: A building used primarily for the
storage of goods and materials, containing less than 5,000 square feet of floor space or less, no outside storage. (Ord. No. 2010-7 § 1d, 12-27-10)
23.6.9.5 Storage or Wholesale Warehouse, Medium – A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials, 5,000-15,000 square feet. Outside storage only allowed on a case-by-case basis with a Specific Use Permit. (Ord. No. 2010-7 § 1d, 12-27-10)
23.6.10 Storage or Wholesale Warehouse, Heavy: A building used primarily for the
storage of goods and materials, containing more than 5,000 15,000 square feet of floor space or more. Unlimited outside storage. (Ord. No. 2010-7 § 1d, 12-27-10)
-65-
23.7 Accessory Uses
23.7.1 Accessory Building or Use: An accessory building or use is one which: (a) is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; and (b) is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served; and (c) contributes to the comfort, convenience and necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served; and (d) is located on the same building lot as the principal use served.
23.7.2 Carport: A structure open on a minimum of three (3) sides designed or used to shelter vehicles, not to exceed thirty-six (36) feet on its longest dimension.
23.7.3 Construction Yard (Temporary): A storage yard or assembly yard for building materials and equipment directly related to a construction project and subject to removal at completion of construction and subject to same restrictions as Field Office. (Also see Section 24.2).
23.7.4 Field or Sales Office (Temporary): A building or structure, of either permanent or temporary construction, used in connection with a development or construction project for display purposes or for housing temporary supervisory or administrative functions related to development, construction or the sale of real estate properties within the active development or construction project. Permits for "temporary buildings" shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed eighteen (18) months. Extensions may be granted only by the City Council, any such permits granted may be revoked if the City Council finds the use of the building or structure is contrary to the intent of this section or results in increased noise, traffic, or other conditions considered to be a nuisance or hazard (Also see Section 23.7.3. above.)
23.7.5 Customary Home Occupation (Home Based Businesses): An occupation, profession, domestic craft, or economic enterprise which is customarily conducted in a "residential dwelling" as hereinafter defined, subject to compliance with each of the following conditions:
a) "Residential dwelling" shall mean a detached building designed, used and occupied exclusively by members of one (1) family as a residence.
b) Such use shall be and remain incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the residential dwelling as a family residence and the area utilized for such occupation, profession, domestic craft, or economic enterprise shall never exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total of the floor area of the residential dwelling.
c) Not more than one (1) non-illuminated sign advertising the home occupation shall be allowed; said sign shall be not more than one (1)
-66-
square foot in area and shall be mounted on the building in which the home occupation is being conducted.
d) The residential dwelling shall maintain its residential character and shall not be altered or remodeled in order to create any type of exterior commercial appeal.
e) No exterior storage of material, equipment, and/or supplies used in conjunction with such occupation, profession, domestic craft, or enterprise shall be placed, permitted, or allowed on the premises occupied by the residential dwelling.
f) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or glare generated by or associated with the home occupation shall extend beyond the property line of the lot or tract on which the home occupation is being conducted.
g) The occupation, profession, domestic craft, or enterprise shall be conducted wholly within the residential dwelling and no accessory building shall be used in conjunction therewith.
h) The only equipment to be used in such occupation, profession, domestic craft, or enterprise shall be that which is ordinarily used in a private home in a like amount and kind.
i) A home occupation shall not generate such additional traffic as to create a traffic hazard or disturbance to nearby residents.
23.7.6 Garage, Private: A detached accessory building or portion of the main
building for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles of the
occupants of the premises; if occupied by vehicles of others, it is a storage
space.
-67-
SECTION 24 SPECIAL USES
24.1 Child Care Centers
24.1.1 No portion of a child care center site may be located within three hundred (300) feet of gasoline pumps or underground gasoline storage tanks, or any other storage area for explosive or highly combustible materials.
24.1.2 Child care centers shall be located adjacent to a street having a pavement width of twenty seven (27) feet or greater.
24.1.3 Site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be required for all child care center sites, whether or not a Specific Use Permit is required.
24.1.4 Child care centers located within any single family or two family residential district shall be required to plat in multiples of the minimum lot width of the district classification requirements. The lot depth shall meet the minimum district requirements and must be platted in a configuration which can be converted into standard lots for residential development. (Ord. No. 2007-16 § 9e, 10-22-07)
24.1.5 All child care centers shall comply with the following standards:
24.1.5.1 All vehicular entrances and exits shall be clearly visible from the street.
24.1.5.2 All passenger loading and unloading areas shall be located so as to avoid safety hazards from vehicular traffic and adequate walkways shall be provided. No public rights-of-way shall be used for loading/unloading purposes.
24.1.5.3 Outdoor play areas shall be provided at a rate of 65 square feet per child based on maximum design capacity of the center. This requirement may be waived by the Planning and Zoning Commission if the child care is provided for less than four (4) hours per day for an individual person.
24.1.5.4 In residential districts, a maximum of one-half of the required outdoor play space may be provided off-site. When off-premises outdoor play area is utilized, it must be located within one hundred (100) feet of the child care facility premises and safely accessible without crossing, at-grade, any major or secondary thoroughfare.
24.1.5.5 No child care center shall be part of a one family or two family dwelling.
-68-
24.2 Construction Yards, Field Offices, and Other Temporary Buildings.
Temporary permits for construction yards and field offices and special use permits or variances regulating temporary buildings shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed eighteen (18) months. Extensions may be granted by the City Council. Upon due notice and hearing before the City Council, any such permit may be revoked if the City Council finds the use of the building or structure is contrary to the intent of this ordinance or results in increased noise, traffic, or other conditions considered to be a nuisance or hazard.
24.3 Radio, Television, and Microwave Towers
24.3.1 No radio, television, or microwave tower shall be located within a distance equal to at least the height of such tower from any residential structure or from any area zoned residential, or shown as residential on the current Comprehensive Plan. Such distance shall be measured as the shortest possible distance in a straight line from the closes point of the tower to the closest point of such area or residence.
24.3.2 No commercial, radio, television, or microwave reflector antenna support structure shall be closer to any residential district boundary line or any area shown as residential on the current Comprehensive Plan than a distance equal to the sum of the required yard specified for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located, plus 25 feet, plus twice the height of the portion of the structure above two (2) stories. Such distance shall be measured as the shortest possible distance in a straight line from the structure to the closest point of such area or residence.
24.3.3 The location of radio, television, or microwave reflectors, antennas, or support structures and associated foundations and any support wires shall be prohibited within any required front or side yard.
24.3.4 All commercial communication operations or radio, television, or microwave reflectors, antennas, or structures shall be prohibited in residential districts.
24.3.5 All commercial signs, flags, lights and attachments other than those required for communications operations, structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) shall be prohibited.
24.4 Residence Hotels
Residential hotels shall be designed to allow for their potential conversion to multifamily residences and as such shall comply with all minimum standards set forth in Section 15. Residence hotels constructed in the MF district shall comply with the MF district requirements. Open space shall be provided in sufficient quantity and locations to allow
-69-
for required additional parking should the residence hotel convert to multifamily residences.
24.5 Garden (Patio) Homes
24.5.1 Location on Lot: Garden (patio) home developments shall be developed as zero lot line homes. One side yard shall be reduced to zero feet, while the other side yard shall be increased to a minimum of ten feet. A minimum five (5) foot wide maintenance easement shall be placed on the adjacent lot to enable the property owner to maintain his house. Side yards and maintenance easements shall be placed on the subdivision plat. A minimum separation between patio homes of ten (10) feet shall be provided. The combined area of all structures shall not exceed sixty-five (65) percent of the lot area.
24.5.2 Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard shall be fifteen (15) feet, provided that in no case shall a garage or carport fronting onto a street be less than twenty (20) feet from the property line adjacent to the street. The front yard setback may be staggered, varied, or reduced to a minimum setback of ten (10) feet for lots facing cul-de-sac or loop streets not exceeding four hundred (400) feet in length, with the approval of a site plan or subdivision plat. Under this provision the maximum setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet. A minimum lot depth of sixty-five (65) feet, as measured from front building line to the rear lot line, shall be maintained.
24.5.3 Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard shall be five (5) feet for a single story structure and fifteen (15) feet for any two story structure. If access is from an alley, the minimum setback will be twenty (20) feet for garages or carports.
24.5.4 Side Yard Setback: The minimum side yard shall be zero (0) feet except that there shall be at least ten (10) feet of separation between structures. When garden (patio) homes are constructed with a zero (0) side yard, five (5) feet on the lot adjacent to the zero (0) setback shall be dedicated as an access easement for the zero (0) setback garden (patio) home. There shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any property line adjacent to a street.
24.5.5 Lot Frontage: The minimum frontage of any garden (patio) home shall be twenty-five (25) feet on residential streets and thirty-five (35) feet on collector and thoroughfare streets.
24.5.6 Lot Area: The minimum lot area for any development lot for garden (patio) homes shall be two thousand eight hundred (2,800) feet.
-70-
24.5.7 Maximum Length of Structures: No zero lot line structure shall have an overall length exceeding two hundred and fifty (250) feet.
24.5.8 Maximum Height of Structures: No structure shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
24.5.9 Parking: Two (2) off-street spaces per dwelling unit plus one-half (1/2) space per dwelling unit for visitor parking within six hundred (600) feet of each dwelling unit. the visitor parking requirements may be eliminated or reduced at the time of site plan or subdivision plat approval with a finding that there is adequate on-street parking for visitors.
24.5.10 Common Area Maintenance: To insure the long term maintenance of common land and facilities in patio home developments, the following shall be required:
(a) Plats and site plans shall be approved subject to the submission of a legal instrument setting forth a plan or manner of permanent area and maintenance of open spaces, recreational areas and other communally owned facilities. No such instrument shall be acceptable until approved by the City Attorney as to legal form and effect. A Homeowners Association (HOA) is the most widely accepted technique for managing commonly owned property. Such association shall provide proof of incorporation prior to issuance of a construction permit.
(b) The HOA or other similar management entity shall be organized as a non-profit corporation with automatic membership in the management entity when property is purchased. This shall be specified in the covenants which run with the land and which bind all subsequent owners. Covenants for maintenance assessments shall also run with the land. Included in the maintenance covenants shall be procedures for changing them at stated intervals. Deeds shall also reference the rights and responsibilities of property owners to the management entity. The management entity shall also be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of all commonly held facilities through the use of a pro-rate formula for all property owners.
24.5.11 Usable Open Space Requirements: Each parcel of land developed under patio home standards shall provide usable open space totaling fifteen percent (15%) of the area of a patio home development. Such open space shall have a maximum slope of ten percent (10%) and shall be exclusive of street and alley rights-of-way and/or easements, individually platted lots without open space easements, private yards and patios. The fifteen percent (15%) shall be computed on the percentage of total platted
-71-
area in a patio home subdivision, excluding right-of-way for major and secondary thoroughfares (as described in the current Comprehensive Plan.) At the time of site plan and/or subdivision plat approval, the City Council may give full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the maximum slope or which are otherwise unusable if it is determined that such areas are environmentally or aesthetically significant and that their existence enhances the development.
24.5.12 Additional Landscaping: In addition to any required landscaping for common areas, the front yard and parkway areas shall be landscaped and permanently maintained.
24.6 Multifamily Residence:
24.6.1 Courts: Where an apartment building is erected so as to create inner courts, the faces of all opposite walls in such courts shall be a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet apart and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such court area for a distance greater than five (5) feet.
24.6.2 Usable Open Space: Each lot or parcel of land which is used for multiple-family residences shall provide on the same lot or parcel of land usable open space (as defined in Section 34.2.101), in accordance with the table below:
NUMBER OF BEDROOMS
REQUIRED OPEN SPACE
1 or less
600 square feet
each additional room
300 square feet
In those instances where a parcel of land has been zoned for multifamily use with a Specific Use Permit or Planned Development classification and the permitted densities do not conform exactly with those permitted in the MF District, usable open space shall be provided in accordance with that required for the multifamily zoning district which most closely approximates the density permitted under the SUP or PD.
In meeting this requirement, a credit of three (3) square feet may be applied for each square foot utilized for swimming pools and adjacent decks, patios, or lounge areas within ten (10) feet of a pool; developed and equipped children's play areas; and usable portions of recreational buildings. Tennis courts are specifically excluded from this increased credit allowance. At the time of site plan approval, the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may allow a credit not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total required usable open space for
-72-
adjacent and immediately accessible public parks. The combined credit for areas calculated at a three-to-one basis and for public parks shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total usable open space for an individual lot or parcel of land.
At the time of site plan approval, the City Council may give full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the maximum slope, if it is determined that such areas are environmental significant and that their preservation would enhance the development.
24.7 Service Stations
Gasoline service station pump islands may not be located nearer than eighteen (18) feet to the front property line. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline filling station may extend beyond the front building line but shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to the property line.
24.8 Swimming Pools
It is the purpose of the following provisions to recognize an outdoor swimming pool as a potentially attractive nuisance and to promote the safety and enjoyment of property rights by establishing rules and regulations governing the location and improvement of swimming pools whether privately, publicly, or commercially owned or operated.
24.8.1 No swimming pool shall be constructed or used until a swimming
pool building permit has been issued there-for. No building permit shall be
issued unless the proposed sanitary facilities and water supply comply with
applicable local and State health department regulations.
24.8.2 A swimming pool erected below ground or above ground with a depth of two (2)
feet or greater may be constructed and operated when:
24.8.2.1 The pool is not located in any required front or side yard abutting a street;
24.8.2.2 A wall or fence, not less than six (6) feet in height, with self-enclosing and self-latching gates that are lockable at all entrances, completely encloses either the pool area or the surrounding yard area;
24.8.2.3 All lighting of the pool is shielded or directed to face away from adjoining residence. If lights are not individually shielded they shall be so placed, or the enclosing wall or fence shall be so designed, that direct rays from the lights shall not be visible for adjacent properties;
-73-
24.8.2.4 No broadcasting system is used for the purpose of advertising the operation of the pool or for the attraction of persons to the premises. This shall not prevent a public address system necessary or useful to the supervision of the pool and the safety of swimmers; and
24.8.2.5 The swimming pool is no closer then eight (8) feet from any property line.
24.9 Fences
24.9.1 Metal fences shall not be allowed in the required front yard in any district.
24.9.2 No fence or hedge shall exceed four (4) feet height in the required front yard in
any district.
24.9.3 No rear or side yard fence shall exceed eight (8) feet in height.
24.9.4 Fences shall be constructed of customary urban fencing materials and shall be
aesthetically consistent with buildings and fences in the area.
24.9.5. An eight foot (8’) fence that completely screens/obstructs the view
of commercial/manufacturing facilities, including wireless
telecommunications towers, from public view. (Ord. No. 2007-16, § 7, 10-22-2007)
24.10 Off-premises Signs
Any sign advertising any establishment, merchandise, service, entertainment, or other thing which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which the sign is located shall be considered the same as a “Billboard, advertising” for purposes of these regulations.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 2, 10-22-2007)
24.11 Portable/Pre-Manufactured Buildings
24.11.1 When used as a Storage or Accessory Building, such structure shall comply with Section 27 and specifically subsection 27.A.1 for residential zones and 27.A.2 for commercial or manufacturing zones. (Ord. No. 2007-16, § 6, 10-22-07)
24.11.2 As Primary or Main Building
24.11.2.A. Shall not be allowed as the main building in any residential
district including SF-E, SF-1, SF-2, TF, MF, MH-1 OR MH-2 zones.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 6, 10-22-07)
24.11.2.B. Shall be allowed as the main building in C-1, C-2, M-1 or
-74-
M-2 districts when the following conditions are met or exceeded:
1- All requirements of the appropriate district are complied with including parking, fencing, minimum lot size, etc.;
2- This building will be the only building/structure on the lot;
3- All City or State building code requirements are met or exceeded; and,
4- The requirements of Section 27.A.2 shall be complied with regarding skirting and appropriate siding materials.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 6, 10-22-2007)
-75-
SECTION 25 SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
25.1 General Provision
25.1.1 As permitted under the provisions of this ordinance, a property owner may petition the City for a specific use of property, as authorized by the zoning district in which the property is located. Such petition shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission. After required notice, as required in Section 36.3.2, and a public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council regarding any application for a Specific Use Permit. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require information, operating data, and expert evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. (Ord. No. 2008-4 § 1, 07-14-2008)
25.1.2 An application for a Specific Use Permit (SUP) shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and showing the general arrangements of the project, together with essential requirements such as off-street parking facilities; size, height, construction materials and locations of buildings; the uses to be permitted; location and construction of signs; means of ingress and egress to public streets; visual screening such as walls, landscaping, and fences; and the relationship of the intended use to all existing properties and land uses in all directions to minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet.
25.1.3 After required notice, as required in Section 36.3.2, and a public hearing, the City Council may grant a permit for a specific use of property as authorized by the zoning district in which the property is situated. The City Council may require information, operating data, and expert evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. (Ord. No. 2008-4 § 1, 07-14-2008)
25.2 Specific Use Permit Regulations
25.2.1 In recommending that a specific use permit for the premises under consideration be granted, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine that such use or uses are harmonious and adaptable to building structures and uses of adjacent property and other property in the vicinity of the premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations as to requirements for the paving of streets, alleys, and sidewalks, means of access to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate off-street parking, protective screening and open space, heights of structures, and compatibility of buildings.
25.2.2 The City Council shall authorize issuance of a Specific Use Permit only after determining that the proposed use or uses are harmonious and adaptable to building structures and uses of adjacent property and other property in the vicinity of the premises under consideration.
-76-
25.2.3 The City Council shall authorize issuance of a Specific Use Permit only after determining that adequate provisions have been made for the paving of streets, alleys, and sidewalks, means of access to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate off-street parking, protective screening and open space, heights of structures, and compatibility of buildings.
25.2.4 No Specific Use Permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner, and grantee of the Specific Use Permit shall be willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of the permit, as attached to the site plan drawing (or drawings) and approved by the City Council. No public hearing is necessary for site plan approval.
25.2.5 Whenever regulations or restrictions imposed by this ordinance are either more or less restrictive than regulations imposed by any governmental authority through legislation, rule, or regulation, the regulations, rules or restrictions which are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. Regardless of any other provision of this ordinance, no land shall be used and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any State or Federal pollution control or environmental protection law or regulation.
25.2.6 When the City Council authorizes granting of a Specific Use Permit, the Zoning Map shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditional and limited uses.
-77-
SECTION 26 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
26.1 Purpose
To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions.
26.2 Special Off-Street Parking Provisions – Residential All Districts
(Ord. No. 2009-2, § 1e, 02-19-2009)
26.2.1 Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same site as the use it serves.
26.2.2 No required parking shall be allowed on any surface other than a paved concrete or bituminous parking space surface.
26.2.3 No parking structure, including garages, carports, or similar structures, shall be located within the required front, side, or rear yards of a lot or tract (Exception: Allowed where paved alleys are provided by developer).
26.2.4 This section applies only to new construction, beginning on or after passage of this ordinance.
26.3 Size of Space
26.3.1 Each standard off-street surface parking space shall measure not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles, and shall be of usable shape and condition. Where it is possible for a vehicle to overhang the front of a parking space above a paved, stoned, mulched, or grassed area other than a sidewalk, street, right-of-way, or adjacent property, the length of the standard space may be reduced to eighteen (18) feet.
26.3.2 Each parking space (on-street or off-street) designed for parallel parking shall have a minimum dimension of eight (8) feet by twenty-two (22) feet.
26.3.3 Each standard parking space located in a parking garage shall measure not less than nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles.
26.4 Parking Area Standards
26.4.1 To prevent nuisance situations, all parking area lighting shall be designed and operated so as not to reflect or shine on adjacent properties.
-78-
26.4.2 For safety and fire-fighting purposes, free access through to adjacent
parking areas shall be provided where practical.
26.4.3 Except for single family and duplex uses, parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other approved methods. Nonpermanent type marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure continuous clear identification of the space.
26.5 Off-Street Parking Incidental to Main Use
Off -street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified by this ordinance and located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use or in accordance with Section 26.9 and located within the same zoning district as the main use.
26.6 Schedule of Parking Requirements Based on Use
Off-street parking shall be provided in sufficient quantities to provide the following ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the districts designated. [Where a calculation results in requiring a fractional space, one additional space shall be required.] Multiple use facilities must each meet the requirements detailed.
26.6.1 Bank, savings and loan or similar financial establishment: One (1) space for
each two hundred (200) square feet of total floor area.
26.6.2 Business or professional office, studio, medical or dental clinic: Three (3)
parking spaces plus one (1) additional parking space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of floor area over five hundred (500) feet.
26.6.3 Church or other place of worship: One (1) parking space for each (4) seats in the
main auditorium.
26.6.4 Clinic of doctor's or dentist's office: One (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of total floor area.
26.6.5 Community center, library, museum or art gallery: Ten (10) parking spaces plus
one (1) additional space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area in
excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet. If an auditorium is included as a
part of the building, its floor area shall be deducted from the total and additional
parking provided as the basis of one (1) space for each four (4) seats that it
contains.
26.6.6 College or university: One (1) space for each two (2) students, plus one (1) space for each classroom, laboratory or instruction area.
-79-
26.6.7 Commercial Amusement (indoor):
26.6.7(a) Bowling Alley - 3 spaces for each lane;
26.6.7(b) Racquetball or handball courts - One space for each court;
26.6.7(c) Indoor tennis courts - 6 spaces for each court;
26.6.7(d) Gymnasium, skating rinks, and martial arts schools or areas - 1 space for each 5 seats at maximum seating capacity, plus 1 space for each two hundred (200) square feet;
26.6.7(e) Swimming Pool - 1 space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross water surface and deck area;
26.6.7(f) Weight lifting or exercise areas - 1 space for each one hundred (100) square feet;
26.6.7(g) Bingo Parlors - 1 space for 3 seats (design capacity) or 1 per one hundred (100) square feet of total floor area, whichever is greater;
26.6.7(h) Indoor jogging or running tracks - 1 space for each one hundred (100) linear feet;
26.6.7(i) All areas for subsidiary uses not listed above or in other parts of Section 25:6 (those uses such as restaurants, offices, etc., shall be calculated with the minimum specified for those individual uses) - 1 space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet.
26.6.7(j) Other - 1 space for each three (3) persons accommodated (design capacity).
26.6.8 Dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall (without fixed seats):
One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area used thereof.
26.6.9 Day nursery, day care, kindergarten school:
One (1) space per ten (10) pupils/clients (design capacity).
26.6.10 Dwellings, single-family attached or detached.
Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
26.6.11 Dwellings, multifamily:
One (1) parking space for each dwelling unit One (1) and one-half (.5) parking spaces for each dwelling unit, plus one-half (.5) space for each individual bedroom in all dwelling units. (Ord. No. 2009-2 § 1B, 02-09-2009)
-80-
26.6.12 Flea market:
One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area or market area.
26.6.13 Fraternity, sorority or dormitory:
One (1) parking space for each two (2) beds.
26.6.14 Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe repair or service:
Two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet.
26.6.15 Gasoline service station:
Minimum of ten (10) spaces.
26.6.16 Golf course:
Minimum of thirty (30) spaces.
26.6.17 Health care facility:
One (1) space for each four (4) rooms or beds, whichever is greater.
26.6.18 Hospital:
One (1) space for each two (2) beds.
26.6.19 Hotel or motel:
One (1) parking space for each sleeping room, unit, or guest accommodation plus one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of commercial floor area contained therein.
26.6.20 Lodge, or fraternal organization:
One and one-fourth (1.25) spaces per two hundred (200) square feet.
26.6.21 Manufacturing, processing or repairing:
One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees on the maximum working shift, plus space to accommodate all vehicles used in connection therewith, but not less than one (1) parking space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
26.6.22 Massage establishment:
One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
26.6.23 Mini-warehouse:
Four (4) spaces per complex plus one (1) space per five thousand (5,000) square feet of storage area.
-81-
26.6.24 Mortuary or funeral home:
One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors, or individual funeral service rooms.
26.6.25 Motor vehicle salesrooms and used car lots:
One (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of sales floor for indoor uses, or one (1) parking space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area for outdoor uses.
26.6.26 Office, general:
One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of total floor area.
26.6.27 Office, medical:
One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
26.6.28 Office-showroom or office - warehouse:
One (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area for storage and warehousing, plus one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of office, sales or display area over 500 square feet.
26.6.29 Private club:
If free standing or located in a shopping center of 150,000 square feet or less, one (1) space for each ten (10) square feet of bar, lounge and waiting areas, plus one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of remaining floor area.
26.6.299b) If located in a shopping center of greater than 150,000 square feet, one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area.
26.6.30 Private country club or golf club:
One (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area or for every five (5) members, whichever is greater.
26.6.31 Recreational area or building (other than listed):
One (1) space for each two (2) persons to be normally accommodated in the establishment.
26.6.32 Restaurant, cafeteria, cafe or similar establishment:
One (1) parking space for every one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
26.6.33 Retail store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein:
One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
-82-
26.6.34 Sanitarium, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar institutions:
One (1) parking space for each six (6) beds.
26.6.35 School, elementary and middle:
One (1) parking space for each five (5) seats in the auditorium or main assembly room, or one (1) space for each classroom plus ten (10) spaces, whichever is greater.
26.6.36 School, secondary (grades 9 - 12:
One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the main auditorium design capacity, or one (1) space for each classroom plus one (1) space for each two (2) students accommodated in the institution, whichever is greater.
26.6.37 Shopping center:
One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. The total floor area used for restaurants and cafeterias (but not including private clubs) which exceeds ten percent (10%) of the shopping center floor area, shall require additional parking to be provided in accordance with the requirements for restaurants.
26.6.38 Storage or warehousing:
One (1) space for each two (2) employees, or one (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of total floor area, whichever is greater.
26.6.39 Theater, auditorium (except school), meeting room, sports arena, stadium, gymnasium, or other places of public assembly:
One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats or bench seating spaces design capacity.
26.6.40 Vehicle repair garage:
Three (3) spaces per service bay, plus one (1) space per employee (maximum shift), plus one (1) space per tow truck or other service vehicle.
26.7 Off-Street Parking Requirements for Uses Not Listed
For those uses which are not matched with a parking requirement in 26.6, the following standards shall apply:
General Use Category Parking Space Requirements
a. Educational & Institutional One space per employee
-83-
b. Transportation, Utility & One space per employee plus one space per
Communications Uses stored vehicle
c. Accessory & Incidental Uses One space per employee
d. Office & Professional Uses One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
e. Automobile & Related Uses One space per employee plus one space per stored vehicle
f. Retail Uses One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
g. Service Uses One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
h. Wholesale Uses Same as for "Storage or warehousing"
i. Contract Construction Uses One space per employee
j. Commercial, Manufacturing, & Same as for "Manufacturing,
Industrial Uses processing, or repairing
26.8 Rules for Computing Number of Parking Spaces
In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the uses in Sections 26.1 - 26.7), the following rules shall govern:
26.8.1 "Floor Area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
26.8.2 Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be rounded to
the nearest whole number.
26.8.3 The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall
be the same as required for a use of similar nature.
26.8.4 In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.
26.9 Location of Parking Spaces
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows:
26.9.1 Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not more than three hundred (300) feet from an institutional building
-84-
served and not more than three hundred (300) feet from any other non-residential building served.
26.9.2 Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, cafes, or similar uses and not more than eighty percent (80%) of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium or similar uses may be provided and used jointly by similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed; provided, however, that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified below.
26.9.3 In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city and executed by the parties concerned, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.
26.10 Use of Parking Spaces - All Districts
Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be used only for these respective purposes and shall not be used for storage or display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials, products for sale.
26.11 Special Off-Street Parking Regulations
In computing the parking requirements for any development, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each use included in the development. Where multiple uses are proposed for a building, the parking requirements shall be calculated on the basis of the most restrictive requirements unless specific areas of different uses are delineated by floor or building segment.
26.11.2 Wherever a parking lot is located across the street from or adjacent to a residentially zoned property, and is designed so that headlight beams will shine into residences (whether or not such residences have been built at the time the parking lot is constructed), and irrigated earthen berm or a solid masonry wall or reinforced concrete fence of not less than three (3) nor more than four (4) feet in height above the finished grade of the off-street parking area shall be erected and maintained so as to provide a headlight screen for the residential district. (Ord. No. 2007-16 § 9f, 10-22-07)
26.11.3 The off-street parking spaces designated for each apartment (multifamily) dwelling unit shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the dwelling unit served by such spaces.
-85-
26.11.4 In all residential district, no heavy load vehicle, truck trailer, truck tractor, mobile home, motor home, camper, trailer, boat, machinery, farm equipment or machinery or any other similar equipment or machinery (called collectively "equipment") shall be parked or left standing for more than two (2) days out of any consecutive seven (7) day period within the required front yard or within the side yard of a corner lot between the side building line and side property line on the side of the lot abutting a street or public right-of-way.
In no event shall equipment, including motor vehicles, trucks, and vans be parked or left standing at any time on a surface other than a paved or gravel driveway or paved parking lot. The driveway shall be located either:
1) between the street or alley on the one hand, and on the other a garage or carport;
2) in the side yard adjacent to the main building; or
3) as a circular driveway serving the main entrance of the premises;
The driveway shall be no wider than the width of the garage, carport (or 20 feet whichever is greater) or parking space which it serves. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the front yard shall be a driveway.
26.11.5 Parking spaces in non-residential districts shall be provided with sufficient space for entering and exiting without backing onto a public street. Parking spaces on the perimeter of the parking lot and abutting a property line shall have a wheel stop barrier two (2) feet from the end of the parking space.
26.12 Design Standards For Parking Structures
26.12.1 In all districts, above grade parking structures shall conform to height restrictions for zoning districts in which they are located.
26.12.2 The distance from parking structure entry and exit points to a corner of a street intersection shall conform to standards contained in the Subdivision Ordinance.
26.12.3 Ramps shall not be constructed with slopes exceeding fifteen percent (15%) and single lane entrances shall not be less than twelve (12) feet wide at the street.
26.12.4 A minimum of one (1) car length shall be provided between an exit control
-86-
gate and the inside edge of a sidewalk to minimize conflicts between exiting cars and pedestrians.
26.12.5 Parking structure facades shall be left fifty percent (50%) open and interior light levels shall be maintained at ten (10) foot candles to enhance security and safety. All parking structure lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect or shine on adjacent properties.
26.12.6 Full enclosure of any level of a parking structure may be permitted only if such structure is fully sprinkled and mechanically ventilated.
26.13 Off-Street Loading
26.13.1 All retail, commercial, and industrial structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within the building or on the lot adjacent to a private service drive.
At least one-half of such loading spaces shall have a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet by forty (40) feet, and the remaining spaces shall have a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet.
Where such loading spaces are located adjacent to a residential district, the space shall be enclosed on two (2) sides.
Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
FOR ALL RETAIL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
Square Feet of Gross Minimum Required
Floor Area in Structure Spaces or Berths
0 to 10,000 None
10,000 to 50,000 1
50,000 to 100,000 2
100,000 to 200,000 3
Each additional 100,000 1 additional
FOR ALL HOTELS, OFFICE BUILDINGS, RESTAURANTS,
SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENT
Square Feet of Gross Minimum Required
Floor Area in Structure Spaces or Berths
0 to 50,000 None
-87-
50,000 to 150,000 1
150,000 to 300,000 2
300,000 to 500,000 3
500,000 to 1,000,000 4
Each additional 500,000 1 additional
26.13.2 Kindergartens, day schools, and similar child training and care establishments shall provide loading and unloading space on a private drive, off-street, to accommodate one (1) motor vehicle for each ten (10) students or children cared for by the establishment.
26.13.3 Loading docks for any establishment which customarily receives goods between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., and is adjacent to a residential use or district, shall be designed and constructed so as to fully enclose the loading operation in order to reduce the effects of the noise of the operation on adjacent residences.
26.13.4 Where adjacent to residential uses or district, off-street loading areas shall be screened from view of the residential use or district.
26.14 Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Facilities
26.14.1 A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area.
26.14.2 For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces (from the right-of-way line).
26.14.3 For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces (from the right-of-way line) shall be provided.
26.14.4 For kiosks, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces (from the right-of-way) for each service window shall be provided.
-88-
SECTION 27 ACCESSORY BUILDING REGULATIONS
27.1 Height
No accessory building shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, nor shall it be greater in height than the main structure.
27.2 Area Regulations for Accessory Buildings or Structures in Residential and Apartment Districts
Section 27.2.1 Front Yard: All attached accessory buildings, including garages and carports, located in the area defined as the front yard shall have a front yard setback not less than that of any main building or as specified in the particular district. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located in the area defined as the front yard, but rather will be restricted to the areas defined as the rear yard and side yard.
(Ord. No. 2008-3 § 2a, 04-22-2008)
Section 27.2.2 Side Yard: All accessory buildings, including garages and carports, but not storage buildings, located in the area defined as the side yard shall have a side yard setback of not less than five (5) feet, except that in all cases where the side yard is adjacent to a side street, the side yard setback shall never be less than twenty (20) feet.
There shall be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet from any side lot line, alley line or easements line except that adjacent to a side street, the side yard shall never be less than twenty 920) feet.
(Ord. No. 2007-16 § 3b, 10-22-2007 amended by Ord. No. 2008-3, § 2a, 5-12-08)
Section 27.2.3 Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than five (5) feet from any lot line, alley line or easement line. for any accessory building, other than certain storage buildings (as provided in Section 27A.1). Carports, garages or other detached accessory buildings located within the area defined as the rear yard, rear portion of a lot, as heretofore described, shall not be located any nearer closer than five (5) fifteen (15) feet from any side or rear lot line to the main building nor nearer than five (5) feet to any side lot line. However, in all cases where any portion of the rear yard is adjacent to a street, the appropriate setback (rear or side) shall never be less than twenty-five (25) feet.
(Ord. No. 2007-16 § 3c, 10-22-2007 amended by Ord. No. 2008-3 § 2b, 04-22-2008)
27.3. Miscellaneous Regulations:
27.3.1 Storage Buildings in Residential Zones – Storage buildings within residential zones shall be restricted to the area defined as the rear yards. Setbacks as provided for in Section 27.2.3 shall apply to structures over four hundred (400) square feet, but shall not apply to structures or portable buildings less than four hundred (400) square feet in area. All such buildings
-89-
require a permit issued by the City of Center prior to construction or placement. two hundred (200) square feet, but shall not apply to structures or portable buildings less than two hundred (200) square feet in area, except that in all cases where any portion of the rear yard is adjacent to a street, the appropriate setback (rear or side) shall never be less than twenty (20) feet. Further, all such buildings require a permit issued by the City of Center prior to construction or placement. (Ord. No. 2007-16 § 3, 10-22-2007 amended by Ord. No. 2008-3 § 2d, 04-22-2008)
a. 27.3.2 Pre-manufactured Buildings in Commercial and Manufacturing Zones: Pre-manufactured buildings are allowed in commercial and manufacturing zones only in accordance with the provisions found herein. Skirting of the building will be required. Further, acceptable siding of the building must be equal, or better, than the following allowed sidings: brick, simulated brick, brick veneer, stucco, wood, vinyl, stone, or new metal. Placement or construction of pre-manufactured buildings in commercial and manufacturing zones shall be allowed only upon the granting of a permit from the City of Center. This provision shall not apply to Industrialized Structures, as such term is specifically defined in this Ordinance. (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 2e, 04-22-2008)
c. 27.3.3.Placement and Intensity of Lighting – Lighting must be placed and
directed so as to not create/constitute a nuisance or safety hazard, and shall
minimize disruption to neighbors.
NOTE: Also See Section 24.11
-90-
SECTION 28 PLATTING PROPERTY IS PERMANENTLY ZONED
28.1 Zoning Required Prior to Approval of Plat
The City Council shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within the city limits until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been permanently zoned by the City Council.
28.2 Annexation Prior to Approval of Plat
The City Council shall not approve any plat or any subdivision within any area where a petition or ordinance for annexation or a recommendation for annexation to the city is pending before the City Council unless and until such annexation shall have been approved by ordinance by the City Council.
28.3 Contemporaneous Action on Zoning and Annexation
In the event the City Council holds a hearing on proposed annexation, it may, at its discretion, hold a contemporaneous hearing upon the permanent zoning that is to be applied to the area or tract to be annexed. The City Council may, at its discretion, act contemporaneously on the matters of permanent zoning and annexation by approval of the annexation ordinance.
-91-
SECTION 29 CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES
29.1 Procedure For Classifying New/Unlisted Uses
It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate in the city. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows: (Ord. No. 2007-16 § 9g, 10-22-07)
29.1.1 The Zoning Administrator shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the Planning and Zoning Commission requesting a recommendation to the City Council as to the zoning classification(s) into which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage and amount and nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material, and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council regarding the zoning districts within which such use should be permitted, generally within sixty (60) days.
29.1.2 The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts, in determining the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted.
29.1.3 The City Council shall by ordinance approve or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate, (generally within sixty (60) days, based upon its findings.
-92-
SECTION 30 CREATION OF BUILDING SITE
30.1 Procedure for Creating Building Site/Lot
No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract, or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions:
30.1.1 The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the City Council and signed by the Mayor, and filed in the plat records of the county and counties in which the lot or tract is located.
30.1.2 The plot, tract or lot faces upon a dedicated street, having twenty-five (25) feet of right-of-way frontage existing and separately owned and existed according to the official deed records of Shelby County, Texas, prior to the effective date of this ordinance or prior to annexation to the City, whichever is applicable, in which event a building permit for only one main building conforming to all the requirements of this ordinance may be issued on each such original separately existing parcel.
30.1.3 The plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the City Council and compliance has been made with provisions and improvements approved on such site plan for all utility and drainage easements, dedication of streets, alleys and other public improvements required to meet the standards established for the platting of land. Any and all plots, tracts, or lots must be provided access via a public street or drive.
-93-
SECTION 31 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
31.1 Uses in Existence at Time of Adoption of Ordinance
A lawful non-conforming status shall exist when a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence and lawfully operating prior to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance. To obtain this status, the owner of the property must apply for, and receive, a certificate of non-conforming use, as set forth in Section 35.6.
31.2 Expansion of Non-Conforming Use Prohibited
No lawful non-conforming use or structure may be expanded or increased, unless otherwise prohibited, upon the lot or tract upon which such non-conforming use is located as of the effective date of this ordinance except to provide off-street loading or off-street parking space upon approval of the City Council.
31.3 Repairs/Normal Maintenance on Non-Conforming Uses Permitted
Repairs and normal maintenance may be made to a lawful non-conforming building provided that no structural alterations or extensions shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the building is changed to a conforming use.
31.4 Change of Non-Conforming to Conforming Use
Any lawful non-conforming use may be changed to a conforming use and once such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a non-conforming use.
31.5 Abandonment/Discontinuation of Non-Conforming Use
Whenever a lawful non-conforming use is abandoned or discontinued, all non-conforming rights shall cease and the use of the premises shall thenceforth be in conformity with this ordinance. Abandonment shall involve the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a non-conforming operation and the actual act of discontinuance. Discontinuance of a business or the vacancy of a building or premises occupied by a lawful non-conforming use for a period of six (6) months shall be construed as conclusive proof of intent to abandon the non-conforming use. Any non-conforming use not involving a permanent type of structure which is moved from the premises shall be considered to have been abandoned.
31.6 Accidental Destruction of Non-Conforming Use
If a non-conforming structure or a structure occupied by a lawful non-conforming use is destroyed by fire, act of God or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to the provisions of this ordinance. In the case of partial destruction of a non-conforming use not exceeding sixty percent (60%) of its reasonable value, reconstruction may be
-94-
permitted after a hearing and favorable action by the Zoning Board of Adjustments, but the size and function of the non-conforming use shall not be expanded.
31.7 Replacement of Non-Conforming HUD-Code Manufactured Home
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, a non-conforming HUD-Code manufactured home may be exchanged or replaced by another HUD-Code manufactured home, provided the newly located residential unit is owner-occupied. One (1) exchange of a manufactured home may be made, within fifteen (15) years of the effective date of this ordinance, for a HUD manufactured home. This applies only to owner occupied manufactured homes.
31.8 Transfer of Property with a Non-conforming Use
The transfer of property that is non-conforming in use shall be governed by the provisions found in this section.
31.8.1 Transfer of ownership of property, whether to a third party or to any heir or beneficiary of the landowner, including any transfer that is a part of a probate proceeding, shall terminate the lawful non-conforming status of any non-conforming use of the property.
31.8.2 The new owner(s) of the property may re-establish the lawful non-conforming status of any non-conforming use of the property by applying for and receiving from the appropriate, designated department of the City of Center a new Certificate of Non-Conforming Use.
31.8.3 The new owner(s) may apply for the certificate prior to the transfer of ownership of the property, but the owner(s) may not apply for such certificate after the expiration of sixty (60) days from the date of transfer of ownership, which shall be determined by the date that the instrument causing such transfer is executed. Heirs have sixty (60) days from the notice of death of the deceased.
31.8.4 The new owner(s) shall complete an application for a new certificate of non-conforming use with the appropriate, designated department of the City of Center. The application shall be posted for fifteen (15) days at City Hall. In addition, copies of the application, along with copies of Section 31.8 of this Ordinance shall be distributed within four (4) days to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the property in question. The public shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of the application to submit any objections to the application.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 5, 10-22-2007)
31.8.5 If no objection is lodged within fifteen (15) days, the City of Center shall not withhold the
granting of a new certificate of lawful non-conforming use, upon a showing by the new
owner(s) that the conditions validating the original use remain in place, and that the new owner(s)’ use shall remain the same as the previous owner(s)’ in type and scope.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 5, 10-22-2007)
-95-
31.8.5 After the expiration of the fifteen day objection period, if an objection has been properly and timely lodged, the Zoning Board of Adjustments, within fifteen (15) days from the expiration of the objection period, shall convene a hearing to determine whether to grant the application. The Zoning Board of Adjustments shall take evidence in the matter as prescribed by Section 33 of this Ordinance. In determining whether to grant the application, the Zoning Board of Adjustments shall take into consideration the totality of the circumstances surrounding the proposed continuance of the non-conforming use of the property, and weigh the objections and concerns of the party(ies) making the objection(s), against the potential hardship created on the new owner(s), should the application not be granted. The Zoning Board of Adjustments shall decide whether to grant the application within fifteen (15) days from its conclusion of the hearing. In no case shall the new owner(s) be allowed a use that exceeds in type and scope the previous owner(s)’ prior non-conforming use.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 5, 10-22-2007)
31.8.6 During the pendency of the application process, the new owner(s) may continue the non-conforming use, so long as that use remains the same as the previous owner(s)’ in type and scope.
31.8.7 The provisions of this section apply only to cases involving non-conforming uses in existence at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. A variance granted pursuant to Section 33 of this Ordinance is not transferable. Transfer of ownership of property, whether to a third party, or to any heir or beneficiary of the landowner, including any transfer that is a part of a probate proceeding, shall terminate any variance granted by the City of Center. Subsequent owners must re-apply for a variance, as provided by Section 33 of this Ordinance.
-96-
SECTION 32 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
32.1 Organization and Appointment
There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission which shall be organized, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council and function as follows:
32.1.1 Membership: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven (7)
members who are residents of the City of Center, with representation from
all City Council Districts, each to serve for a term of two (2) years and
removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and
after public hearing. Appointees shall fill positions which shall be
designated by place numbers (e.g., place 1, place 2, etc.). Vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose place becomes
vacant for any cause in the same manner as the original appointment was
made. The Mayor and City Council may appoint two (2) alternate
members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, who shall serve in an advisory capacity only to the Planning and Zoning Commission however, alternate members shall have full powers of other members when needed in order to establish a quorum at any meeting lacking a quorum among regular members of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. No. 2009-2 § 1C, 02-09-2009)
32.1.2 Terms: The terms of members filling places 1, 3, 5and 7 shall expire on June 30 of each odd-numbered year and the terms of members filling places 2,4, and 6 shall expire on June 30 of each even-numbered year. Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms, but no members shall be appointed for a term in excess of two (2) years. Newly-appointed members shall be installed at the first regular commission meeting after their appointment. Advisory members shall be elected on alternating years.
32.1.3 Organization: The commission shall hold an organizational meeting in July of each year. The commission shall meet on-call and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings consistent when the provisions of this ordinance and the requirements of law. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a chairman from its own membership at its annual organizational meeting.
32.1.4 Quorum and Compensation: A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four (4) members and/or alternate members of commission. The members shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.
32.2 Duties and Authority
The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby charged with the duty and invested with the authority to:
-97-
32.2.1 Formulate and recommend to the City Council for its adoption a city plan for the orderly growth and development of the city and its environs and from time to time recommend such changes in the plan as it finds will facilitate the movement of people and goods, and the health, recreation, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
32.2.2 Formulate a zoning plan as may be deemed best to carry out the goals of the city plan; hold public hearings and make recommendations to the City Council relating to the creation, amendment, and implementation of zoning regulations and districts as authorized under state law.
32.2.3 Exercise all powers of a commission as to approval or disapproval of plans, plats, or replats as authorized under state law.
32.2.4 Study and recommend the location, extension, and planning of public rights-of-way, parks, or other public places, and on the vacating or closing of same.
32.2.5 Study and make recommendations regarding the general design and location of public buildings, bridges, viaducts, street fixtures, and other structures and appurtenances.
32.2.6 Initiate, in the name of the city, proposals for the opening, vacating, or closing of public rights-of-way, parks, or other public places and for the change of zoning district boundaries on the area-wide basis.
32.2.7 Formulate and recommend to the City Council for its adoption policies and regulations consistent with the adopted city plan governing the location and/or operation of utilities, public facilities, and services owned or under the control of the city.
32.2.8 Submit each May a progress report to the City Council summarizing is activities for the past year and a proposed work program for the coming year.
-98-
SECTION 33 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
33.1 Creation, Membership and Procedures:
33.1.1 Zoning Board of Adjustment Established: A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby reestablished in accordance with the provisions of Texas Local Government Code, § 211.008, as amended, regarding the zoning of cities and with the powers and duties as provided in said Code.
33.1.2 Membership: The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members, each to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council for a term of two (2) years and removable for cause by the appointment authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member, whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made. Three (3) members shall serve until January 1 of odd-numbered years, as heretofore appointed, and two (2) members, as heretofore appointed, shall serve until January 1 of even-numbered years, and thereafter each member reappointed for each new appointee shall serve for a full term of two (2) years unless removed as hereinabove provided. The City Council may also appoint four (4) alternate members of the board who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the chairman of the Board, so that all cases to be heard by the Board will always be heard by a minimum number of four (4) members. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the regular members, which is for a term of two (2) years, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner and they shall be subject to removal by the same means and under the same procedures as the regular members.
33.1.3 Hearings: The hearings of the Board shall be public. The Board shall hear the intervention of any owner of property adjacent to, in the rear of, or across the street from a lot as to which the granting of any permit is pending, and shall also hear any other parties in interest. All hearings are to be heard by at least four (4) members of the Board.
33.1.4 Meetings: Regular meetings of the Board shall be held at such times as the Board may determine. Special meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman or at the written request of two regular members of the Board, or city staff, and said request to be submitted to the Chairman.
33.1.5 Rules and Regulations: The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such vote, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the City Secretary and shall be public record. The Board shall act by resolution in which seventy-five (75) percent of voting members must concur. The Board shall adopt
-99-
from time to time such additional rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of the ordinance, and shall furnish a copy of the same to the Zoning Administrator and the Building Inspector, all of which rules and regulations shall operate uniformly in all cases. All of its resolutions and orders shall be in accordance therewith.
33.2 Powers and Duties of Board
33.2.1 Appeals Based on Error: The Board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of the city of the enforcement of this ordinance.
33.2.2 Special Exceptions: The Board shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance, specifically including and limited to the following issues, upon which the Board is required to pass as follows:
(Ord. No. 2008-3 § 3a, 04-22-2008)
33.2.2.1 Permit the erection and use a building or the use of premises for railroads if such uses are in general conformity with the Master Plan and present no conflict or nuisance to adjacent properties.
33.2.2.2 Permit a public utility or public service or structure in any district , or a public utility or public service building of a ground area and of a height at variance with those provided for in the district in which such public service building is permitted to be located, when found reasonably necessary for the public health, convenience, safety, or general welfare.
33.2.2.3 Grant a permit for the extension of a use, height, or area regulation into an adjoining district where the boundary line of the district divides a lot in a single ownership on the effective date of this ordinance.
33.2.2.4 Permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value, where the Board finds some compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use and primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming use is not to continue a monopoly.
33.2.2.5 Waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements of any of the districts, whenever the character or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities, or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an
-100-
advantage or a convenience.
33.2.2.6 Determine whether an industry should be permitted within the M-1 -- Light Industrial District and M-2 -- Heavy Industrial District because the methods by which it would be operated and because of its effect upon uses within surrounding zoning districts.
33.2.27 Rule on all applications on siting of manufactured homes in districts not so zoned. Approval shall only be allowed in cases of extreme hardship under guidelines established by the Board.
33.2.3 Limitation on Reapplications: When the Board has denied a proposal, no new applications of similar nature shall be accepted by the Board or scheduled for twelve (12) months after the date of Board denial. Applications which have been withdrawn at or before the Board meeting may be resubmitted at any time for hearing before the Board.
33.2.4 Vote of 75% of Voting Members Required: The concurring vote of 75% of voting members of the Board is necessary to:
(a) reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official;
(b) decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the Board is required to pass; or
(c) authorize a variation from the terms of a zoning ordinance.
33.3 Appeals
33.3.1 Procedure: Appeals may be taken to and before the Zoning Board of Adjustment by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau in the city. Such appeal shall be made by filing in the office of the City Secretary a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The office or department from which the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record from which the action appealed was taken.
33.3.2 Stay of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Building Inspector shall certify to the Zoning Board of Adjustment that, by reason of facts in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted or by a court of equity, after notice to the office from whom the appeal was taken.
33.3.3 Notice of Hearing on Appeal: The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and shall mail notices of such
-101-
hearing to the petitioner and to the owners of property lying within two hundred (200) feet of any point of the lot or portion thereof on which a variation is desired, and to all other persons deemed by the Board to be affected thereby, such owners and persons being determined according to the current tax rolls of the City. Depositing of such written notice in the mail shall be deemed sufficient compliance therewith.
33.3.4 Decision by Board: The Board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end, shall have all powers of the officer or department from whom the appeal is taken. After the close of said hearing, a decision shall be rendered within sixty (60) days, absent extenuating circumstances.
33.3.5 The Zoning Board of Adjustments shall entertain a request to reconsider a particular variance no sooner than twelve (12) calendar months following their ruling on any particular request.
33.4 Variances
The Board shall have the power to authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done, specifically including and limited to the following issues: (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 3b, 04-22-2008)
33.4.1 Permit a variance in the yard requirements of any district where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of the provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot or topographical or other conditions, provided such variance will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare.
33.4.2 Authorize, upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this ordinance relating to the construction or alteration of buildings or structures will impose upon him unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship, such variances from the strict application of the terms of this ordinance as are in harmony with its own general purpose and intent, but only when the Board is satisfied that granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variance from the Comprehensive Plan as established by this ordinance and at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly protected.
33.4.3 The Board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
-102-
there is error of law in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement of this ordinance. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Board shall have, in addition, the following specific powers:
33.4.3.1 To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises for railroads if such uses are in general conformance with the Master Plan and present no conflict or nuisance to adjacent properties.
33.4.3.2 To permit a public utility or public service or structure in any district, or a public utility or public service building of a ground area and of a height at variance with those provided for in the district in which such public utility or public service building is permitted to be located, when found reasonably necessary for the public health, convenience, safety, or general welfare.
33.4.3.3 To grant a permit for the extension of a use, height or area regulation into an adjoining district, where the boundary line of the district divides a lot in a single ownership on the effective date of this ordinance.
33.4.3.4 To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty percent (60%) of its fair market value, where the Board finds some compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use.
33.4.3.5 To waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts, when (i) the character or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities; or (ii) when such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot. The Board shall not waive or reduce such requirements merely for the purpose of granting an advantage or a convenience.
33.4.4 A written application for variance shall be submitted together with the required fee, accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings and any necessary data, demonstrating:
a) that special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
b) that literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance
-103-
would deprive he applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance;
c) that the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
d) that granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; and
e) no non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
33.5 Changes
The Board shall have no authority to change any provisions of this ordinance and its jurisdiction is limited to hardship and borderline cases which may arise from time to time. The Board may not change the district designation of any land either to a more or less restrictive zone.
It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, that such questions shall be presented to the Board only on appeal from the decision of the Building Official and that recourse from the decisions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by the laws of the State of Texas.
-104-
SECTION 34 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL DEFINITIONS
34.1 General Rules of Construction:
The following rules of construction shall apply to the interpretation of words used in this ordinance:
34.1.1 words used in the present tense include the future tense;
34.1.2 words used in the singular number include the plural number;
34.1.3 words in the plural number include the singular number;
34.1.4 the words "building" and "structure" are synonymous;
34.1.5 the words "lot", "plot" and "tract" are synonymous; and
34.1.6 the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
34.2 Special Definitions
Except to the extent a particular provision specifies otherwise, the following definitions shall apply throughout this ordinance:
34.2.1 Abutting Property - Property abutting upon a street shall also be understood as abutting property on the other side of the street.
34.2.2 Accessory Use or Building - A use or building subordinate to and detached from the main building and used for purposes customarily incidental to the primary use of the premises.
34.2.3 Adjacent - Shall mean "next to" or "closest to" but shall not necessarily mean "touching".
34.2.4 Alley - A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
34.2.5 Antenna/Microwave Reflector - An apparatus constructed of solid, mesh, or perforated materials of any configuration that is used to receive and/or transmit microwave signals from a terrestrial or orbitally located transmitter or transmitter relay. This definition is meant to include but is not limited to what are commonly referred to as satellites which receive only earth stations.
34.2.6 Antenna, Radio or Television - The arrangement of wires or metal rods used in sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
-105-
34.2.7 Apartment - A room or suite of rooms in a multifamily dwelling or apartment house designed or occupied as a place of residence by a single family, individual or group of individuals.
34.2.8 Apartment House - Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as a home or place of residence by three (3) or more families living in independent dwelling units.
34.2.9 Area of the Lot or Building Site - The area shall be the net area of the lot or site and shall not include portions of streets and alleys.
34.2.10 Basement - A building story which is partly underground, but having a least one-half of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.
34.2.12 Block - An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; where this word is used a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two (2) streets which intersect said street on said side.
34.2.13 Board of Adjustment - The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Center.
34.2.14 Buildable Width - The width of the building site left to be built upon after the required side yards are provided.
34.2.15 Building - Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building.
34.2.16 Building, Detached - A building surrounded by yard or open space on the same building lot.
34.2.17 Building Ends - Those sides of a building having the least dimension as compared to the front or rear of a building. As used in the building space regulations for multiple-family dwelling, the term "building end" shall mean the narrowest side of a building regardless of whether it front upon a street, faces the rear of the lot or adjoins the side lot line or another building.
34.2.18 Building, Front Of - The side of a building most nearly parallel with and adjacent to the front of the lot on which it is situated.
34.2.19 Building Inspector - The Building Official or person charged with the enforcement of the zoning and building codes of the city.
34.2.20 Reserved.
-106-
34.2.21 Building Line - A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance therefrom constituting the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected.
34.2.22 Building Lot - A single tract of land located within a single block which (at time of filing for a building permit) is designed by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. It shall front upon a street or approved place. Therefore, a "building lot" may not coincide with a lot of record. A "building lot" may be subsequently subdivided into two (2) or more "building lots", and a number of "building lots" may be cumulated into one "building lot", subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
34.2.23 Building, Main or Primary - A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
34.2.24 Building Official - The Building Inspector, or any other person appointed by the City Manager or City Council to conduct inspections of buildings, plumbing, or electrical.
34.2.25 Canopy - Any structure of a permanent fixed nature attached to or independent of the main structure, built and designed for the purpose of shielding from the elements, persons or chattels or a roof-like structure of a permanent nature which is supported by or projects from the wall of a structure.
34.2.26 Cellar - A building story with more than one-half (1/2) its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.
34.2.27 Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance - An official certificate issued by the city through the enforcing official indicating conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizing legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
34.2.28 Contiguous - Shall mean "touching" or "in contact".
34.2.29 Court - An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two (2) sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one (1) side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent space.
34.2.30 Coverage - The percent of a lot or tract covered by the roof or first floor of a building.
34.2.31 Depth of Lot - The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
-107-
34.2.32 Depth of Rear Yard - The mean horizontal distance between the rear line of a building other than an accessory building and the rear lot line except as modified in the text of any section in this ordinance.
34.2.33 District - A section of the city for which the regulations governing the area, height or use of the land and buildings are uniform.
34.2.34 Duplex - A building designed for occupancy by two families living independently of each other within separate living units which have a common wall and are under one roof.
34.2.35 Dwelling Unit - A building or unit shall consist of one (1) living quarters (for instance, a duplex shall constitute two (2) living quarters.
34.2.36 Family - An individual or group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship including foster children, exchange students, and servants together with not more than two (2) additional persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the previously identified individual or group, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit or a Family Home for the Disabled as defined by the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act, Article 1011n of V.A.C.S., as it presently exists or may be amended in the future, but not including household care or rehabilitation care facilities.
34.2.37 Flood Plain - An area of land subject to inundation by a 100-year frequency flood, as shown on the flood plain map of the City of Center. The term "floor plain" is interchangeable with the term "flood hazard area".
34.2.38 Floor Area - The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding cellars, carports, garages or porches.
34.2.39 Floor Area Ratio - The ratio of total building floor area to lot area.
34.2.40 Reserved.
34.2.41 Front Yard - See Yard, front (Section 34.2.104a).
34.2.42 Garage Sale - The sale of items normally accumulated by a household subject to compliance with each of the following conditions:
a) No more than two (2) garage sales shall be allowed for the same location in any twelve (12) month period. The duration of the garage sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days. (Ord. No. 2007-16 § 9i, 10-22-2007)
b) Subject to compliance with applicable City Code, for more details
-108-
see Ordinance 94-1.
34.2.43 Gross Floor Area - The gross floor area of a building shall be measured by taking outside dimensions of the building at each floor level.
34.2.44 Heavy Load Vehicle (HLV) - A self-propelled vehicle having a Manufacturer's Recommended Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) of greater than 11,000 pounds, such as large recreational vehicles, tractor-trailers, buses, vans, and other similar vehicles. The term "truck" shall be construed to mean "heavy load vehicle" unless specifically stated otherwise.
34.2.45 Height - The vertical distance of a building measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to (1) the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface, (2) to the deck line of mansard roofs, or (3) to the mean height level between eaves and edge for hip and gable roofs and, in any event, excluding chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding ten (10) feet. If the street grade has not be officially established, the average front yard grade shall be used for a base level.
34.2.46 Industrialized Housing - A residential structure, as defined by State law, designed for use and occupancy by one (1) or more families, constructed in one (1) or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent residential site, designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the modules or modular components are transported to the permanent residential site and are erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. The term shall not mean or apply to (a) housing constructed of sectional or penalized systems not utilizing modular components; or (b) any ready-built home which is constructed so that the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling it and moving it to another location. Industrialized Housing shall mean residential structures regulated by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and as defined by Section 1202 of the Texas Occupations Code or subsequent revisions.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 1, 10-22-2007)
34.2.47 Landscape Screen - Plant material of the evergreen variety, a minimum of six (6) feet in height at the time of installation and planted on four (4) foot centers. All such landscape screens shall be permanently maintained. Adequate facilities shall be provided for permanent watering at the time of installation.
34.2.48 Light Load Vehicles (LLV) - A self-propelled vehicle having a Manufacturer's Recommended Gross Vehicle Weight not greater than 11,000 pounds, and having no more than two (2) axles, such as pick-up trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, campers and other similar vehicles, but not including automobiles and motorcycles.
-109-
34.2.49 Living Unit - The room or rooms occupied by a family and which includes cooking facilities, including cooking, sleeping, and independent restrooms.
34.2.50 Reserved.
34.2.51 Lot - An undivided tract or parcel of land under one (1) ownership having frontage upon a public street or officially approved place, either occupied or to be occupied by a building or building group, together with accessory buildings, and used together with such yards and other open spaces as are required by this ordinance, which parcel of land is designated as a separate and distinct tract and is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat of record.
34.2.52 Lot, Corner - A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the Building Inspector.
34.2.53 Lot Coverage - The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story of floor) of a building located on the lot or the area determined as the maximum cross-sectional area of the building.
34.2.54 Reserved for future use.
34.2.55 Lot Line, Front - That boundary of a building lot which is the line of an existing or dedicated street. Upon corner lots either street line may be selected as the front lot line providing a front and rear yard are provided adjacent and opposite, respectively, to the front lot line.
34.2.56 Lot Line, Rear - That boundary of a building lot which is most distant from or is most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
34.2.57 Lot Line, Side - That boundary of a building lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
34.2.58 Lot Lines - The line bounding a lot as defined herein.
34.2.59 Lot of Record - A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Appraisal District of Shelby County, Texas; or a parcel of land the deed for which is recorded in the office of the Appraisal District of Shelby County prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
34.2.60 Reserved.
-110-
34.2.61 Lot or Building Site - Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building, and including such open spaces as are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place.
34.2.62 Lot Width - The width of a lot at the front building lines.
34.2.63 Main Building - The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use.
34.2.64 Manufactured Home (HUD Code) Park - Any tract of land, under single ownership, of not less than three (3) acres and not more than ten (10) acres, approved for occupancy by manufactured housing and accessory structures related thereto and designed and operated in accordance with standards herein set forth or as set forth in any other ordinance of the City of Center relating to the location, use, construction, operation or maintenance of manufactured housing.
34.2.65 Manufactured Home (HUD Code) Subdivision - A tract of land of not less than three (3) acres to be used as a location primarily for owner-occupied HUD Code manufactured homes and which has been final platted of record in its entirety in accordance with the City of Center Subdivision Regulations and in accordance with the Section 25 of this ordinance.
34.2.66 Manufactured Modular Homes - "Modular Home" shall have the same meaning as “industrialized housing” as defined herein and regulated by Section 1202 of the Texas occupations Code.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 1, 10-22-2007)
34.2.67 Manufacturing Processes - Uses restricted from other zoning districts but permitted in the M-1 and M-2 districts under this definition are manufacturing and industrial uses which do not emit dust, smoke, odor gas, fumes, or present a possible hazard beyond the bounding property lines of the lot or tract upon which the use or uses are located, and which do not generate noise or vibration at the boundary of the lot or tract which is generally perceptible in frequency or pressure above the ambient level of noise or vibration in the adjacent area.
34.2.68 Mobile Home Park - See Manufactured Home (HUD Code) Park.
34.2.69 Mobile Home Subdivision - See Manufactured Home (HUD Code) Subdivision.
34.2.70 Reserved.
34.2.71 Non-Conforming Building or Use - A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which
-111-
it is located.
34.2.72 Occupancy - The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants.
34.2.73 Off-Street Parking Incidental to Main Use - Off-street parking spaces provided in accordance with the requirements specified by this ordinance and located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use or within two hundred (200) feet of such lot or tract and located within the same zoning district as the main use or in an adjacent parking district.
34.2.74 Off-Street Parking Space - An area for the temporary storage of an automobile which shall be permanently reserved for such purpose and which shall not be within or on any public street, alley or other right-of-way. (See Section 26 for detailed descriptions and regulations.)
34.2.75 Open Space - Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves, porches and plant material. Also see "Usable Open Space" (Section 34.2.101).
34.2.76 Open Storage - The storage of any equipment, machinery, commodities, raw, semi-finished materials, and building materials, not accessory to a residential use, which is visible from any point on the building lot line when viewed from ground level to six (6) feet above ground level, for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
34.2.77 Parking Space - An all-weather surfaced area used for parking a vehicle, not on a public street or alley, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway connecting the area with a street, permitting free ingress and egress without encroachment on the street.
34.2.78 Planning and Zoning Commission - The duly appointed Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Center.
34.2.79 Plat - A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City of Center and subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
34.2.80 Reserved.
34.2.81 Radio, Television and Microwave Towers - Structures supporting antenna for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum but excluding non-commercial antenna installations for home use of radio or television.
34.2.82 Residence - Same as dwelling; when used with district, an area of residential
-112-
regulations.
34.2.83 Residential District - Any zoning district included in this ordinance in which residential use constitutes the primary permitted use classification, including the SF-E, SF-1, SF-2, MF, MH-1 and MH-2 district classification.
34.2.84 Room - A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping quarters, but not including toilet or cooking facilities.
34.2.85 Screening Device - See "Landscape Screen".
34.2.86 Setback - The minimum horizontal distance between the front wall of any projection of the building, excluding steps and unenclosed porch and the side street.
34.2.87 Sign - An outdoor advertising device that is a structure, or that is attached to or painted on a building, or that is leaned against a structure for display on premises, or that is free standing.
34.2.88 Site Plan - A detailed line drawing, to scale, showing scale used, north arrow, date and title of project, clearly describing the project and showing the following information:
a) Property lines, location and widths of all streets, alleys and easements.
b) Proper dimensions on all fundamental features such as lots, buildings, parking spaces and landscaped areas.
c) The location of setback lines, driveway openings and sidewalks.
d) All proposed buildings, free-standing sign locations, parking areas and open spaces.
e) All required landscaping, together with a description of type of material to be used.
f) A cross section of any required or proposed screening.
g) Total square footage of the development lot; total square footage of proposed structures; total footage of landscaped areas; total percentage of coverage; density of floor area ratio where applicable; height of all structures; number of parking spaces; square footage and design features of all signs; and solid waste collection facilities.
-113-
h) Name, address and telephone number of the proponent.
34.2.89 Story -The height between the successive floors of a building from the top floor to the roof. The standard height for a story is eleven (11) feet, six (6) inches.
34.2.90 Street - Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, more than thirty (30) feet in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public or public use.
34.2.91 Street Line - A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street; the right-of-way.
34.2.92 Street, Local or Residential - A street designed to serve properties abutting and in the immediate vicinity of the street, having a minimum right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet in single family residential districts and seventy-five (75) feet in all other districts.
34.2.93 Street, Major - A street designed to serve the entire community or substantial portions of the community, as well as traffic of non-local origin and destination, having a minimum right-of-way width of one hundred (100) feet.
34.2.94 Street, Secondary or Collector - A street designed to serve an area roughly one quarter (1/4) mile distant from each side of the street, having minimum right-of-way width of seventy-five (75) feet.
34.2.95 Structural Alterations - Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beams or girders.
34.2.96 Structure - (Same as Building.)
34.2.97 Swimming Pool (Private) - A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a single family, two-family or apartment dwelling and located within the required side or rear yards; however, a pool shall not be located closer than eight (8) feet to any property line.
34.2.98 Tennis Court (Private) - A surface designed and constructed for playing the game of tennis along with all fencing, nets and related appurtenances but excluding lighting for night play in residential areas except as may be otherwise provided or restricted by the Specific Use Permit.
34.2.99 Thoroughfare - (Same as Street.)
34.2.100 Two Family Dwelling - A building designed for occupancy by two families living independently of each other within separate units which have a common wall and
-114-
are under one roof.
34.2.101 Usable Open Space - An open area which is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. An area of common usable open space shall have a slope not exceeding ten percent (10%), shall have no dimension of less than ten (10) feet, and may include landscaping, walks, water features and decorative objects. Usable open space shall not include rooftops, accessory buildings, parking areas, driveways, turn-around areas, or right-of-way or easement for streets or alleys.
34.2.102 Variance - An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the Zoning Ordinance to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district.
34.2.103 Wholesale -The sale of goods, merchandise, services and/or commodities for resale by the purchaser and does not offer retail sales to the general public.
34.2.104 Yard - An open space, other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and which is not obstructed from a point forty (40) inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the sky, except as provided for roof overhang and similar special architectural features and plant material.
34.2.104a Yard, Front - An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and from the main building to the front lot or street line with the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building line as specified for the district in which it is located.
34.2.104b Yard, Rear - An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings as herein permitted extending across the rear of a lot from one (1) side lot line to the other side lot line.
34.2.104c Yard, Side - An open, unoccupied space or spaces on one (1) side or two (2) sides of a main building and on the same lot with the building, situated between he building and a side line of the lot and extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not the rear line or front line shall be deemed a side line.
34.2.105 Zoning District Map - The official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn.
34.2.106 Zoning Ordinance - This ordinance containing land use regulations for the City of
-115-
Center.
-116-
SECTION 35 BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
35.1 General Requirements
No permanent structure may be constructed or otherwise located within the city limits prior to issuance of a Building Permit by the Building Inspector. No permanent structure constructed or otherwise located within the city limits may be occupied prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Inspector. No change in the existing conforming use of a permanent structure, or of land to a use of a different classification under this ordinance, and no change in the legally conforming use of a permanent structure or of land may take place prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Inspector.
35.2 Procedure for New or Altered Buildings
Plans for any permanent structure to be constructed or otherwise located within the city limits must be approved by the Building Inspector who, upon approval, shall issue a Building Permit. A complete application for a Building Permit shall contain details of foundation and structure sufficient to determine compliance with applicable provisions of the Building Code. Upon submission of a complete application, the Building Inspector shall issue a Building Permit. After issuance of a Building Permit and prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Building Inspector shall conduct a foundation, plumbing, electrical and framing inspection. After such inspection, the Building Inspector shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the plans and the results of the inspection comply with the provisions of all applicable ordinances and regulations.
35.3 Procedure for Vacant Land or a Change in Use
Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or a building, or for a change in a non-conforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to said Building Inspector. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the Certificate of Occupancy therefore shall be issued within ten (10) days after the application for same has been made.
35.4 Contents of Certificate of Occupancy
Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of the building and fire laws and ordinances. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the Office of the Building Inspector or his agent and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
35.5 Temporary Certificate
Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the Building Inspector for a period not exceeding six (6) months during the
-117-
completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Issuance of a temporary certificate shall not be construed to alter the respective rights, duties, or obligations of the owner or of the City relating to the use occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this ordinance.
35.6 Certificates for Non-Conforming Uses
A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for all lawful non-conforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of this ordinance. Application for such Certificate of Occupancy for a non-conforming use shall be filed with the Building Inspector by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by such non-conforming use within one (1) year of notification by the Building Official Inspector of its non-conformance. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to issue a Certificate of Occupancy for a lawful non-conforming use, but failure to apply for such Certificate of Occupancy for a non-conforming use shall be evidence that said non-conforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 2008-3 § 4, 04-22-2008)
-118-
SECTION 36 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO ALL ZONING ORDINANCES AND DISTRICTS AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
36.1 Declaration of Policy
The City declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development of land, buildings, and structures to be a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community. Therefore, no change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts except:
36.1.1. To correct any error in the regulations or map.
36.1.2. To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality.
36.1.3 To recognize changes in technology, style of living, or manner of doing business.
36.2 Authority to Amend Ordinance
The City Council may from time to time, after public hearings required by law, amend , supplement, or change the regulations herein provided or the classification or boundaries of the zoning districts. Any amendment, supplement, or change to the text of the Zoning Ordinance and/or the zoning map any change in the classification or boundaries of the zoning districts may be ordered for consideration by the City Council, may be initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council, or may be requested by the owner of the affected real property or the authorized representative of an owner of affected real property.
36.3 Public Hearing and Notice
36.3.1 Upon filing of an application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance and map, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall hold a public hearing on said application.
36.3.2 Written notice of such hearings shall be sent to the owner of the property or his agent and to all owners of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed, such notice, mailed first-class return receipt requested, to be given not less than ten (10) days before the date of such hearing, to all owners who have rendered their said property for City taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved City tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the City Post Office. Where property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property proposed to be changed is located in territory which was annexed to the City after the final date for making the renditions which are included on the
-119-
last approved City tax roll, notice to such owners shall be given by one publication in the official newspaper at least fifteen (15) days before the time of the hearing. Also, the City Secretary shall have the property, lot or tract posted with a sign at least eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches in size which shall state “Zoning change Requested for information call City Hall” and the telephone number shall be listed. Failure of owners to receive actual notice of hearing shall in no way affect the validity of the action taken.
36.4 Action of the Planning and Zoning Commission
36.4.1 If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends amendment of this ordinance to the City Council, said recommendation shall be by resolution of the Planning and Zoning Commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of its total membership present and voting. A copy of any recommended amendment shall be submitted to the City Council and shall be accompanied by a report of findings, summary of hearing and any other pertinent data.
36.4.2 The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend denial of an application with or without prejudice against the applicant to refile the application. If the Commission recommends denial of the application and fails to clearly state the same is being denied with prejudice, then it shall be deemed that said application is being recommended for denial without prejudice against refiling. If it is later determined by the Commission that there has been a sufficient change in circumstances regarding the property or in the zoning application itself, it may waive the waiting period and grant a new hearing. Newly annexed land which has been given Agricultural zoning is exempt from the one (1) year waiting period.
36.5 Action of the City Council
36.5.1 If the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended approval or denial of an application, the City Council shall set said application for public hearing and shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing by one (1) publication in the official newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing, and in addition shall send written notices to the owner of the property or his agent, and to all property owners of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property pursuant to Section 36.3.2. This notice may be issued simultaneously with the notice required by Sec. 36.3.2.
(Ord. No. 2007-16, § 8, 10-22-2007)
36.5.2 If the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended to the City Council that a proposed amendment be disapproved, the City Council may refuse to adopt the amendment by a simple majority vote of the Councilmen present and
-120-
voting. However, in order to adopt the amendment which has been recommended for disapproval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of a simple majority of all members of the City Council of the City of Center, Texas.
36.5.3 When the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended to the City Council that a proposed amendment be approved, the City Council may disapprove the petition or application for amendment by a simple majority vote of the City Councilmen present and voting. In the event of a tie vote of the City Councilmen present and voting, the Mayor may cast the deciding vote.
36.5.4 In the case of a protest against an amendment to the ordinance signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area included in the proposed change and extending two hundred (200) feet from that area, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of a simple majority of all members of the City Council of the City of Center.
36.5.5 In making its determination, the City Council shall consider the following factors:
36.5.5.1. Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in
the immediate area concerned and their relationship to the general area
and the city as a whole.
36.5.5.2 Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers and other utilities to the area and shall note the findings.
36.5.5.3 The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the city, and any special circumstances which may make a substantial part of such vacant land unsuitable for development.
36.5.5.4. The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning
classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed changes.
36.5.5.5 The manner in which other areas designated for similar development will be, or are likely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved, and whether such designation for other areas should also be modified.
36.5.5.6 Any other factors which will substantially affect the public health, safety, morals or general welfare.
36.5.6 In considering a motion to deny a zoning application, or upon voting to deny a
-121-
zoning application, the City Council shall further consider whether said application shall be denied with or without prejudice against refiling. If the City Council shall deny the application and fail to clearly state the same is being denied with prejudice, then it shall be deemed that said application is being denied without prejudice against refiling. If an application is denied with prejudice, no application may be filed for all or part of the subject tract of land for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial by the City Council. If it is determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission that there has been a sufficient change in circumstances regarding the property or in the zoning application itself, it may waive the waiting period and grant a new hearing. Newly annexed land which has been given Agricultural zoning is exempt from the one (1) year waiting period.
36.6 Effect of Denial of Petition
In case the application for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance is denied by the City Council, said application shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one (1) year subsequent to such denial. A new application affecting or including all or part of the same property must be substantially different from the application denied, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, to be eligible for consideration within one (1) year of the denial of the original application.
In the event of a reapplication affecting the same land is for a zone that will permit the same use of the property as that which would have been permitted under the denied application, the same shall not be considered to be substantially different from the application denied.
36.7 Final approval and Ordinance Adoption
If the amending ordinance is not approved within six (6) months from the time of its original consideration, the zoning request, at the option of the City Council, may be recalled for a new public hearing.
36.8 Changes in Zoning Regulations
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance not involving a particular property but involving change in the zoning regulations generally do not require notice to individual property owners. In such cases, notice of the required public hearing shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the city, stating the time and location of the public hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of such publication.
-122-
SECTION 37 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses, and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule shall be posted in the office of the administration official and may be altered or amended only by the City Council.
No permits, certificates, special exception, or variance shall be issued unless and until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action taken on proceedings before the Board of Adjustment unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
The exact charge for the following services will be established by separate ordinance:
a. For docketing a zoning petition with the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Center.
b. For docketing an application for relief with the Board of Adjustment of the City of Center.
-123-
SECTION 38 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction be fined a sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2000.00) per day and each and every day that the provisions of this ordinance are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the said penalty provided for, the right is hereby conferred and extended upon any property owner owning property in any district where such property owner may be affected or invaded by a violation of the terms of the ordinance to bring suit in such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law and equity in the protection of the rights of such property owners.
-124-
SECTION 39 VALIDITY, SEVERANCE AND CONFLICT
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall be severed from and shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so dedicated to be invalid or unconstitutional. To the extent any provision of this ordinance conflicts with other ordinances of the City of Center the terms of this ordinance shall control.
-125-
SECTION 40 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be effective upon the posting and/or publication of its caption as required by law and the City Secretary is hereby directed to implement such posting and/or publication.
-126-
APPENDIX 1
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
A
SF-E
SF-1
SF-2
TF
MF
MH-1
MH-2
C-1
C-2
M-1
M-2
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
(feet)
35
35
35
35
30
45
25
25
45
50
50
50
SIDE YARD WIDTH
(feet)
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
B
B
B
B
REAR YARD
(feet)
30
30
25
20
15
15
15
15
B
B
B
B
FRONT YARD
(feet)
35
35
30
25
20
20
20
20
B
B
B
B
LOT AREA
(square feet)
87,120
43,560
7,500
6,000
7,000
A
6,000
C
B
B
B
B
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
(feet)
100
100
60
60
70
70
60
C
B
B
B
B
MINIMUM LOT DEPTH
(feet)
200
200
100
100
90
150
100
C
B
B
B
B
MAXIMUM LOT
COVERAGE
10%
10%
35%
40%
60%
60%
40%
C
B
B
B
B
A - Total lot area shall not be less than 9,000 square feet for dwelling unit construction. For each dwelling unit over three (3) in number, no less than 1,500 square feet of additional lot area is required. A maximum of ten (10) units may be constructed per acre.
B- None required except where non-residential use abuts a residential lot in which case the requirements shall be the same as the adjoining residential zone and shall comply with visibility and parking requirements as provided within this ordinance.
C- No more than ten (10) units per acre, the minimum size of the entire park shall be at least
-127-
three (3) acres.

November 23, 2009
City of Center
ORDINANCE NUMBER 2009-20
J i~>",,-, :_<:'\"':, ' >'
AN ORDINANcltoFmCITY OF CENTER, riiXASREGtJLATING THE
DRAINAGE AND THE DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER
c
WHEREAS, the City ofG~rit~rendeavors to secure the .safetyafidpr~perty of citizens and
businesses within the City from increased risks of flood damag;eorstbtm water runoff; and,
WHEREAS, it is the de~ire6n~eCity to regulate the practlc~san~activities related to
development that increase storm water flow or potential damagetoadjoirting properties;
WHEREAS, Ordinance 96-4regulating developmentstancfai~s~hhiIlthe City of Center does
not provide specific guidance for the development practices that would minimize storm water
discharge;
1. FINDINGS OF FACT
The foregoing recitals are incorporated into this Ordinance byreference as findings of fact as if
expressly set forth herein.
2. ENACTMENT
1. That the general proviSIons Section 4. 1 within Ordin~Ilc~ 96~4arehereby repealed in so
much as they conflict with the provisions of this ordinart'Ce.
2. The provisions of the attached exhibit "A", entitledC~nterbrai~age and Storm Water
Regulations is adopted in its entirety as if set forth inlull in this ordinance and shall
govern the requirements for site development and stonn water discharge.
3. REPEALER
That any other ordinance of the City of Center in conflict with this otdinanceis repealed to the
extent that it conflicts with this ordinance or the rules, regulations arid policies adopted herein.
4. SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provisionofthis Ordinance or the
attached Exhibit shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional,thesame shall not affect the
validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so
decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
5. PROPER NofICE & MEETING
tf.-'"
6.' EFFECTIVE DATE& PUBLICATION
ATrEST:
EXHIBIT "A"
Center Drainage and Storm Water Discharge Regulations-' 2669
1. Applicability. ....
u <
c' ". .... ...........; ........ ,"
These regulations shall apply to any properties\ vithin the City Limits o! theCityof
Center, Texas and to subdivisions of property~ s defined in Chapter 2120f thel.o.cal
Government Code. Where laws or regulatiOns of the federal government or the State
of Texas impose more stringent requirements than those herein, the more stringent
requirements shall apply.
II. Drainage Control During Construction
a. Applicability . .................... .. f<
All sites, properties or locations within theincofporated city limits bf theCityhf
Center. The permit for site work shall be included in the building pertnit and stich
application for building permit shall include a site plan inclusive of a site grading
plan, site drainage plan and storm water discharge calculations.
b. NPDES General Permit Requirements "~" . i;~ i ..; ..............;
Construction contractors and/or the property oWner are responsible for meeting the
requirements of the US Environmental Protectio~ Agency (EPA), Tex,asCommission
on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and any other regulations applicable to the
specific site on which construction is occurring.
c. Basic Construction Standards
All construction sites shall require silt fencing or other silt control t6prevent erosion
onto adjoining properties, drainage structutesofstbrm water charrriels.
III. Development Standards for Drainage Control
All non-residential construction within the City? f Center meeting either.^ofthe
following categories shall be required to comlllywith these requirements for pOStconstruction
control of the site' s storm water discharge under this Secti?n.
b) Sites of three (3) acres or more regardless of percent of impervious
coverage.
c) Sites of one (1) acre but less than three (3) acreswlth' greatefthan
85% impervious coverage df the site or the immediate point of
discharge from the site..,.
d) For purposes herein, impervious coverage shall mean. a'ny non-dirt
or natural ground surface material that prevents natur~l absbtption
of water and include but not be limited to all building materials,
concrete, asphalt and gravel.
b. Discharge Control
i. Drainage Calculations . ...,;
i< ,> ,.'
Both pre-development and proposed post-development discnar~eratesshal1
be calculated for the 25- year storm event for the specific siteprior to any
site clearing, grading or the issuance ofa building permit.
ii. Design Storm
The design storm used to determine disch~tg~t~tes'~rid detention volume' .
necessary to obtain the required discharge rate shall be n storm with a .
statistical probability of occurrence of one in 25 in any given year. If the
project is \Vithin an environmentally ~riiical area, including any designated
floodplain or discharging directly'into a designated floodplain, the design
storm maybe adjusted to require discharge rates and detention basedonthe
100 year storm event at the discretion of the floodplain administrator.
iii. DischargePoint ". .. .... ..................... . ...... ." ..' ....... ....
The discharge point for drainage\Va; ter from each site shall be determined' .
based upon the preservation of mitural drainage patterns, restricting
obstructions to natural watercourseSatId whether the capacity of existing
drainagecnannels is adequate for the additional volume.
iv. DischargeRate .... .
To the extent practical, thepeakdrairi~ge water discharge rate from
and impervious surfaces on the site 'shall not exceed 0.2 cubic feetper
second per ~cre under design storm~ onditions or three percent (3%)
increase in the discharge rate from pre-development conditions, whichever
is less. . .
v. Control Measures
During neT\\ development, redevelopment and land-disturbing
managementpractices shall be used to accomplish the following:
a) Control erosion and the transport of sediment from the
measuressuch as mulching, matting, covering, silt fences~.:
sediment traps and catch ~asins, settling ponds and protective'
berms;.......>.. ..... ........
b) Permanently stabilize exposed soils that are not being actively
worked, through such methods as the installation of permanent
vegetative cover and installation of slope protective materials; and
c) Control the introducti~n'6fcontaminants and pollutants into, and
reduce and treat contaminants in drainage water, drainage control
facilities, surface waterahd groundwater, and public drainage
systems by methodssuch as covering of material stockpiles; proper
disposal of hazardous materials; regular cleaning of catch basins,
gravel truck loading and h~avy equipment areas; spill control for
fueling operations; swe~ping; and maintaining erosion control
protective features described above.
vi. Drainage Easement Requirements .... ..... ....... i.......
When drainage easements are required for the proper dischai-g~ of site "
drainage across other privateprope~ iesc'evidence of drainage easements
shall be reflected in the site plan or records filed in the deed records of
Shelby County. .. .. ~ .
vii. Floodplain Development Regulati9~~'.'",... .'; ';" h~'. ....
Nothing herein shall alter or adjust the regulations, requirementsor~'ther
provisions regulating the development of properties in, on or adjaCent to the ,
designated floodplains within the City, generally referred to as the
Floodplain Development Ordinance.
IV. Protection of Property from Grading' ofAdjoinirig Property
The provisions of this Section shall apply to permanent and temporary protectiol1of,
and encroachment on, adjoining property.
i. Maximum Slope . .. .... ..',"':.. ..
When the existing grade of a siteis~ ltered by fill, excavating, aredgil1gor
moving of earth materials, the'owllershall protect all adjoining property
during construction from encroachment or collapse by sloping the sides of
the temporary grading at a slope'Yhich is safe and not more than Ol1e .............. .,
horizontal to one vertical. In addition, adjoining property shall be protected
from encroachment or collapse~y sloping the sides of the permanent
grading at a slope not greatetthan~~() horizontal to one vertical. The
Building Official may approve temporary or permanent slopes of greater'
steepness based on a certified design by a geotechnical/ civil erlgineer.
ii. Encroachment ............................:
All grading shall occur entirely withiifthe site unless the applicant provi,des'
one of the following: .
a) Proofofownership;or.... .... c;.<..
b) An easement, granted by the fee owner of the encroached-upon
property, which authorizes 'the encroachment on the adjoining
property; or ..' ..
i./,'>' . ..,,;'
c) A letter signed by the owner of the adjoining properiy~which
authorizes such temporary encroachments during construction on
the adjoining property a.s tetnporary change of grade, temporary
stockpiling' or shoring.
111. Conflict with Other Requiremef1t~'.;;".., '. "
Nothing herein shall minimize other.requirements or regulations of the City
of Centerincluding any provisions' of the Zoning Ordinance, Floodplain
Ordinance or other generallaws, oH.1inances and policies of the City of
Center. Tothe extent that the provisions herein create situations of conflict
with other ordinances, the more sfririgent provisions as determined the
City Manager shall govern.


An ordinance of the City of Center, Texas adopting DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS   FOR  DEVELOPMENT   OF  INFRASTRUCTURE	(hereinafter called Specifications) and providing for "grandfather" circumstances,  providing  for  fines  and penalties for non-compliance, providing for the repeal of all ordinances in conflict, providing for a severability clause, and providing  for a date that this ordinance is to become  effective.
Whereas, it is necessary that the Specifications be adopted by the City of Center; and Whereas,  the Center City Council believes  it is in the best interest of the City of Center to
adopt the Specifications;

Now therefore be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Center:

Section   I .      That the Specifications attached  hereto and made  a part  of by reference is  hereby  adopted  as  the  official  Specifications  of  the  City.

Section 2. That any property or tract of land that is not in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and is not provided City utility services as of the effective date of this Ordinance, shall not be provided City utility services and no improvements on the said property or tract of land shall be accepted by the City as public infrastructure.

Section 3. That any and all changes and improvements to any property or tract of land after the effective date of this Ordinace shall be in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Example: A lot with multiple housing units may not add a housing unit or replace a housing without meeting compliance with the provisions of this Ordinace.

Section 4. That any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by any requirements of this Ordinanace, which involves the jurisdiction of the City, shall appeal in writing to the City. Relief from any requirements of the Ordinance shall be authorized by the City through amendment of this Ordinance.

Section 5. That any  person,  firm,  or  corporation  who  shall  violate  or  fail  to comply with any of the provisions of  this  Ordinance  for a  particular piece of property or tract of land within the Corporate Limits or the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the City of Center shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the maximum fine allowed by the State, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a seperate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. This section is applicable provided that the particular  piece  of  property  or tract of land in question was not  already in non-compliance as of  the date of passage  of this Ordinance  by the City Council.
 
Section 6. That all ordinances, or parts of ordinances, in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed and that all others not in conflict shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 7. If any paragraph, sentence or phrase of this ordinance be judged to be illegal or invalid, then all other parts of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective and be in full force and effect 30 days from and after its passage and approval by the City Council, duly attested by the Mayor and City Secretary, and publication in the newspaper.

CITY OF CENTER

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
 






TABLE OF CONTENTS


1.	LOT STANDA RDS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page  1

2.	EASEMENT STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . Page  1

3.	STREETS	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 2

4.	DRAINAGE	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 9

5.	WATER	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 1 1

6.	SANITARY SEWER	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 19

7.	ORAWINGS	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 26
 






The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the City and to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the Community. Hereinafter every owner or developer of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City of Center or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City shall comply with the provisions of the Ordinance.

1.	LOT STANDARDS

1.1	A lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location and type of development and shall not be less than 5,000 square feet in area. Also, the maximum single family residences (house, mobile home, prefabricated home, etc.) per lot shall be one.

1.2	Depth and width  of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.

1.3	3 Each lot shall front upon a public street and shall have a 5 foot side building setback line with a 25 foot front building setback line. Exceptions  to this will  only be considered if the portion of the right-of-way from the public street not being utilized by the street surface, curbing, and drainage is adequate enough to allow less than  a 2 5 foot setback.

1.4	4    Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential  development  from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.

1.5	Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial  to street lines.

2.	EASEMENT STANDARDS

2.1	Utility easements shall be provided within the proposed development as may be necessary to assure the proper design, installation and maintenance of either underground or aerial utilities. Easement widths shall be determined by the type of utility; however, an easement shall not normally be required along the rear of lots served by a dedicated alley.

2.2	When a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream or a proposed drainage easement, there shall be provided a storm  water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the line for such watercourse.		The easement or right-of-way  width for such watercourse shall be determined	by good engineering practice and may require improvement or realignment to assure proper drainage of storm water.



Page  I
 
-	-  --	---






2.3	The minimum width of a utility or drainage easement shall be twenty (20) feet.

Where residential and building sites are located in the floodway or flood plain, the minimum (regulatory flood) finish floor elevation shall be one ( 1) foot above the 100 year flood plain elevation.

l.	STREETS

The physical design of the streets in the proposed development shall confonn to the following minimum standards:

3.1	The arrangement of streets in a development shall either:

3.	1.1		Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of the existing principal streets in surrounding areas or;

3.1.2		Confonn to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to meet a  particular  situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance of existing streets impractical.

3.2	Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic in residential areas will be discouraged.

3.3	Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the City may require such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.

3.4	Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way the City may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. The distance of a street fonn a railroad shall recognize the problem of approach grades and future grade separations.

3.5	Street Intersections - Where more than two (2) streets intersect at a point shall be avoided.

3.5.1	No major street shall intersect any other major street at an angle of less than eighty ( 80) degrees.

3.5.2	No collector street shall intersect a major street at an angle of less than eighty
(80) degrees, or another collector street at an angle of less than seventy (70) degrees.





Page 2
 
•
3.5.3	No local street shall intersect any major street at an angle of less than eighty
(80)  degrees,  or any collector street at an  angle  of  less  than  eighty  (80)
degrees.

3.6	Cul-de-sacs may be permitted where the form or contour of the land or the shape of the property makes such street design appropriate.  Such  cul-de-sacs  shall  provide proper access to all lots and shall generally not  exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length and a tum-around shall be provided at the closed end which has a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet (60 feet in  Commercial  and  Industrial  areas. Dead  end streets will  not be allowed.

3.7	Street right-of-way width shall not be less than as follows:
Pavement  Width  in Feet
Street Type	Right-of-Way Feet	Back Curb -Back Curb
Major Thoroughfare	60	36
Collector, Industrial or
Commercial Street	60	36
Local, Residential	50	30

3.8	No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to approval of the City Manager or designee.

3.9	Street Construction Requirements - All development street construction shall be in accordance with the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) Standard Specification for Construction of Highways, Streets and Bridges, latest edition, hereinafter referred to as the TxDOT. ITEM Copies of the TxDOT ITEM may be obtained from the TxDOT in Austin, Texas.

Local design standards, in accordance with TxDOT ITEM, are included as drawings within this section and shall be complied with by the developer.




















Page 3
 
3.9.1	Preparing  Right of Way  (TxDOT ITEM  100).

All areas shall be cleared of all structures and obstructions. Such obstructions shall be considered to include remains of houses, foundations, floor slabs, concrete, brick, lumber, plaster, septic tank drain fields, basements, abandoned utility pipes or conduits, equipment, fences, retaining ealls, and shacks. Those trees, shrubs and other landscape features specifically designated by  the Engineer for preservation shall be carefully protected form abuse, marring, or damage during construction operations. Continual parking and/or servicing of equipment under the branches of trees markes for preservation and require pruning, they shall be trimmed as directed by the Engineer and all exposed cuts over 2 inches in diameter shall be treated with a material approved by the Engineer.

Holes remaining after removal of all obstructions, objectionable material, trees, stumps, etc., shall be backfilled with approved material, compacted and restored to approximately its original contours by blading, bulldozing, or by other methods, as approved by the Engineer. In areas to be immediately excavated, the backfillling of holes may not be required when approved by the Engineer.

Before backfilling, the remaining ends of all abandoned storm sewers, culverts, sanitary sewers, conduits, and water or gas pipes over 3 inches in diameter, shall be plugged with an adequate quantity of concrete to form a tight closure and inspected by City Manager or designee.

3.9.2	Excavation (TxDot ITEM 110).

Roadway excavation" shall consist of the required excavation within the limits of the roadway (except excavation otherwise designated as channel excavation, structural excavaton, etc.}; the removal and proper utilization or disposal of all excavated materials; and the constructing, shaping and finishing of all earthwork on the entire length of roadway and approaches to same, in conformity with the required lines, grades and typical cross sections and in accordance with specification requirements herein outlined. Compaction of embankments shall conform to the method of "Ordinary Compaction".

All suitable excavated materials shall be utilized, insofar as practicable, in constructing the required roadway sections or in uniformly widening embankments, flattening slopes, etc. Unsuitable roadway excavation  and roadway excavation in excess of that needed  for construction  shall be known as "Waste" and shall be disposed of outside the limits of the right-of-way. Unsuitable material encountered below subgrade elevation in  roadway  cuts, shall be replaced  with  other suitable material.


Page 4
 
During construction the roadbed and ditches shall be maintained in a condition to insure proper drainage at all times. Ditches and channels shall be so constructed and maintained to avoid damage to the roadway section.

The street subgrade shall be constructed to a minimum depth of eight  (8) inches below the lower limits of the base course.

3.9.3	Flexible  Base  (TxDOT ITEM 247).

Proir to delivery of the base material, the subgrade or existing roadbed shall be shaped to conform to the planned typical sections.

Base material shall be spread uniformly and shaped the same day as delivered. In the event inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstances render this impractical, the material shall be shaped as soon as practical.

Prior to compacting the flexible base, the flexible base material shall be bladed and shaped to conform to the typical sections as shown on the plans. All areas of segregated coarse or fine material shall be corrected or removed and replaced with well graded material.

Throughout this entire operation, the shape of each course shall be maintained by blading. Upon competion, the surface shall be smooth and in conformity with the typical section as shown on the plans and the established lines and grades. Prioir to placing the surfacing on the completed base, the base shall be cured.  The flexible base shall be compacted by "Density Control".

Typical cross sections sre shown on the included plan and require 6 inches of compacted base material.

The flexible base shall be one of the following types, as follows:

Type A. Type A material shall be crushed stone produced from oversize quarried aggregate, sized by crushing and produced from a naturally occurring single source. Crushed gravel or uncrushed gravel shall not be acceptable for Type A material. No blending of sources and/or additive materials will be allowed in Type A material.

Type B.   Type B material shall be crushed  or uncrushed  gravel.









Page 5
 
•
Type C.  Type C material shall be crushed gravel.  Unless otherwise
shown on the plans, crushed gravel shall have a minimum of 60 percent of the particles retained on the No. 4 sieve with two  (2) or more crushed faces as determined by Test Method Tex-460-A, Part I.

The fexible base shall meet the physical requirements of Grade 1,2,3,4 or 5.

3.9.4	Lime Stabilized Subgrade (TxDOT ITEM 260)

This item shall govern for treating the existing subgrade by pulverizing, adding lime, mixing, and compacting the material as specified in this item.

Lime shall be in accordance with TxDOT Specifications  Item No. 264.

In areas where lime stabilized subgrade is directed the amount of lime to be added shall be 32 lbs. per square yard. The soil and lime should be thoroughly mixed at the proper moisture content, an adequate mellowing period between initial and final mixing should be allowed, the moisture content should be adjusted to optimum or slightly above, and the mixture should be compacted to a minimum of 95 percent of ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) density.

3.9.5	Prime (TxDOT ITEM  310)

The completed base course shall receive a surface prime of MC30. The rate of application shall be a minimum of 0.25 gallons per square yard.

When the area and/or base is satisfactory to receive the prime coat, the surface shall be cleaned by sweeping or other approved methods. If found necessary, the surface shall be lightly sprinkled just prior to application of the asphaltic material. The asphaltic material shall be applied on the clean surface by an approved type of self-propelled pressure distributor so operated as to distribute the material in the quantity specified, evenly and smoothly under a pressure necessary for proper distribution. The develper shall provide all necessary facilities for determining the temperature of the asphaltic material in all of the heating equipment and in the distributor, for determining the rate at which it is applied, and for securing uniformly at the junction  of two distributor loads.

The developer will select the temperature of application based on the temperature-viscosity relationship that will permit application of the asphalt within the limits recommended in the Item, "Asphalts, Oils and Emulsions". The recommended range for the viscosity of the asphalt is t 00 to t 2 5 centistokes. The developer shall apply the asphalt  at a  temperature  within 15°F of  the  temperature  selected.



Page 6
 







The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the surface until the work is accepted.

No traffic, hauling or placement of any subsequent courses shall be permitted over the freshly applied prime coat until approved by the City Manager or designee.

3.9.6	Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Pavement (TxDot ITEM 340)

The pavement shall be constructed on the previously completed and approved subgrade, base, existing wearing surface, or in the case of a bridge, on the prepared slab or as otherwise specified herein and in accordance with the details shown on the plans.

The asphaltic material shall be placed on the primed base course at a rate of 165 pounds per square yard (approximately I V2 inches thick) and shall meet the requirments of Type "D" (Fine-Graded  Surface Course).

The asphaltic material shall form from 4 to 8 percent of the mixture by weight, or form 9 to 19 percent of the mixture by volume.

The asphaltic mixture, when placed with a spreading and finishing machine, or tack coat shall not be placed when the air temperature is below 50°F and is falling, but it may be placed when the air temperature is above 40°F and is rising. The asphaltic mixture, when placed with a motor grader, shall not be placed when tlie air temperature is below 60°F and is  falling,  but  may  be placed when the air temperature  is  above  50°F  and  rising.  The  air temperature shall be taken in the shade away from artificial heat. Mat thicknesses of 1 V2 inches and less shall not be placed when the temperature of the surface on which the mat is to be placed is below 50°F. No mixture with lightweight coarse aggregate shall be placed when the temperature of  the surface on which the mat is to be placed is below 50°F. It is further provided that the tack coat or asphaltic mixture shall be placed only when the humidity, general weather conditions and temperature  and moisture condition of the base are  suitable.

If, after being discharged from the mixer and prior co placing, the temperature of the asphaltic mixture is 50°F or below, or t 25°F or above, all or any part of the load may be rejected.









Page 7
 
3.9.7	Concrete Pavement (TxDOT ITEM 360)

Concrete pavement may be used in place  of asphalt and base within the development provided the subgrade is prepared as shown in the attached details.

The pavement shall consist of Type A Portland cement concrete, with reinforcement as shown on the plans, with monolithic curbs, constructed  as herein specified on the prepared subgrade with the minimum thickness of  6 inches and to the lines and grades established. Steel reinforcement shall be placed in the concrete and shall be No.  4 bars spaced at  1 8 inches on center in  both  directions.    Reinforcement  shall be continuous.

Tranverse expansion joints shall be formed perpendicular to the centerline and surface of the pavement and shall be constructed in accordance with the sequence of operations shown on thw pains. The concrete faces of the joint seal space shall be left true to line and section throughout the entire length of the joint. On completion of curing of the pavement, the joint sealing filler of the type specified shall be placed in accordance with plans.

Tranverse contraction joints shall be formed or sawed joints perpendicular to the centerline and surface of the pavement and shall be constructed by the method, and in the squence of operations, as shown on pains. Where sawed joints are used, contraction joints at approximately 60-foot intervals shall be sawed as sppm as sawing can be accomplished without damage to the pavement and before 24 hours after the concrete has been placed. The remaining contraction joints shall be sawed in a uniform pattern and they shall be completed before placing concrete in succeeding lanes and before permitting traffice to use the pavement.

Longitudinal joints shall be of the type or alternate types shown on the plans and shall be constructed of specified materials in accordance with provisions of the plans. Longitudinal joints shall be constructed accurately to required lines, shall be perpendicular to the pavement surface at the joint, and the pavement surface over and adjacent to the joint shall be finished as specified.

Longitudinal joints shall be sawed as soon as sawing can be accomplished without damage to the pavement. Sawing shall not cause damage to the pavement and the groove shall be cut with a minimum of spalling. No traffic (including construciton traffic) shall be permitted on the pavement until the longitudinal joint is cut. When the flex plane type longitudinal joint is used, it shall be placed behind the longitudinal float.

3.9.8	Concrete Curb and Gutter and Valley Gutter


Page 8
 
The curbs, gutters, and valley gutters shall be constructed of Class A (3000 PSI) concrete, shall receive membrane curing and shall comply with the included standard drawings.

Valley gutter shall be constructed at the street intersections where it is anticipated that storm water will cross the intersecting streets.

4.	DRAINAGE

The drainage system in the proposed  development shall conform to the minimum standards.

4.1	General Requirements

4. 1. 1     The streets, inlets, storm sewer pipe and all other drainage structures shall be designed to accommodate a 10 year storm. All  lots within  the development shall  be  required  to be above the  100 year  flood  plain.

4.1.2	Provisions shall be made to prohibit the storm discharge from the proposed development from damaging the downstream property. Where required, drainage easements shall be obtained from downstream property owners by the developer.

4.2	Drainage  Construction  Requirements

4.2.1	Storm Sewer Pipe (TxDOT ITEM 464)

4.2.1. 1                        Storm sewer pipe shall be reinforced  concrete in accordance with ASTM designation C76 and shall be either Class Illor Class
IV.  Minimum size shall be 12".

4.2.1.2	The culvert pipe shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of these specifications, to the lines and  grades shown on the plans, and shall be sizes and dimensions shown thereon. The installation  of pipe shall include all joints  or etc., as may required to complete the work. The location of private driveway and side road pipe may be varied as deemed necessary.

4.2.1.3	Pipe shall be substantially free form fractures, large or deep cracks and surface roughness. The ends of the pipe shall be normal to the walls and centerline of the pipe.

4.2.2	Excavation and Backfill for Structures (TxDOT ITEM 400)



Page 9
 
Class C bedding shall apply and allows the pipe to be placed on a foundation of stable earth such that the bedding is shaped to flt the lower 10% height of the overall pipe.

4.2.3	Pipe Laying

Laying of the pipe on the prepared bedding shall start at the outlet end with the tongue end pointing downstream and proceed  to the inlet end with the abutting sections properly matched and true to the grade shwon on the plans. When multiple pipes are installed in the same trench, the lateral clearance between the pipes shall be one-half diameter of the pipe.

4.2.4	Joints

Both ends of the pipe shall be clean and dry and shall be factory coated with a suitable asphaltic primer. The entire diameter of the grove shall be coated iwth a V2 inch thick layer of mastic. The tongue end shall be shoved home with sufficient pressure to make a tight joint. The lift holes in the roof of the pipe shall also be filled with mastic.

4.2.5	Inlets and Junction Boxes (TxDOT ITEM 465)

Inlets and junction boxes shall be constructed at the location shown on the plans and in accordance with the TxDOT standard drawings. The curb inlet may be recessed.  The materials shall be Class A concrete.

4.2.6	Headwalls Wingwalls  and Aprons  (TxDOT ITEM  466)

Headwalls, wingwalls and aprons shall be constructed where pipe culverts cross under streets in the proposed subdivisions. These structures shall be  cast in place using Class A concrete with steel reinforcement. These items shall also be  required  where  storm sewer pipes discharge  into open channels.


















Page  10
 
5.	WATER

The proposed subdivision shall be served by an adequate water supply for consumer usage and fire protection. The system shall meet all the requirements of the State Health Department, State Board of Fire Insurance and the requirements of this Ordinance.

5.1	General Requirements

5.1.1	Minimum supply flow rates shall be 750 gallons per minute and minimum anticipated pressures shall be 35 psi. It shall be the developers responsibility to construct and connect the developments water mains to the existing source outside the proposed development.

5.1.2	Water mains shall be constructed four feet behind the curb or from edge of road base and generally be located on the north and west sides of the proposed streets or at a location approved by the City Manager or his designee based on future considerations for accessibility to perform maintenance.

5.1.3	Water mains shall be a minimum 6 inches in diameter or larger as required for necessary  normal consumption and fire protection.

5.1.4	Water mains shall be placed  no closer than nine feet to a sanitary sewer main.

5.1.5	Valves shall be placed at all main junctions to allow isolation of mains along lateral streets. A valve shall be placed at 1000 foot intervals along long feeder mains.

 
5.1.6



5.1.7



5. 1 .8



5. 1.9



5.1.10

5. I.11
 
Water mains shall be constructed a minimum of 4 feet below the proposed finish grade of the surface.

Right-of -way clearing and rough grading to within 6 inches of final grade shall be accomplished  prior to installation of water mains, services and fire hydrants.

Where water mains are to be constructed outside the limits of the street right­ of-way, the developer shall provide a 20 foot wide dedicated easement.

Water mains constructed within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City shall meet all the requirements of this Ordinance.
All construction and planning costs shall be the responsibility of the developer. Other  utilities  disturbed   or  broken   during  construction   operations  shall  be
responsibility  of  the  subdivider  and  shall  be  repaired  to  like-new  condition
immediately.


Page  11
 
5.2	Constructions Requirements

Construction shall be in accordance with the applicable American Water Works Association (AWWA) Specifications, the State Health Department, the State Fire Insurance  Board  and  this Ordinance.

 
5.2. J







5.2.2

5.2.2. J





5.2.2.2




5.2.3
 
Clearing and Grubbing shall consist of the removal and disposal of trees, stumps, brush, roots, vegetation, logs, rubbish and other objectionable matter. The permanent easement shall be cleared of brush, logs, rubbish, trees and shrubs. All cleared and grubbed material shall be disposed of outside the easement or right-of-way.

When burning of brush is permitted, the following shall govern:

The City Fire Department and the Texas Forestry Service shall be notified of the intention to bum before burning any brush or other debris. Brush piles and fires shall be controlled as to size to eliminate possible dangers of forest or grass fires.

Where construction is on new location, the brush shall be piled and burned in center of the right-of-way.  No timber shall be cut or defaced  outside  the  permanent  easement.

Trenches

All utility lines shall be constructed in open cut trenches. Trenches shall be sheathed and braced to the extent necessary to maintain the sides of the trench in vertical position throughout  the construction period. Adequacy of  the sheathing and  bracing shall be the responsibility  of the developer.

The trench bottom shall be continuous, relatively smooth and free of rocks and shall be constructed to provide a firm, stable and uniform support for the full length of the pipe. Bell holes shall be provided at each joint to permit proper joint assembly and alignment.
 

5.2.4	Trench  Safety Systems

The developer shall be required to furnish and utilize a trench safety system. The trench safety system utilized shall meet all requirements of the proposed amendments to OSHA rules and regulations 29 CFR J 926 Subpart P Excavations. This standard classifies soil types and the corresponding method of protection required, shoring, sloping, benching and blocking. If the method being used does not correspond with the soil type encountered then the developer must furnish the appropriate method.


Page  12
 
5.2.5	Bedding

Bedding shall be required to bring the trench bottom up to grade. Precautions shall be taken to ensure that adequate and uniform support is provided under the pipe and to avoid differential settlement of the pipe.

Bedding Classes A, B, C, or D, as described in ASTM C 12-74 shall be used for all rigid pipe.

Pipe embedment  is shown on the  included  drawing.

5.2.6	Backfill

Trenches shall be backfilled with materials selected form trench excavations or obtained from other sources, which is free from stones of such size as to interfere with compaction and is free form large lumps which will not break down readily under compaction. Any material retained on a 3 inch sieve, or material excavated in such a manner as to produce large lumps not easily broken down or which cannot spread in loose layers shall not be used. In general, material excavated by means of a trenching machine will meet the requirements above, provided large stones are not present.

The pipe shall be uniformly and continuously supported over its entire length on firm, stable material. Blocking shall not be used to change pipe grade or to intermittently support pipe across excavated sections.

After bedding has been prepared and the pipes installed as required by the pertinent specifications, selected materials from excavation or borrow shall be placed along both sides of the pipe equally in uniform layers not exceeding 6 inches in depth (loose measurement). If required,  the backfill  may be wetted and thoroughly compacted. Each side  of  the  pipe  shall  be  supported  by  a berm of thoroughly compacted material at least as wide as  the  external diameter of the pipe, except insofar as undisturbed material protrudes into this area.

Filling and/or backfilling shall be continued in this manner to a point at least 6 inches  over the top of the  pipe. Special care shall be taken to secure thorough compaction of the material placed under the hunches of the pipe. All fill or backfill below the top of the pipe shall be compacted in the manner prescribed regardless of whether or not such material is placed within the limits of the embankment,  or roadbed.






Page 13
 
5.2.7	Water Mains

Piping for water lines shall be of types and materials specified herein. The interior of the pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign matter before being lowered into the trench and shall be kept clean during laying operations by plugging or other approved method. The full length of each section of pipe shall rest solidly upon the pipe bed, with recesses excavated to accommodate bells and joints. Any pipe that has the grade or joint disturbed after laying shall be taken up and relaid. Pipe shall not be laid in water, or when trench or weather conditions are unsuitable for the work. When work is not in progress, open ends of pipe and fittings shall be securely closed so that no trench water, earth or other substances will enter the pipes or fittings. Any section of pipe found to be defective before or after laying shall be replaced with sound pipe. Where pipe ends are left for future connections, they shall be valved, plugged or capped. The pipe and accessories shall be new and unused.

 
5.2.7. I






5.2.7. l. l







5.2.7.1.2
 
Plastic Pipe

This section designates the requirements  for Polyvinyl Chloride Plastic (PVC) Pipe.

Materials

The PVC pipe shall conform to all the requirements set forth in AWWA C900 and shall be Class 1 50 and have cast iron equivalent outside diameter.

Installation

All pipe shall be installed in accordance with ASTM D2774 and have a minimum cover of 48". Pipe may be bent to the minimum radius recommended by the manufacturer for the kind, type, grade, wall thickness and diameter of the specified pipe. During pipe lowering operations, care shall be taken to avoid imposing strains that will over stress or buckle the pipe.

PVC pipe shall be stored so as to prevent damage by crushing or piercing. If stored for any extended length of time, it shall be under cover and not in direct sunlight.






Page  14
 
5.2.7.2	Ductile Iron Pipe

This section designates the requirements for ductile iron pipe.

5.2.7.2.1	Material

The ductile iron pipe shall confonn to all requirements set forth in the American Water Works Association Standard C 151 shall be class 50.

5.2.7.2.2	Installation

All pipe shall be installed in accordance with AWWA C600. Proper implements, tools and facilities shall be provided and used for the safe and convenient performance of the work. All pipe  shall be lowered carefully into the trench by means of a derrick, ropes, or other suitable tools or equipment in such a manner as to prevent damage to the pipe. Under  no circumstances shall the pipe be dropped or dumped into the trench. The trench shall be de-watered prior to installation of the pipe.

All lumps, blisters and excess coating shall be removed from the socket and plain ends of each pipe. The outside of the plain end and the inside of the bell shall be wiped clean and dry and be free form dirt, sand, grit or any other foreign material before the pipe is laid.

As each length of pipe is placed in the trench, the joint shall be assembled and the pipe brought  to correct  line and grade. The pipe shall then be secured in place with approved  backfill  material.

5.2.7.3	Connection of Existing System to Proposed Improvements

The developer shall provide all fittings and perform the necessary work associated with connection of the existing piping systems (lines currently in use) to the completed distribution lines proposed.








Page 15
 
5.2.7.4	Cleanup

Upon completion of the installation of the water lines and all appurtenances, the developer shall remove all debris and surplus materials resulting from the work.

5.2.8	Valves and Fittings

 
5.2.8. 1

5.2.8.1.1
 
Gate Valves

Materials

All gate valves shall be mechanical joint Mueller gate valves, or approved equal. Gate valves shall be designed for a minimum water working pressure of not less than 150 pounds per square inch and shall conform to the requirements of the American Water Works Association Standard CSOO.

Installation

Prior to installation, gate valves shall be inspected for direction of opening, freedom of operation, tightness of pressure containing bolting, cleanliness of valve parts and especially setting surfaces, handling damages and cracks.
 

Gate valves shall be set plumb. Where feasible, valves shall be located outside the paved areas of roads and streets.

5.2.8.2	Valve Boxes

A valve box shall be provided for every valve. The valve box shall not transmit shock or stress to the valve and shall be centered over the operating nut of the valve. The box cover shall be set flush with the surface of the finished areas.

5.2.8.3	Fittings

5.2.8.3.1	Materials

All fittings shall be ductile iron and of the size shown on the plans. All fittings shall conform to American Water Works  Association  Standard  C 1 10.


Page 16
 
5.2.8.3.2.








5.2.8.4







5.2.9

5.2.9.t






















5.2.9.2
 


















Fire Hydrants
 
Installation

All fittings shall be installed in the locations designated on the plans. Any blocking required, as shown on the included plans, shall be installed prior to the backfilling operation.

Water  Service  Connections

The developer shall furnish and install a water service connection at each lot and in accordance with the detail drawing included herein.




Materials

All fire hydrants shall conform to the requirements of the American Water Works Association Standard C502. All fire hydrants shall be Mueller Compression Type with two (2) 2V2 11 hose outlets and one {1) 4V2" pumper outlet. Nozzle threads shall conform to NFPA number 194 for National Standard Fire Hose Coupling Screw Threads. Fire hydrants shall be 611 diameter and dry barrel with mechanical joint inlet connections.

Nipples used for fire hydrant connection shall be 611 diameter ductile iron pipe Class 50 and shall conform to the requirements of the American Water Works Association Standard C 151.

Gate valves, tees and retaining glands shall be 611 diameter mechanical  joint.

Installation

Prior to installation, all hydrants shall be inspected for nozzle threading, operating nut and capnut dimensions, cleanliness, handling damage and cracks.

All hydrants shall stand plumb and shall have their hose nozzles parallel with the roadway with the pumper nozzle facing the roadway  street.

Hydrants shall be set to the established grade, with the centerline of the lowest nozzle  1 811    above ground.   Each hydrant shall be


Page 17
 
connected to the main with a 611 mechanical joint tee and a 611 diameter ductile iron pipe controlled by a 611 Mueller  Gate Valve.

The fire hydrant shall be blocked and shall have a drainage system as shown on the plans to prevent damage to the barrel caused by freezing.

 
5.2.10





5.2.10.1
 
Disinfecting and Testing

All lines constructed in accordance with this Ordinance shall be disinfected and tested  prior to final acceptance.

Disinfecting

The developer shall disinfect the lines in accordance with AWWA C651 and may elect to "Slug" segments of the line during installation with granulated chlorine such as HTH or an approved equal. This method or any alternate shall  be performed in accordance with and at the chlorine concentrations specified In the AWWA C601 Specification. The developer shall sample the water in the mains after the chlorinated water has been flushed and replaced with water from the supply system. These samples shall be submitted for bacteriological testing by an approved laboratory. Mains failing these tests shall be disinfected, flushed and retested.



























Page 18
 
5.2. 10.2	Testing

The developer shall perform a hydrostatic test on all completed lines. Upon completion and approval of the disinfecting of the lines, the necessary valves shall be opened to allow system­ pressure to be exerted on  the  newly  constructed  lines.  Care shall be exercised to remove all entrapped air from lines by draining the entire segment being tested. This can be accomplished by opening the relief valves, fire hydrants, bleed valves or service  connection valves located at the highest elevations along the line. Once all air has been  removed  from the lines and the valves closed, the working line pressure shall be measured with a gauge applied to a fitting at or near the highest elevation along the line. All valves required to isolate the segment being tested shall be closed. With the test segment isolated, an external pump and potable  water  supply  shall  be used to increase the test segment pressure. Leakage, shall not exceed 10 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of pipe per 24 hours when  tested  at  1 'h  times the working  pressure.

Any line segment being tested that fails to meet the allowable pressure loss or leakage requirements established herein and by the AWWA C600 Specification shall be rejected. The developer shall repair any rejected segment, redisinfect the segment and retest the segment.

6.	SANITARY SEWER

The proposed subdivision shall be served by an adequate sanitary sewer system and meet all the requirements of the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission and this Ordinance.

6. 1	General  Requirements

6. 1. 1 Sewer mains shall be constructed four feet behind the curb or road bed and generally located on the south and east sides of the proposed streets or at a location approved by the City Manager or his designee based on future considerations for accessibility to perform maintenance.

6. I .2         Sewer mains shall be a minimum of 6 inches in diameter or larger as required for design flows.

6. I.3            Sewer mains shall be placed no closer than nine feet to a water main.  When a sewer main crosses a water main, the sewer main must be encased.


Page  19
 
•
6. 1 •4	Manholes shall be placed at all sewer main junctions to allow for clean out. A
manhole shall be placed at 500 foot intervals along long sewer mains.

6. 1.5           Sewer mains shall be constructed such that the outer end of the service pipe is a minimum of 4 feet below the finished curb grade or edge of road bed fronting each lot in the development or at a depth approved by the City Manager or designee in certain circumstances.

6. 1.6         Right-of-way clearing and rough grading to within 6 inches of final grade shall be accomplished prior to installation of manholes, cleanouts and services.

Where sewer mains are to be constructed outside the limits of the street right­ of-way, the developer shall provide a 20 foot wide dedicated easement.

6. 1.7      Sewer mains constructed within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City shall meet all the requirements of this Ordinance.

6.1.8	All construction and planning costs shall be the responsibility of the developer.

6. 1.9 Other  utilities  disturbed  or  broken  during  construction  shall  be  the responsibility of the developer and shall be repaired to like-new condition immediately.
































Page 20
 
6.1.10
 
All sewers shall be designed and constructed to give a velocity when flowing full of not less than 2 feet per second. The following shall be the minimum acceptable slopes:
 

 
Inside Diameter
 
Fall in Feet Per  100 Feet of
 
 	of Pipe	Sewer 	


6	0.50
8	0.33
10	0.25
12	0.20
15	0.15
18	0.11
24	0.08
30	0.055

6.1.11		Flow rates for sizing the sewer mains shall be established using the following table (peak flows):




 
Source	Daily Sewage Flow-Gallons
 
Number of Persons Per Residence
 
Peak Flow­ Gallons
 
 	Per Person	Per Day 	

 
Residential Trailer Park Mobile Homes School
Office Building Factory
Motel Hospital
Nursing  Home Restaurant Industrial



6.2	Construction  Requirements
 
100
50
75
20
20
20
50
200 per bed
100 per bed
5 per meal
based on water consumption
 
3
2V2
3
 
1200
500
900
 

Construction shall be in accordance with the Texas Department of Health and this Ordinance. Sewer lines shall be designed considering the estimated contributory population  to be served  in the future, plus adequate allowance  for institutional  and


Page 21
 
•
commercial flows. Strict attention shall be given to minimizing infiltration and inflow
into the system.

6.2. 1	Clearing and Grubbing

Shall consist of the same requirements established herein for water mains.

6.2.2	Burning of Brush

Shall consist of the same requirements established herein for water mains.

6.2.3	Trenches

Shall consist of the same requirements established herein for water mains.

6.2.4	Trench Safety Systems

Shall consist of the same requirements established herein for water mains.

6.2.5	Bedding

Bedding shall be required to bring the trench bottom up to grade. Precautions shall be taken to ensure that adequate and uniform support is provided under the pipe and to avoid differential settlement of the pipe.

Bedding Classes A, B, C, or D, as described in ASTM C 12 shall be used for all rigid pipe.

Bedding Material Classes I, II or Ill as described in ASTM 02321 shall be used for all flexible and semi-rigid  pipe.

6.2.6	Backfilling

Shall consist of the same requirements established herein for water mains.

6.2.7	Sewer Line Piping and Fittings

Piping for sewer lines shall be of types and materials specified herein. The interior of the pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign matter before being lowered into the trench and shall be kept clean during laying operations by plugging or other approved method. The full length of each section of pipe shall rest solidly upon the pipe bed with recesses excavated to accommodate bells and joints. Any pipe that has the grade or joint disturbed after laying shall be taken up and relaid.  Pipe shall not be laid in water or when trench or


Page 22
 
weather conditions are unsuitable for the work. When work is not in progress, open ends of pipe and fitting shall be securely closed so that no trench water, earth or other substances will enter the pipes or fittings. Any section of pipe found to be defective before or after laying shall be replaced with sound pipe. Where pipe ends are left for future connections, they shall be plugged or capped.

6.2.7.1	Plastic Pipe and Fittings

This sections designates the requirements for Polyvinyl Chloride Plastic (PVC) Pipe and fittings.

PVC pipe and fittings, sizes 4 inches and larger in diameter, shall conform to all the requirements set forth in ASTM 03034 with a SOR of  35.

All PVC pipe and fittings shall be installed in accordance with Section Ill, ASTM 02321-72, utilizing Class I material for embedment. Pipe shall be bent to the minimum radius recommended by the manufacturer for the kind, type, grade, wall thickness and diameter of the specified type. During pipe lowering operations, care shall be taken to avoid imposing strains that will over stress or buckle the pipe. Seal lubricant shall be applied in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations.

PVC pipe shall be stored so as to prevent damage by  crushing or piercing. Is stored for any extended length of time, it shall be under cover and not in direct sunlight.

6.2.8	Service Connections

Service Connections shall be supplied and installed in accordance with this section, the applicable detail drawings and at all lots within the proposed development.

All materials used for service connections shall be 4 inch PVC sewer pipe and fittings, ASTM 03034 with a SDR of 35.

All service connections shall be installed in accordance with ASTM 02321 and the applicable detail drawings included. Any special adaptors required for connection of these service connections  to any rigid or semi-flexible pipe shall also be  furnished.





Page 23
 

A % inch diameter steel rod shall be placed at the outboard end of each sewer service and extend vertically and tenninate a minimum of 12 inches above the finished grade of the backfilled trench. This rod will serve as a marker for locating the end of the service connection. Care shall be exercised during the backfill operations to assure these markers are installed plumb. The upper end of the rod shall be fonned to resemble an eye bolt to preclude possible injury to persons residing in the area.

6.2.9	Cleanouts

Cleanouts shall be supplied and installed in accordance with this section and the included detail drawings.

All materials used for cleanouts shall be 6 inch PVC sewer pipe and fittings in accordance with ASTM 03034 with an SDR of 35.

All sewer cleanouts shall be installed in accordance with ASTM 02321 and the applicable detail drawings. Any special adaptors required for connection of these sewer cleanouts to any rigid or semi-flexible pipe shall be furnished by the developer.

6.2. 10	Creek and Ditch Crossing

All sewer lines crossing creeks or drainage ditches shall be encased with V4 inch thick wall steel tubing. The encasement shall be anchored on both ends by concrete  blocking.

6.2.l	l t	Manholes

Manholes shall be precast or poured  in place concrete type.

Precast  reinforced  concrete  manholes  shall confonn  to  all  requirements  set
forth in ASTM C478.

Poured-in-place manholes may be used in lieu of precast manholes. The base, wall and cover shall be poured  and vibrated to assure a monolithic structure free from infiltration. All concrete shall have an average compressive strength at  28 days equal to or greater than  4,000 psi.

The concrete base for precast manholes shall have an average compressive strength at 28 days equal to or greater than 3,000 psi. The base shall be poured  and vibrated  to assure a structure free from infiltration.



Page 24
 
The invert of standard manholes shall be formed in a pattern typical of the wall construction.

Flow channels equivalent to the diameter of the pipe shall be formed with concrete  then  troweled  to a smooth, even  finish  with  a steel trowel.

The manhole bottom from wall line to flow channels shall be sloped and troweled smooth on a grade of 1 inch/foot with a liberal radius applied at flow channel Intercepts.

All manholes shall have a 300 pound cast iron ring and cover installed in accordance with the detail drawing included herein. Manhole covers with pick slots shall be used in all locations.

 
6.2.12
 
Sewer Piping Systems Test

All  pipes  carrying  wastewater  by  means  of  gravity  flow  shall  be  tested  as follows:

All lines shall be flushed.

Low pressure air testing shall be the method used to test all the sewer piping.

The developer shall apply the required test pressure to  the piping system.

During air testing, the developer shall plug each end of the section being tested and apply 3.5 psi for the time period indicated in the following table:
 

 
Pipe Diameter
4"
6"
8"
10"
12"
15"
18"
21"
24"
 
Time  Minutes
2
3
4
5
6
7
9
10
1 1
 

The maximum pressure loss shall not exceed V2 psi.  Any line that loses more than  V2 psi shall be repaired and retested.


Page 25
 





























7.	DRAWINGS






























Page 26
 








 



1' lYP


1-1/2"	MAC. TYPE "D"










PRIME   COAT,   MC-30
@  0.25 GAL./SY


8" EXISTING SUBGRADE COMPACTED TO 95% STD PROCTOR  DENSITY
 
R-0-W so· RESIDENTIAL R-0-W 60' THOROUGHFARE
26' RESIDENTIAL
32'  COMMERCIAL
 






















6" FLEX  BASE  COMPACTED
TO   95%  STD   PROCTOR   DENSITY
 
















0-
)>
r

-,;:,Io,
 
fT1	0
 

TYPICAL	STREET	SECTION	W/O	CURB	&	GUTTER
NTS
 
-I	fzTI
-I
(/)	f;T:oI
 
0
::!
0z

z
--l. 0c
(
 









R-0-W 50' RESIDENTIAL R-0-W so· THOROUGHFARE

26' RESIDENTIAL
32' COMMERCIAL
TACK  COAT,  EA11M	1-1/2"  HMAC  1YPE. "D''
@   0.05  GAL/SY.	PRIME COAT, MC-30
@   0.25  GAL/SY






 






8" EXISTING  SUBGRAOE  COMPACTED TO  95%  STD.  PROCTOR  DENSITY
 






6"  FLEX  BASE  COMPACTED
TO  95%  STD.  PROCTOR   DENSITY
 
=0<
()
r
(/)
-f
::::0
 



lYPICAL STREET	SECTION	W/	CURB	& GUTTER
NTS
 
f"l1	()
111
(/)	-I
f"l1	111
::0
 
0z
 









R-0-W so· RESIDENTIAL R-0-W  60'  THOROUGHFARE

30' RESIDENTIAL
36  COMMERCIAL










 






8"  LIME  STABILIZED  SUBGRADE  COMPACTED TO  95%  STD.  PROCTOR   DENSllY
 





6" 3000 psi CONCRETE PAVEMENT REINFORCED W/ #4 BARS @  18" O/C
 
=-0<
0
r
Cf)
-I
:::0
fT1	0
fzT1
 
TYPICAL   CONCRETE   STREET   SECTION
NTS
 
Cf)
fT1	fT1
()	::0
:::::!
0z
 
 








































T


























"'"'"'
 


































CONCRET






































6111Hfll
 

STOKES  &  ASSOcllAs,  INC.
CONSULTANT ENGINEERS9
P.O. BOX  1t14   HENDERSON  TEXAS  75853
903   857-	Fax  (903)  657-7864	PIPE	EMBEDMENT	DETAIL



















NATURAL   GROUND
 
DWG NO. 6
 



- - - - - - - -

1
STANDARD   EXCAVATED   BACKFILL
SEE SPECIFICATIONS

SELECT   BACKFILL   AND   OR GRANULAR    EMBEDMENT SEE   SPECIFICATIONS



VARIABLE DIAMETER WATER/SEWER   PIPE












BELL  HOLES  REQUIRED

PIPE	EMBEDMENT	SECTION










8!111321111
 



STOKES & ASSocI.As, INC.
CONSULTANT ENGINEE
P.O.  BOX  1114    l-£ta:RSON   TEXAS  75653
903	7-7	Fax  (903)  657-7864	GATE	VALVE	INSTALLATIONS














CAST   IRON  VALVE   BOX
AS   REQUIRED   BY  VALVE   DEPTH
 



DWG NO. 7
 

12"  SQUARE	I
lYPICAL	-
 


CONCRETE   PAD
6"  THICK
 







VALVE  BOXES  SHALL  BE SET  PLUMB  &  CENTERED OVER THE OPERATING  NUT




 


SNUG  BOLTS TO  BACKFILL
 
GATE   VALVE




















TYPICAL	SECTION
 



NOTE:
SEE  SPECIAL   DETAIL  FOR  VALVES   TO   BE INSTALLED   IN  STREETS   TO   BE  PAVED
 

STOKES  &  ASSOCIAs,  INC.
CONSULTANT ENGINE£
P.0. BOX  1114    HEN	TEXAS 75653
903    7-75M	Fox (903) 657-78&4
 



GATE
 



VALVE
 
CENTER

INSTALLATIONS
 
DWG
NO.
8
 
IN	PAVED	STREETS






CAST   IRON  VALVE   BOX
AS   REQUIRED   BY  VALVE   DEPTH












 










CARRIER PIPE
 

4"
MIN.
 

. ..·.
:·.•..
·.·

0
GATE	I
VALVE	CONCRETE	'h
 














lYPICAL	SECTION

CONSTRUCTION    SEQUENCE
1.	INSTALL  GATE  VALVE   AND   BACKFILL  TO   STREET   SUBGRADE.
2.	LIME STABILIZE  SUBGRADE.
3.	DIG  OUT  AND   INSTALL  VALVE   BOX  TO   MATCH  EXISTING   PAVING  GRADE.
4.	BACKFILL  TO   TOP   OF   LIME  STABILIZED   SUBGRADE   WITH   CONCRETE.
5.	INSTALL   PAVING.


NOTE:
VALVE   BOX   SHALL   BE  SET   PLUMB  AND   CENTERED
OVER  THE  OPERATING   NUT.	SNUG   ALL  VALVE   BOLTS PRIOR   TO   BACKFILL.



l!0080401
 

STOKES   &  ASSOCI8S,   INC.
CONSULTANT ENGINEER-
P.O.  BOX  1114    HENDERSON   TEXAS  75653
903   6 7-7	Fax (903) 657-7864


"A"  11"15' BEND
"B"  22"30'  BEND
"C"  45"  BEND
"D" 90"  BEND
 

CITY	0	CENTER

SCHEDULE OF
HORIZONTAL	BLOCKING

LB.  CONC.













VARIABLE BEND
 
DWG NO. 9
 





 







"x"





.   ··: 4;.
:  ·.•  ·...•: ....·..
 
* DIMENSION  "X"  MAY  VARY  IF NECESSARY  TO  PROVIDE BEARING AGAINST UNDISTURBED TRENCH WALL
 
, -  .... ·
 
·. , "E"
 
...
......:- ".·:· .•·.. ...f
..... :.. ·'·: :



1500  LB.  CONC.


"X


1 ..	"E"	-I
 
s-·--·- ----=----
 



STOKES & ASSOCifAs,  INC.
CONSULTANT ENGINEERSW-
P.O. BOX  1114    HENDERSON  1EXAS 75653
QQ.'5    657-7558	Fox  (903)  657-7884
 





WATER SYSTEM STANDARDS
 


DWG NO. 10
 



 



,,.....

GI)
w......
Cl::'.	SERVICE   SADDLE
 






I- Cl::'. z


I
 

3/4' CURB STOPS MUELLER OR EQUAL

METER SPUD
POSITIDN SERVICE


\
 
<[	DW
>	CORPORATION STOP	f:QW
w	Cl::'. >
 
OPPOSITE PROPERTY
/-	,	LINE
 
N......
 
::J <[
uCl..
 
GI)	-	LL LL
'-"	DD
 
--P.L.
I
 
z......
<[
 

1' TYPE 'K'	w
COPPER <DBL)	<[  i::I
 
/'/-.//
 
Cl::'.	314'    TYPE 'K'
w	COPPER <SGU
<[


EXISTING OR PROPOSED CURB 8.  GUTTER
 

TERS

10'  O.C. MUELLER DR EQUAL
314'X314'Xl' BRANCH <DBL SERVICD
 
PLAN



 



PROPOSED
 

EXISTING OR PROPOSED CURB 8.  GUTTER
 
PAVING	METER SPUD


METER AND METER BOX







314'  TYPE 'K' COPPER <SGU



PROFILE - SINGLE AND DOUBLE
\JATER SERVICE DETAIL



 




11#11/fOI
 
NOTE:   DEVELOPER   SHALL   HAVE  SERVICE   INSTALLED   FROM  THE   MAIN TO  THE   CURB  STOP  AS   DETAILED.
METERS  ANO  METER  BOXES  WILL  BE  INSTALLED  BY  CllY  AT
DEVELOPERS  EXPENSE.
 

STOKES  lit  ASsOCIAs,  INC.
CONSULTANT ENGINE£R9-
P.o. BOX 1114  HENDERSON  TEXAS 75653
D03   857-7558	Fox  (903)  657-7884
 



WATER
 
CENTER

SYSTEM STANDARDS
 

DWG NO. 1 1
 


 



FIRE  HYDRANT
 
6"  M.J.  GATE  VALVE  W/  STD. RISER & VALVE COVER
 




THRUST  BLOCKS
 
.----.........+-c_o.......	CRET
I	I	I
 
6" D.l.P.  NIPPLE
LENGTH  AS   REQD.
 


-+--ff-1 .-t-H-t-- - 4-t---1r----ttt-

 
..... .....
 

.......
 
"	.. .. ..
 


2'-6'
 

:		6"   M.J.   RETAINING GLANDS
I	MJ  TEE
6" D.1.P.  NIPPLE
LENGTH  AS   REQD.
 

EXISTING    OR    PROPOSED CURB   g.   GUTTER










A.W.W.A.  COMPRESSION  lYPE FIRE HYDRANT,  MUELLER
OR  APPROVED   EQUAL

3' -6" MINIMUM   DUlY STANDARD THREADS
.. -r..  .. ..	.
.;,.........,,,.

 
12" MIN.


T :·- RAIN
.,...........,"·.,;.,....".
 





36"  X  36" CONCRETE
SLAB  4" THICK
 
.,.
1 6" MIN.	., ., ;"'  .	"-":--. --i,...-11,.
J_
 

,.,
 


NOTE:  DO  NOT  COVER   DRAIN
 
:.·;;.: ": _:.: ., .:;......	WITH   CONCRETE   DURING
..	·	..	.  .,,.,   ·	INSTALLATION
 
.. ".""
 

.,,.
 
.,.. .,..,,  •..•. r
 

TYPICAL	FIRE	HYDRANT	ASSEMBLY

"""""'
 

STOKES  & ASSocias. INC.
CONSULTANT   ENGINEER-
P.O.	BOX  1114   HENDERSON  IDCAS 75653
903   657-7558	Fax (903) &57-78&4
 



SEWER	STANDARDS







STANDARD, 300LB. CAST IRON RING & COVER FDR MANHOLES SHALL  BE  FURNISHED  AND
INSTALLED   BY   CONTRACTOR.
 
DWG
NO.
12
 

-t---'--




PICK  SLOT














MANHOLE	COVER















SECTION	OF	COVER









NOTES1

1.	\./HERE  DESIGNATED  IN THE  PLANS  PRESSURE  TYPE  M.  H. RING  8.  COVER   \./ILL  BE  USED  IN LIEU  OF  STANDARD.	ND SEPARATE BID  ITEM  \./ILL  BE  MADE  FOR  FURNISHING  PRESSURE  TYPE  M.  H.
RING   8.   COVER.
 

STOKES & ASSOCI . INC.
CONSULTANT  ENGINEERS.
P.O. BOX 111•  HENDERSON, TEXAS 75653
 
CITY
 
OF..:;	CENTER
 

DWG
NO.
 
903	7-7	Fox  (903) 657-78M	SEWER
 
STANDARDS 	13




























7181
11161
2 318 1
- 4  7/16'
 

 


MACHINE   THIS
 
24  3/8'
 
SURFACE	22  114'




 

 	22  118' 	 31'


HALF PLAN	SECTION OF RING
 
AFTER   MACHINING
 














Hll(Jlffl6
 







48# PRECAST CONCRETE MANHOLE
&	GROOVE JOINTS	STANDARD CAST-IN-PLACE

 





MORTAR
 
RING &   COVER



..
'(Y°)
 



MONDLITHICALL Y PLACED CONCRETE AS  SPECIFIED
 









"...
,,
 











4'-0"
 


RING &  COVER
 











(/)
 
DEPTH OF MANHOLE
RISER   VARIES


BOTTOM   SECTION  OF
 

"'
"...	•
"
 
rr1	0
r;ro1
(/)	0
;'Tl
 
RISER   PIPE IS  BUTT
 
,.,..
 
.......,08 •..	z	0
 
AND   GROOVE
 
...   ...  ., .,, ,,	_,,  ..  ..   "'   ..
 
0	(zTl
 
,,  ,,	,,	,.	"	'°	..  .,	;)>o	-i
 
.•   •. •  .

GROUT SPACE FILLED ITH CEMENT, MORTAR OR MASTIC TYPE      MATERIAL
 
I..	7'-0...	J


NOTE1
l TYPICAL FDR ALL MANHOLE INSTALLATIONS,
BREAK   OUT   TOP  HALF   OF   PIPE   AFTER   INVERT   IS  POURED.
 
(Tl
(/)	;u




z
 

STOKES  &: ASSOM . INC.
CONSULTANT  ENGINEERS..,.-
p.0.  BOX  1114    t£N)ERSON    TEXAS  75653
903   857-7558	Fax  (903)  857-7864
 



SEWER


.----	A
 



STANDARDS
 
DWG NO. 15
 








4' SERVICE






MAIN   X   4'  'v/YE	4'-45°BEND








SEVIER   MAIN	•	A
  TYPICAL	SERVICE   CONNECTION 	


NOTE:
THE  CONTRACTOR   SHALL  INSTALL A  3/8" STEEL  ROD  AT  THE OUTBOARD  END  OF THE  INSTALLED  SERVICE  CONNECTION.  THIS ROD  SHALL  EXTEND  VERTICALLY  AND  TERMINATE  12" ABOVE
THE  TRENCH  BACKFILL  FINISHED  GRADE.  THIS  ROD  WILL  SERVE AS  A  LOCATOR  FOR  THE  SERVICE.  THE  END  OF THE  EXPOSED ROD  SHALL  BE  FORMED  IN A  CIRCULAR  SHAPE  FOR  SAFETY PURPOSES  AS  SHOWN.


 

..
(..l...J..
 
3/8' LR.
 


FINISH   GRADE
 




4' PLUG
 






== = = = P... 	
 
r 4•  SERVICE


d
 




SECTION	II A-A"
 

STOKES & ASSOCT ,  INC.
CONSULTANT   ENGINEERS.,..
P.O.  BOX  1114    HENDERSON   TEXAS  7565.3
903	7-7	Fax (903} 657-7864
 
Cl1Y


SEWER
 
OEi  CENTER	DWG NO.
STANDARDS	1 6



















CLEANDUT
 












22  112·
BEND









PLUG IF END OF LINE


CLEANOUT	DETAIL


















IO/llllflll
 
CITY	0	CENTER


SEWER	STANDARDS
 

DWG NO. 17
 


NOTE:
THE CONTRACTOR  SHALL INSTALL A 3/8• STEEL ROD AT THE OUTBOARD END OF THE INSTALLED SERVICE CONNECTION. THIS ROD SHALL EXTEND VERTICALLY AND TERMINATE 12" ABOVE
THE  TRENCH  BACKFILL  FINISHED  GRADE.  THIS  ROD  WILL  SERVE AS  A  LOCATOR  FOR THE  SERVICE.  THE  END  OF THE  EXPOSED ROD  SHALL  BE FORMED  IN A  CIRCULAR  SHAPE  FOR  SAFETY PURPOSES  AS  SHOWN.

 
4' SERVICE
 


..
.......
 

318'   I.R .
FINISH  GRADE
 






MAIN  X  4'







SE\./ER   MAIN
  DEEP SERVICE CONNECTION 	

 



2/.  MIN.
 
SLEEVE   DR   ADAPTER AS   NECESSARY
 


SECTION "B-B"


 
NOTES:
1.	DEEP SERVICE CONNECTIONS  SHALL BE PERMITTED  ONLY WHEN SEWER  MAIN EXCEEDS   7'-o• IN  DEPTH.
2.	SERVICES SHALL BE PLUGGED AT PROPERlY LINE AT A MINIMUM DEPTH OF 4' -0" BELOW PROPOSED BUILDING SLAB.
 


