CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted, February 12, 1990 
Effective, February 12, 1990 
____________ 
Published in 1990 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DECATUR, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Bobby Wilson 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Coker 
Johnny Hayes 
Charles Burton 
Ted Taylor 
Charles Long 
Clifford Mercer 
City Council 
____________ 
Sam Renshaw 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Mason Woodruff 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the second section of Chapter 3 is 3-2. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of sections that would logically come between sections 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-1.1, 4-1.2 and 4-1.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 5 and 6, it will be designated as Chapter 5.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
    The index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date periodically. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Sam Renshaw, City Secretary, Brett Shannon, Assistant City Secretary and Mason Woodruff, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 2-90 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF DECATUR, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, TEXAS: 
    Section 1.  The code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City Decatur, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 14, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 10, 1989, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for all violations of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, nor exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies, such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5.  Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6.  Ordinances adopted after April 10, 1989, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7.  This ordinance shall become effective February 12, 1990. 
    Passed and adopted by the City Council of the City of Decatur, Texas, this 12th day of February, 1990. 
/s/ Bobby Wilson 
      Mayor   /s/ Sam W. Renshaw 
      City Secretary   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 10-09-12  9-13-10 Included 20 11-01-01  1-24-11 Omitted 20 11-01-02  1-24-11 Omitted 20 11-02-03  2-14-11 Omitted 20 11-03-05  3-28-11 Omitted 20 11-05-06  5- 9-11 Omitted 20 11-06-07  6-27-11 Omitted 20 11-08-08  8-22-11 Omitted 20 11-09-09  9-12-11 Omitted 20 11-09-10  9-12-11 Omitted 20 11-09-11  9-26-11 Omitted 20 11-09-12  9-26-11 Omitted 20 11-09-13  9-26-11 Omitted 20 11-10-14 10-24-11 Omitted 20 11-10-15 10-24-11 Included 20 11-10-16 10-24-11 Included 20 11-11-17 11-14-11 Included 20 11-11-18 11-28-11 Omitted 20 12-01-01  1- 9-12 Omitted 20 12-04-02  4- 9-12 Omitted 20 12-05-03  5-21-12 Omitted 20 12-09-04  9-10-12 Omitted 20 12-09-05  9-10-12 Omitted 20 12-09-06  9-24-12 Omitted 20 12-10-07 10- 8-12 Included 20 13-01-01  1-14-13 Omitted 20 13-01-02  1-28-13 Omitted 20 13-01-03  1-28-13 Omitted 20 13-03-04  3-25-13 Omitted 20 13-04-05  4-22-13 Omitted 20 13-05-06  5-20-13 Omitted 20 2014-06-06  6-23-14 Included 21 2014-10-10 10-13-14 Omitted 22 2015-03-01  3-23-15 Included 22 2015-04-04  4-13-15 Included 22 2016-06-10  6-27-16 Included 23 2016-06-11  6-27-16 Included 23 2016-06-12  6-27-16 Omitted 23 2017-03-03  3-27-17 Included 23  
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Home Rule Charter of the City of Decatur. An ordinance adopted December 9, 2002 called a special election to be held on February 1, 2003 for the purpose of submitting a Home Rule Charter to the voters of the City of Decatur. The Charter was adopted on February 4, 2003. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. Amendments have been included and are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. The absence of a history note indicates the section has remained unchanged. 

CHAPTER I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS OF THE CITY 

1.01 - Incorporation, Corporate Name. 
    All inhabitants of the City of Decatur, Wise County, Texas, within the boundaries of said City now established or as hereinafter established in the manner provided by law, shall constitute a municipal body politic incorporated under the name of "City of Decatur", hereinafter referred to as the "City", with such powers, rights, authority, privileges, obligations and immunities as are herein provided. 
1.02 - Corporate Boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the City shall be as they exist when this Charter is adopted, until changed by the City Council. 
(b)  The boundaries and limits of the City shall be those established on an official map duly adopted by the City Council by ordinance and amended from time to time to include annexations and disannexations from the corporate limits. The City Secretary shall at all times keep a correct and complete description and official map on file, with recent annexations and disannexations. 
1.03 - Annexation. 
(a)  The Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix boundaries of the City and to provide for the alteration or the extension of said boundaries, pursuant to any laws of the State of Texas now or hereinafter enacted with or without the consent of the owners or inhabitants of such territory. 
(b)  The annexation ordinance shall describe the territory to be annexed. Notice shall be published and public hearings held as required by state law. Amendments not enlarging or extending the boundaries set forth in the proposed ordinance may be incorporated into the proposed ordinance without the necessity of republication of said notice. The additional territory annexed shall be a part of the City and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the City as provided by state law. The inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. 
1.04 - Disannexation. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, disannex any territory within the corporate boundaries of the City, if the Council determines the territory is not necessary or suitable for City purposes, and may exchange territory with other municipalities. When the disannexation ordinance is passed, the disannexed territory shall cease to be a part of the City but the disannexed territory shall remain liable for its pro rata share of any indebtedness incurred while the area was a part of the City and the City shall continue to levy, assess and collect taxes on the property in the disannexed territory until such indebtedness has been paid. 
1.05 - Form of Government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to the provisions of, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution, State Laws and this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the "Council." 
1.06 - General Powers of the City. 
(a)  The City shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature, that are now or hereafter may be granted to a Home Rule City by the Constitution and laws of this State, together with all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all such powers granted. 
(b)  Among such powers, the City shall have police powers, the power to adjust boundaries, to contract and to co-operate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency or subdivision thereof, or with the federal government or any agency thereof to accomplish any lawful purpose. The City may use a corporate seal; may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any purpose in fee simple, or in any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease, exchange, condemnation, and subject to the provisions of this Charter, may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, improve, exchange and control property as may now or hereafter be owned by it; may access, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money and appropriate money for all lawful purposes; may furnish municipal services, both within and without its corporate limits; may provide for the expenditure of public funds for a retirement system, group health, life and accident insurance coverage, and surety bonds for City employees or officers; may pass ordinances, resolutions, and enact such regulations as may be expedient for the maintenance of good government, order and peace of the City and the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, security and convenience of the City for its inhabitants consistent with the provisions of this Charter. 
1.07 - General Powers Adopted. 
    The enumeration of the particular powers of this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City shall have and may exercise all powers of local self-government and all other powers which, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
1.08 - Eminent Domain. 
    The City shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter, or by the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the City to take fee title and easement interest in the lands so condemned, and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public or private property for such purposes. 
1.09 - Power to Acquire Property Inside and Outside the City for Any Lawful Purposes. 
    The City shall have the power to sell and to acquire by condemnation or purchase either private or public property located inside or outside of the corporate limits for any lawful purposes. 
1.10 - Platting of Property. 
    Should any property situated within the corporate limits of the City or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, be hereafter platted into blocks and lots, the owner or owners of the property shall comply with the comprehensive master plan of the City, all provisions of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City, and all provisions of the applicable State laws. 
1.11 - Street Powers. 
    The City shall have exclusive domain, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under all alleys, streets, highways, gutters and sidewalks, situated in the City, and the power to layout, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, drain, abandon and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, squares, parks, public places and bridges and regulate the use thereof, and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property or places of all obstructions, telegraph, telephone or other poles, carrying electric wires or signs, encroachments of every nature or character upon any said streets and sidewalks, and to vacate and close private ways; and when a street or alley has been vacated or abandoned, the City shall have the right to sell the same in any manner, and shall have the power to assess property owners for improvements. Such exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over or under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, parkways, alleys and highways of the City shall also include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate, locate, relocate, remove, or prohibit the location of all utility pipes, lines, wires or other property of any sort. Any listing of a specific authority shall not limit or exclude any other power the City has over alleys, streets, highways, gutters, sidewalks, or other public rights-of-way. The right of control and use of the public streets, highways, sidewalks, gutters, and alleys is hereby declared to be inalienable to the City, except by ordinances not in conflict with this Charter. 
1.12 - Solid Waste Disposal. 
    The City shall have the power to provide for and/or own a solid waste collection and disposal system as well as regulation of all sanitary land fills. The Council shall have the right by ordinance to adopt and prescribe rules and regulations for the handling of all garbage, trash and rubbish in the City, and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the City for the removal of garbage, trash and rubbish, and to provide rules and regulations for the collection thereof. 
1.13 - Sanitary Sewer System. 
    The City shall have the power to provide for and/or own a sanitary sewer system and to require property owners to connect their premises with such sewer systems; and to prescribe rules, regulations, and restrictions with reference to use, consumption, waste, payment, cutoff, turn on, connections and management of such system, and to prescribe penalties for violation of such rules and regulations; and shall further have the right to fix charges, rates and compensation to be charged by the City for sewage service, to provide rules and regulations for the collection thereof and to provide for fixing a lien against the property, the owners of which fail or refuse to pay such charges and compensation. 
1.14 - Water System. 
    The City shall have the power to provide for and/or own a water system and to require property owners to connect their premises with such water systems; and to prescribe rules, regulations, and restrictions with reference to use, consumption, waste, payment, cutoff, turn on, connections and management of such system, and to prescribe penalties for violation of such rules and regulations; and shall further have the right to fix charges, rates and compensation to be charged by the City for water service, to provide rules and regulations for the collection thereof and to provide for fixing a lien against the property, the owners of which fail or refuse to pay such charges and compensation. 
1.15 - Parks, Playgrounds, and Public Places. 
    The City shall have exclusive control of all City parks, playgrounds, public squares, and public places and buildings and shall have the power to control, regulate and remove all obstructions and prevent all encroachments thereupon and to provide for raising, grading, filling, terracing, landscape gardening, erecting buildings, swimming pools and wading pools, tennis courts, organized sports facilities and other structures including, but not limited to, museums, libraries and art galleries. The right of control and use of all public parks, playgrounds, public squares, public places and buildings is hereby declared inalienable to the City, except by ordinances not in direct conflict with this Charter. 
1.16 - Fire Protection and Hazardous Substance. 
    The Council shall have the power, by ordinance or otherwise, to provide means for protection against conflagrations and for the establishment, maintenance, support, and regulation of a Fire Department and for guarding against fires. 
1.17 - Police. 
    The Council shall by ordinance or otherwise provide means to preserve order within the City, and to secure residents of said City from violence, and property therein from injury or loss and for the establishment, maintenance, support and regulation of a Police Department. 
1.18 - Health. 
    The Council shall have the power to provide for a Health Department and to establish all necessary rules and regulations protecting the health of the City and for the establishment of quarantine stations, pest houses, emergency hospitals, and to provide for the adoption of necessary quarantine laws to protect the inhabitants against contagious or infectious diseases. Such general laws shall include the following powers, but not to the exclusion of other powers: 
(a)  The Council shall have the power by ordinance or otherwise to regulate, license and inspect persons, firms, corporations, common carriers, or associations operating, managing, or conducting any hotel or any other public sleeping or eating place, or any place or vehicle where food or drink or containers thereof, of any kind is manufactured, prepared, stored, packed, served, sold or otherwise handled within the City limits; and shall have the power to prescribe health regulations with reference to any and all workers or employees hired or used in any of said places or vehicles, or about said places and vehicles; or who deliver products to and from said places and vehicles; and shall have the power to inspect, license and regulate the sanitary condition of said places and vehicles and to condemn all articles not wholesome or fit for human consumption. 
(b)  The Council shall have the power to license, require occupation fees or taxes and to prescribe health regulations with respect to places of business, their persons and their workers and employees, and shall have the power to prescribe all necessary health regulations. 
(c)  The Council shall have the power to define all nuisances and prohibit the same within the City and outside the City limits to protect the citizens of the City; to have power to police all parks or grounds, speedways, or boulevards owned by the City and lying both outside and inside the City; to prohibit the pollution of any stream, draw, drain or tributaries thereof, water deposit and reservoir, whether above or below the ground, which may constitute the source of storage of water supply, and to provide for policing the same, as well as to provide for the protection of any watersheds and the policing of same, to inspect, license and regulate dairies, slaughter pens and slaughter houses inside or outside the limits of the City. 
(d)  The Council shall have the power to provide for fixing of penalties for failure of any person, firm, corporation or association to comply with any such rules and regulations so prescribed by the Council under the provisions of this section; it being the intention to vest in the Council not only powers expressly enumerated in this section but all other powers reasonably necessary for the protection of the health of the City and its inhabitants. 
CHAPTER II. - CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR 

2.01 - Governing Body. 
    The governing and lawmaking body of the City shall consist of the Mayor and six (6) Councilmembers and shall be known as the City Council or the Council. 
2.02 - Elective Officers. 
    The Mayor and the members of the Council shall be elected and hold office as herein provided: 
(a)  Each Councilperson shall be elected to and occupy a place on the Council, such places being numbered one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5) and six (6). 
(b)  Four (4) members of the Council whose positions shall be places one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4), shall be residents of and elected by the qualified voters of single-member geographical districts of the City, known as districts one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4), as such districts may from time to time be determined by the City Council in accordance with Section 2.02(d), and created and described by ordinance. Two (2) members of the Council and the Mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the entire City, commonly known as at large. 
(c)  All members of the Council and the Mayor shall be elected for terms as follows: 
(1)  Councilmember terms expiring in May of 2004 shall be designated Places 4, 5, and 6. Councilmember terms expiring in May of 2005 shall be designated Places 1, 2, and 3. 
(2)  At the regular city election held in May of 2005, Places 1 and 3 shall be elected to single member districts created in accordance with Section 2.02(d) for terms of one (1) year, and thereafter be elected to single member districts for two (2) year terms. 
(3)  At the regular city election held in May of 2005, Place 2 shall be elected to a single member district created in accordance with Section 2.02(d) for a two (2) year term, and thereafter be elected to a single member district for two (2) year terms. 
(4)  Place 4 shall be elected at large for a term of one (1) year at the regular city election held in May 2004, and thereafter be elected to a single member district created in accordance with Section 2.02(d) for two (2) year terms. 
(5)  Place 5 shall be elected at large for terms of two (2) years at the regular city election held in May of 2004, and thereafter be elected at large for two (2) year terms. 
(6)  Place 6 shall be elected at large for a term of one (1) year at the regular city election held in May of 2004, and thereafter be elected at large to two (2) year terms. 
(7)  The Mayor shall be elected at large for a two (2) year term at the regular city election held in May 2004, and thereafter elected at large to two (2) year terms. 
(d)  The Council shall from time to time create and describe by ordinance election districts known as districts one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4). Such districts shall be created so that each will contain, as nearly as possible, a population equivalent to the others, according to the latest available census data. 
2.03 - Limitation on Consecutive Terms for Elected Officials. 
(a)  A person who has served as Mayor or Councilmember whether at large or by single member districts for four (4) consecutive terms shall not again be eligible to become a candidate for, or to serve in the office of, Mayor or Councilmember until the second general election after the fourth consecutive term has expired. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a term of office shall be defined as an elected period of two (2) years (defined as from general election date to general election date). A person elected or appointed to fill an unexpired term may serve four additional consecutive terms. 
(c)  A Councilmember shall be considered to serve consecutive terms if serving in different places consecutively, however, it shall not be considered a consecutive term when a councilmember is elected to the office of Mayor. Provided, however, a person who has served eight consecutive terms as both Mayor and Councilmember shall not again be eligible to serve in either capacity until the second general election after the eighth consecutive term has expired. 
(d)  This provision shall apply to Place 5 and the Mayor in 2004, Places 2, 4 and 6 commencing at the May, 2005 election, and shall apply to Places 1 and 3 at the May, 2006 election. 
2.04 - Qualifications. 
(a)  Candidates. Each person who becomes a candidate for Mayor or Councilmember shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  be at least twenty-one (21) years of age on the first day of the form to be filed or date of appointment; 
(2)  be a citizen of the United States; 
(3)  be a qualified voter of the City; 
(4)  reside and have resided for at least twelve (12) months preceding the election within the corporate limits of the City; 
(5)  no candidate may file for more than one office or position number per election; 
(6)  no employee of the City shall continue in such position after becoming a candidate for a City elective office. 
(b)  When any member of the Council no longer possesses all of the qualifications specified in this section, or is convicted of a felony or any offense involving moral turpitude while in office, the office shall immediately and automatically become vacant. The Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members in accordance with Section 2.08(b) and for these purposes shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records. 
2.05 - Compensation. 
    The City Council shall set the compensation of its members. 
2.06 - Presiding Officer-Duties of the Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall preside over the meetings of the Council, and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed upon him by this Charter, and by ordinances and resolutions passed in pursuance thereof. He shall participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council and shall have a vote on all matters before the council. He shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the courts for the purpose of enforcing military law and for all ceremonial purposes. 
2.07 - Mayor Pro Tem. 
    At the first meeting after each general election or general election run-off, if any, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the City Council shall appoint one of the Councilmembers as Mayor Pro Tem who shall hold office for one (1) year. The Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of Mayor in case of the absence or disability of the Mayor. Additionally, the Council shall have the authority to appoint a Deputy Mayor Pro Tem who shall perform the duties of Mayor in the case of the absence or disability of the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. 
2.08 - Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office: Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of the Mayor or a Councilmember shall become vacant upon the Mayor or Councilmember's death, resignation, removal from office (in any manner authorized by law), or forfeiture of office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of Office. The Mayor or a Councilmember shall forfeit his or her office if during a term of office, the Mayor or Councilmember: 
(1)  lacks any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by other law; 
(2)  violates any expressed prohibition of this Charter; 
(3)  is convicted of a felony crime or is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(4)  fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council without being excused by the Council. 
The Council shall, by an affirmative 3/4 vote of the entire membership, be the final judge in matters involving forfeiture of office by a Councilmember or the Mayor. 
(c)  Filling of Vacancies. If one vacancy occurs on the Council then the remaining members shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term and may do so by appointment or by calling a special election. If two or more simultaneous vacancies occur, then the remaining members of the Council shall call a special election to fill the vacancies for the unexpired terms. 
2.09 - Meetings of the City Council. 
    The Council shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings each month at a time to be fixed by ordinance, unless the dates fall on a regularly observed City holiday, provided that the Council may establish as many additional regular meetings during the month as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the City and its citizens. By a 3/4 vote of all council members present, a regular meeting date may be canceled. All meetings of the Council shall be open in accordance with and except as provided by the Texas Open Meetings Act, and shall be held at the City Hall, except that the Council may designate another place for the meetings. 
2.10 - Special Meetings. 
    The Mayor or a majority of the other members of the Council may call special meetings by giving notice to the City Secretary who shall notify each member of the Council of the time of the meeting and its purpose. 
2.11 - Rules of the Council: Minutes and Procedures. 
(a)  The City Council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may compel the attendance of its members. Minutes of the proceedings of the City Council shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times and which shall constitute one of the archives of the City. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances shall be by roll call and entered upon the minutes, and the full caption of every ordinance or resolution, upon its final passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose. Each ordinance and resolution shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of the City Secretary, and maintained in the office of the City Secretary. 
(b)  Any item requested by one (1) or more members of the Council or by the City Manager shall be placed on the agenda by the City Secretary. The Mayor will establish the order of the agenda for each Council meeting. The City Secretary shall prepare the agenda, which shall be publicly posted at City Hall in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
2.12 - Quorum and Voting. 
    A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum and a vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary for any action of the Council, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter. 
2.13 - Code of Ethics and Conduct. 
    The City Council shall adopt by ordinance a code of ethics and conduct that is consistent with the provisions of this Charter and applicable to elected officers, appointed board, commission, and committee members, and employees of the City. 
CHAPTER III. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL 
A. - GENERAL 

3.01 - Powers of the Council. 
    All powers and authority, including determination of all matters of policy, which are expressly or by implication conferred on or possessed by the City, shall be vested in and exercised by the Council; provided, however, that the Council shall have no authority to exercise those powers which are expressly conferred upon other City officers by this Charter. 
3.02 - Appointment of Members of Boards. 
    The members of all boards created by this Charter or by the Council shall be appointed by the Council. 
3.03 - Investigative Powers of the Council. 
    The Council as a whole shall have the power to inquire into or investigate the official conduct of any department, agency, officer or employee of the City and for that purpose shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers, records or other evidence, and as it shall provide by Ordinance, to punish and fix penalties for contempt for failure or refusal to obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers, records or other evidence. All powers granted by this section shall be exercised only in a meeting of a quorum of the Council held in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
3.04 - Depository of City Funds. 
    The Council is authorized to select a depository, according to state law, for the City funds. 
3.05 - Interference in Administrative Matters. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer and the head of the administrative branch of the City. Except for the purpose of inquiry or investigation, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative departments and personnel solely through the City Manager, and no member of the Council shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. 
3.06 - Appointive Offices. 
    In addition to the elected officers, the other officers of the City shall be the City Manager, City Attorney, and such other officers as the Council may from time to time direct. The Council may abolish or consolidate such offices and positions as it may deem to be in the best interest of the City and may divide the administration of such offices or positions as it may deem advisable, create new offices and positions and discontinue any office or position at its discretion except the offices of City Manager, City Secretary, and City Attorney. Removal of officers appointed by the city council shall be at the discretion of the Council, by vote of the majority of the entire Council. 
3.07 - State of Emergency. 
(a)  A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist during periods of impending or actual public crisis or disaster. A state of emergency may be declared by the vote of the Council, or by order of the Mayor, or, in his absence or disability, the Mayor Pro Tem, or Deputy Mayor Pro Tem, in the absence or disability of the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, if a meeting of the Council cannot be called within the time available, whenever conditions threaten to render inadequate the normal procedures of the City for protection of persons or property. During a state of emergency, the Mayor, or, in his absence or disability, the Mayor Pro Tem shall have all the powers which would be vested in the Council by state law to the extent he considers reasonable, or necessary for the protection of persons or property. 
(b)  The emergency powers herein provided shall be exercised only to the extent made necessary by the nature of the emergency and during the continuation of the state of emergency. 
(c)  The Mayor, or person authorized by this Charter to carry out the duties of the Mayor, or the Council by a majority vote, shall be authorized to declare the emergency terminated. 
B. - ORDINANCES 

3.08 - Validation of all Ordinances, Rules and Regulations. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City heretofore ordained, passed, adopted, or enacted, that are in force at the time this Charter becomes effective, and which are not in conflict with such Charter, shall remain in full force until altered, amended or repealed by the Council after such Charter takes effect. 
3.09 - Action Requiring an Ordinance. 
(a)  The Council shall legislate by ordinance. In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the Council shall be by ordinance which: 
(1)  adopt, amend, or establish an administrative code; 
(2)  alter or abolish any City board, department, office, or agency; 
(3)  provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed; 
(4)  levy taxes, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 9 of this Charter with respect to the property tax levied by adoption of the budget; 
(5)  grant, renew or extend a franchise; 
(6)  regulate the rate charged for services by a public utility; 
(7)  authorize the borrowing of money that cannot be repaid within the current fiscal year; 
(8)  convey, lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the City; 
(9)  adopt with or without amendment ordinances proposed under the initiative power; and 
(10)  amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 8 of this Charter with respect to repeal of ordinances reconsidered under the referendum power. 
(b)  Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done either by ordinance, resolution or minute order. 
3.10 - Form of Ordinances. 
    Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in substantially the form required for final adoption. The subject of the ordinance shall be clearly expressed in its title except ordinances or resolutions making appropriations or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or issuance of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness. The enacting clause of every ordinance shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Decatur," but the same shall be omitted when the ordinances of the City are codified and published in a book or pamphlet form by the City. Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance or part of the City code shall clearly set forth the provision or provisions being repealed or amended and, if amended, shall further clearly set forth the amendment being made. 
3.11 - Procedure for Enacting Ordinances and Resolutions; Publications. 
(a)  Ordinances and resolutions may be passed at any regular meeting or special meeting called for that purpose provided notice has been given in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(b)  All ordinances exclusive of emergency ordinances defined by Section 3.12 of this Charter shall be considered and passed in open meeting of the Council at two separate Council meetings. On second presentation the Council may consider and approve any changes it deems necessary from the ordinance presented at first reading, unless otherwise provided by state law. Every ordinance, resolution or motion shall require on passage the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present unless more is required by state law or this Charter. 
(c)  The descriptive caption or title of an ordinance that imposes a penalty, fine or forfeiture and the penalty for violating the ordinance shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the City. 
(d)  An ordinance required to be published takes effect when the publication requirement is satisfied, unless the ordinance provides otherwise, and an ordinance that is not required to be published takes effect when adopted unless the ordinance provides otherwise. 
(e)  All ordinances and resolutions may be admitted and received in all courts, subject to the rules of evidence and laws of jurisdictions where proof of such ordinances and resolutions are tendered, without further proof. 
3.12 - Emergency Ordinances. 
    The Council may adopt emergency ordinances only to meet public emergencies affecting the life, health, property, or the public peace in accordance with State law. In particular, such ordinances shall not levy taxes, grant or renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner generally prescribed for ordinances, except that it shall be plainly designed in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance can be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it was introduced. The affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Council shall be required for adoption. After adoption, the ordinance shall be published as required for other adopted ordinances, but may become effective immediately upon enactment. 
3.13 - Codification of Ordinances. 
    The City Manager, as soon as practical after the adoption of this Charter may cause to be codified and properly entered and published for public distribution or for anyone desiring same, the ordinances of the City, which codification may be revised and updated annually. 
CHAPTER IV. - CITY ADMINISTRATION 
A. - GENERAL 

4.01 - Administrative Departments. 
(a)  There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter and may be established by ordinance and excepting as otherwise provided in this Charter, these administrative departments shall be under the direction of the City Manager. The Council shall have power by ordinance to establish administrative departments or offices not herein provided by this Charter. The Council may discontinue, redesignate, or combine any of the departments and/or administrative offices. No changes shall be made by the Council in the organization of the administrative service of the City until the recommendations of the City Manager thereon shall have been given an opportunity to be heard by the Council. 
(b)  The head of each department shall be a chief, director, superintendent or coordinator who shall be appointed by the City Manager and such chief, director or superintendent or coordinator shall have supervision and control over his department. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual, and the City Manager may act as City Secretary and may head one or more departments. 
B. - CITY MANAGER 

4.02 - Appointment and Qualifications. 
(a)  The Council, by majority vote of the entire Council qualified and serving, shall appoint a City Manager, who shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. 
(b)  The method of selection shall be left to the discretion of the Council so long as the method insures orderly, non-partisan action toward securing a competent and qualified person to fill the position. The City Manager shall be chosen solely upon the basis of the person's administrative training, experience, ability and character. 
(c)  Neither the Mayor nor any Councilmember may be appointed City Manager or acting City Manager while holding office or for a period of two (2) years thereafter. 
(d)  The City Manager shall establish residency in the City of Decatur unless excused by City Council. 
4.03 - Compensation. 
    The City Manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the Council according to the person's experience, education and training. 
4.04 - Term and Removal. 
(a)  The City Manager may be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the discretion of the Council, by the affirmative vote of five (5) members of the Council, unless otherwise provided by contract. 
(b)  If removed after serving six (6) months, he may demand written charges and the right to be heard thereon at a public meeting of the Council prior to the date on which his final removal shall take effect; but pending such hearing the Council may suspend him from office. 
(c)  The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final. It is the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibilities of such suspension or removal in the Council. 
(d)  The Council is authorized to enter into a contract with a City Manager to establish additional terms of employment. 
4.05 - Bond of City Manager. 
    The Council shall require the City Manager before entering upon the duties of his office, to execute a good and sufficient surety company bond, in such amount as the Council may demand, payable to the City and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office. The premium of such bond is to be paid by the City. 
4.06 - Powers and Duties. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of the City. He shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the City and to that end shall have the power and be required to: 
(1)  In cooperation with the City Attorney, see that all State laws and City ordinances are effectively enforced. 
(2)  Appoint, suspend and/or remove all or any one of the heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the City. 
(3)  Exercise control over all departments and subdivisions thereof created by this Charter, or that may hereafter be created by the Council, except as hereinafter provided. 
(4)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the City Attorney, whose duty it shall be to take such steps as may be necessary to enforce the same. 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the Council, except when excused by the Council. 
(6)  Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit it to the Council each year and be responsible for its administration after its adoption. 
(7)  Administer the budget of the City. 
(8)  Prepare and submit to the Council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year. 
(9)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem to him advisable. 
(10)  Prepare personnel rules subject to the approval of the Council. 
(11)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by the Council. 
4.07 - Acting City Manager. 
(a)  The City Manager, within thirty (30) days after taking office, shall designate by letter filed with the City Secretary, a qualified administrative officer of the City to perform the duties of the City Manager in his absence or disability. Such designation shall be subject to approval of the Council. No member of the City Council shall serve as Acting City Manager. Upon resignation or termination of the City Manager, the Acting City Manager shall perform the duties of the City Manager until a new City Manager or Acting City Manager is appointed by the Council. 
(b)  Should the need for an Acting City Manager occur prior to the City Manager submitting a designee or prior to the Council's approval of the City Manager's designee, the Council shall appoint an Acting City Manager. 
(c)  The City Manager may select a different Acting City Manager by repeating the letter of designation and obtaining the Council's approval. 
CHAPTER V. - COURTS 

5.01 - Purpose of the Municipal Court. 
    There shall be established and maintained a court, designated as a Municipal Court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas relative to Municipal Courts. 
5.02 - Judge of the Court. 
    The "Judge of the Municipal Court," shall be appointed by the City Council. The Judge shall be a resident of this State, a citizen of the United States, and be an attorney in good standing, licensed to practice in the State of Texas. The Council shall fix the compensation for the Judge and such compensation shall never be based on fines assessed or collected. Removal of the Judge shall be at the discretion of the Council, by 3/4 vote of the entire Council. The Judge may request a public hearing prior to his removal. 
5.03 - Clerk of the Court. 
    There shall be a Clerk of said court appointed by the City Manager. The Clerk of said court and such deputies as said Clerk may appoint, shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, keep minutes of the proceedings of the court, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary as performed by clerks and deputies of courts. The City shall require the Court Clerk, before entering upon the duties of the office, to execute a good and sufficient surety company bond, in such amount as the City may demand, payable to the City and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office. The premium of such bond is to be paid by the City. 
5.04 - Absence of Judge. 
    The Council may appoint one or more alternate Judge(s) who shall have the same qualifications as the Judge of the Municipal Court and who shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the Council. In case of the temporary disability or absence of the Judge of the Municipal Court, an alternate Judge shall have authority to act as Judge of said court. The Council shall by appointment fill a vacancy in the office of the Judge for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
5.05 - Fines. 
    All monies received as court imposed fines or penalties shall be paid into the general fund of the City treasury, unless otherwise required by State law. 
CHAPTER VI. - CITY ATTORNEY 

6.01 - City Attorney. 
(a)  The Council shall appoint a competent, duly qualified, licensed and practicing attorney in the State of Texas, to be an attorney for the City, hereinafter referred to as the "City Attorney." He shall serve at the discretion of the Council and he shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the Council. The City Attorney shall be the adviser of, and attorney for, all of the offices and departments of the City, and he shall represent the City in all litigation and legal proceedings; provided, that the Council may retain special counsel at any time they deem same appropriate and necessary. He shall review and concur or dissent upon all documents, contracts, and legal instruments in which the City may have an interest. The City Attorney shall perform other duties prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance, or as directed by the Council. 
(b)  The Council may contract with an attorney or with a firm of attorneys who may designate one (1) member of said firm, with Council approval, to serve as City Attorney. 
6.02 - City Prosecutor. 
    All cases in the Municipal Court shall be prosecuted by the City Attorney, or such designated Prosecutor as the Council may authorize. 
CHAPTER VII. - ELECTIONS 

7.01 - City Elections. 
    The regular City Election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May, or other date established by State law, at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices, the terms of which expire that year. The Council shall fix the hours and place for holding such election. Notice of the election shall be published according to State law. In the order, ordinance, or resolution of the Council calling any election, at which more than one (1) Council member shall be elected, the Council shall, in calling such election, provide for a separate place on the ballot for each vacancy to be filled at such election, designating such places as Place No. One, Place No. Two, etc.; and in case an unexpired term is to be filled at such election, the place for the unexpired term shall be so designated. 
7.02 - Special Elections. 
    The Council, by ordinance or resolution, may call such special elections as are authorized by the State law, this Charter, or for any other reason the Council deems necessary, fix the time and place of holding same, and provide all means for holding such special elections in accordance with State law. 
7.03 - Regulation of Elections. 
    All general and special elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas regulating the holding of municipal elections and in accordance with this Charter and ordinances or resolutions adopted by the Council for the conduct of elections. The Council shall appoint the election judges and shall provide for the compensation of all election officials in the City elections and for all other expenses in holding said elections. 
7.04 - Exception of Election Code. 
    In the event there is a conflict between any of the provisions of this Charter and the Texas Election Code or an omission of any elements or provisions necessary for the conduct of an election, then those provisions of the Texas Election Code then existing shall prevail. 
7.05 - Filing for Office/Procedures. 
(a)  Each candidate for an elective office shall meet the qualifications set forth in Section 2.04. 
(b)  Any person so qualified who desires to become a candidate for election shall file an application with the City Secretary, in accordance with the Texas Election Code. 
7.06 - Holding Other Office. 
(a)  No person elected to the Council shall, during the term for which he is elected to the Council, hold or be appointed to any office, position, or employment in the service of the City, and no former member of the Council shall hold any compensated, appointive city office or employment until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he is elected to the Council. This Section shall not prohibit a member of the Council from serving on the board of an economic development corporation, crime control and prevention district, or other instrumentality of the City. 
(b)  If any member of a board or commission appointed by the Council shall become a candidate for election to any public office of the City, he shall immediately upon his being elected, forfeit his place as a member of such board or commission. 
(c)  If any employee of the City becomes a candidate for election to any public office of the City of Decatur they shall, immediately upon becoming a candidate, forfeit the employment held with the City. 
7.07 - Official Ballots. 
(a)  Candidates Names on Ballots: The names of all candidates who have filed for office shall be printed on the official ballots without party designation. The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates for each office or position shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held under the supervision of the City Secretary, or as otherwise required by State law. 
(b)  Early Voting shall be governed by the Texas Election Code. 
7.08 - Canvassing and Election Results. 
    Returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judges to the City Secretary with a copy of the returns being sent to the Mayor. The Council shall canvass the returns, investigate the qualifications of the candidates and declare the official results of the election prior to the first regular Council meeting following delivery of the votes to the City Secretary all in accordance with the Texas Election Code. The results of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council. The qualified person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any office shall thereupon be declared elected by said Council. The decision of the Council, as to qualifications of candidates, shall be conclusive and final for all purposes. 
7.09 - Runoff in Event of Tie. 
    In the event there is a tie vote, and no candidate receives a plurality of the votes cast, there shall be a runoff election held in accordance with State law. 
7.10 - Notification of City Officers. 
    The City Secretary, with the concurrence of the Council, shall promptly notify all persons elected to office. A candidate who is elected in a regular, or special City election shall, after taking the oath of office as prescribed herein, take office, and enter upon his duties at the next Council meeting after the date of the election. 
7.11 - Oath of Office. 
    Every officer of the City, whether elected or appointed, shall take the oaths of office prescribed by the Texas Constitution prior to assuming office. 
CHAPTER VIII. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

8.01 - Initiative, Referendum and Recall. 
(a)  The Power of Initiative: The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the Council, and, if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to zoning, appropriation of money, levy of taxes, issuance of bonds and notes, borrowing of money, salaries of City officers or employees, or matters related to administration of municipal employees, annexation, or municipal boundary adjustments, or in any instance where a court of proper jurisdiction determines that the initiated ordinance has been removed from the field of initiative. Such initiative power may be used to enact a new ordinance, or to repeal or to amend sections of any existing ordinances. 
(b)  The Power of Referendum: The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance, and if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a City election provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to zoning, appropriation of money, levy of taxes, issuance of bonds and notes, borrowing of money, salaries of City officers or employees, or matters related to administration of municipal employees, annexation, or municipal boundary adjustments, or in any instance where a court of proper jurisdiction determines that the referred ordinance has been removed from the field of referendum. 
(c)  The Power of Recall. Any member of the City Council may be removed from office by a recall election held by the qualified voters of a Councilmember's constituency. As used herein, "constituency" means the qualified voters eligible to vote for the Councilmember whose removal is sought either by geographic district established according to Section 2.02(d) of this Charter or at large, as the case may be. 
(d)  Qualified Voter Defined. As used in this Charter, a qualified voter is a person who possesses voter qualifications established by the Election Code, and is a registered voter as defined by the Election Code. 
(e)  Business Day Defined. As used in this Chapter, business day shall mean everyday except Saturdays, Sundays, and official municipal holidays. 
8.02 - Commencement of Proceedings for Initiative and Referendum; Petitioners' Committee; Affidavit. 
(a)  Any fifteen (15) qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the City Secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the Petitioners' Committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
(b)  Promptly after the affidavit of the Petitioners' Committee is filed, the City Secretary shall verify that the applicants are qualified voters, and if they are, shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the Petitioners' Committee. 
8.03 - Petitions for Initiative and Referendum. 
(a)  Number of Signatures: Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular City election. 
(b)  Form and Content: All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink and shall be followed by the signer's printed name, the signer's voter registration number, the county of registration, the signer's residence address, and date of signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)  Affidavit of Circulator: Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it, when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Time for Filing Petitions: Referendum petitions must be filed within sixty (60) days after adoption by the Council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Initiative petitions must be filed within sixty (60) days after issuance of the appropriate petition blanks to the Petitioners' Committee; additional time as specified in 8.04 shall be allowed for amending petitions. All petitions shall be filed with the City Secretary. 
8.04 - Procedure After Filing Petition for Initiative or Referendum. 
(a)  Review by City Secretary and Attorney. Upon the filing of a petition, the City Secretary shall review the petition to determine the existence of the requisite number of signatures of qualified voters and whether the form of the petition complies with the provisions of this Charter. The City Secretary shall also review the petition to determine the genuineness of the signatures. The City Attorney shall review the petition for legal sufficiency. The Council may provide by ordinance the punishment and penalties for contempt for failure or refusal to obey any subpoena, or request for production of evidence issued by the City Secretary or City Attorney. 
(b)  Certificate of City Secretary. Within ten (10) business days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary, with advice from the City Attorney, shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail. 
(c)  Amendment by Petitioner. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures or due to inadequate form or content may be amended once if the Petitioners' Committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the City Secretary within five (5) business days after receiving the copy of such certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) business days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of 8.03 and within five (5) business days after it is filed the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. 
(d)  Submission to City Council. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the Petitioners' Committee does not elect to amend as provided in subsection (c) within the time required, the City Secretary shall promptly present this certificate to the Council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
8.05 - Referendum Petitions: Suspension of Effect or Ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition is filed with the City Secretary, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or 
(2)  The Council repeals the ordinance, or 
(3)  Upon the certification of the election results by the election officials. 
8.06 - Action on Initiative or Referendum Petitions. 
(a)  Action by Council: When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner prescribed for enacting ordinances or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the City. 
(b)  Submission to Voters: The vote of the City on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held on the next election date authorized by the Texas Election Code that is at least forty-five (45) days after the date of the final Council vote thereon. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls and shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the City within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election. 
(c)  Withdrawal Signatures: No signature shall be withdrawn from any petition after such petition has been filed with the City Secretary. 
8.07 - Results of Election for Initiative and/or Referendum. 
(a)  Initiative: If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Referendum: If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
8.08 - Commencement of Recall Proceedings; Petitioners' Committee; Affidavit. 
(a)  Any fifteen (15) qualified voters of the Mayor's or a Councilmember's constituency may commence recall proceedings by filing with the City Secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the Petitioners' Committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out the name of the Councilmember to be removed and a clear and concise statement of the grounds for his removal. As used herein for purposes of recall, "Councilmember" shall include the office of Mayor. 
8.09 - Recall Petitions. 
(a)  Number of Signatures: Recall petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the Councilmember's constituency, equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular City election. 
(b)  Form and Content: All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink and shall be followed by the signer's printed name, the signer's voter registration number, the county of registration, the signer's residence address, and date of signing. Recall petitions shall contain the name of the Councilmember whose removal is sought, and a clear and concise statement of the grounds for this removal. There shall be a separate petition for each Councilmember whose removal is sought. 
(c)  Affidavit of Circulator: Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it, when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
(d)  Time for Filing Petitions: No signature to a recall petition shall remain effective or be counted if it was placed upon the petition more than forty-five (45) days prior to filing of the recall petition with the City Secretary. 
8.10 - Procedure After Filing Petition for Recall. 
(a)  Review by City Secretary and Attorney. Upon the filing of a petition, the City Secretary shall review the petition to determine the existence of the requisite number of signatures of qualified voters and whether the form of the petition complies with the provisions of this Charter. The City Secretary shall also review the petition to determine the genuineness of the signatures. The City Attorney shall review the petition for legal sufficiency. The Council may provide by ordinance the punishment and penalties for contempt for failure or refusal to obey any subpoena, or request for production of evidence issued by the City Secretary or City Attorney. 
(b)  Within ten (10) business days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail. 
(c)  A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures or due to inadequate form or content may be amended once if the Petitioners' Committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the City Secretary within five (5) business days after receiving the copy of this certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) business days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of 8.09 and within five (5) business days after it is filed the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. 
(d)  If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient and in compliance with the terms of this Chapter of the Charter, the City Secretary shall promptly present this certificate to the Council at its next regular council meeting or at a specially called meeting and immediately shall notify the Councilmember whose removal is sought and provide him with a copy of his petition. 
(e)  If the Councilmember whose removal is sought does not resign within seven (7) days after the certified petition is presented to the Council, the City Council, at its next regular meeting or at a specially called meeting, shall order a recall election to be held on the first uniform election date occurring on or after the 45 th day after the date the election is ordered. 
8.11 - Public Hearing. 
    The elected official whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the Council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the Council shall order such public hearings to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing. 
8.12 - Recall Ballot. 
    Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: 
"Shall (Name of person) be removed from the office of (Name of office) by recall?" 
(2)  Immediately to the left of each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"YES" 
"NO" 
8.13 - Results of Recall Election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against removal of the elected official named on the ballot, he shall continue in office. If the majority of the votes cast at the election be for the removal of the elected official named on the ballot, the Council shall immediately declare his office vacant and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Section 2.08 of this Charter for the filling of vacancies. 
8.14 - Limitation on Recall. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official within six (6) months after he takes office, or within one year after a failed recall election. 
8.15 - Failure of City Council to Call an Election. 
    In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the Council shall fail or refuse to receive the initiative, referendum or recall petition, or order such initiative, referendum or recall election, or discharge other duties imposed upon said Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such initiative, referendum or recall, then the County Judge of Wise County, Texas, shall discharge any such duties herein provided to be discharged by the City Secretary or by the Council. In addition, any qualified voter in the City may seek judicial relief in the District Court of Wise County, Texas, to have any of the provisions of this Charter pertaining to initiative, referendum or recall carried out by the proper official. 
CHAPTER IX. - BUDGET, FINANCE AND TAXATION 
A. - BUDGET 

9.01 - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end the last day of September of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the Budget and Accounting year. 
9.02 - Annual Budget. 
    The operating budget message shall explain the budget in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City, and shall include such other materials, as the City Manager deems necessary. The source or basis of the estimates shall be part of the forecast. 
    The budget shall contain the following: 
(1)  Comparative figures for the actual and estimated tax rate, revenues, and other income and expenditures to compare the current and prior fiscal year. 
(2)  The proposed expenditures of each office, department, or function, and reasons for proposed increases or decreases. 
(3)  A schedule showing the debt service requirement due on all outstanding indebtedness and on any proposed debt. 
(4)  The source or basis of the estimates. 
(5)  The total of the proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total estimated income and the balance of available funds. 
(6)  Such other information as may be required by State law, the Council or deemed appropriate by the City Manager. 
9.03 - Capital Facilities and Property Budget. 
    The City Manager shall propose annually a five (5) year Capital Facilities and Property budget, which may be revised and extended each year to indicate capital improvements pending or in process of construction or acquisition, and which shall provide the following items: 
(a)  A summary of proposed programs; 
(b)  A list of all capital facilities and property improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five (5) fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(c)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement with the estimated effect on the tax levy and; 
(d)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired over the five (5) year period. 
9.04 - Submission. 
    The City Manager shall submit to the Council a proposed budget and accompanying message on or before the first day of August of each year. The Council shall review the proposed budget and revise it as deemed appropriate prior to general circulation for public hearing. 
9.05 - Public Notice and Hearing. 
    The Council shall post in the City Hall and publish in the official newspaper as required by State law prior to any required public hearing on the budget a notice stating the time and place where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public, and the time and place of each public hearing on the budget. 
9.06 - Amendment before Adoption. 
    The Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment at a regular or special meeting. In amending the budget, it may add or increase any programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income plus funds available from prior years. 
9.07 - Adoption. 
    The Council, by majority vote, shall adopt the budget by ordinance not later than the 30th day of September. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amount specified therein as expenditures from the fund indicated, and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. 
9.08 - Defect Shall Not Invalidate Tax Levy. 
    Errors or defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirements shall not nullify the tax levy or the tax rate. 
9.09 - Failure to Adopt a Budget. 
    If the Council fails to adopt the budget by the beginning of the fiscal year, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month to month basis with all items in it pro-rated accordingly until such time as the Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
9.10 - Public Records. 
    Copies of the approved operation budget, capital facilities and property budget and supporting papers shall be filed with the City Secretary and shall be public records available to the public for inspection upon request. 
9.11 - Specified Reserve Fund. 
    Specified reserve funds may be created for specific purposes, and may be used only for such purposes. 
9.12 - Amendment of Budget. 
    The Council may amend the budget for any municipal purpose or as otherwise permitted by law. 
9.13 - Emergency Appropriations. 
    To meet a public emergency created by a natural disaster or man-made calamity affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations, and may authorize the issuance of emergency debt or notes. 
9.14 - Reduction of Appropriations. 
    If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial actions taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose the Council may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
9.15 - Transfer of Appropriations. 
    At any time during the fiscal year the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, division or office and transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another. The City Manager shall make written reports of all transfers to the City Council as directed by order of the City Council. 
9.16 - Limitations. 
    No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. 
9.17 - Effective Date. 
    The supplemental and emergency appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption of the ordinance or budget amendments. 
B. - BORROWING 

9.18 - Authority to Incur Indebtedness. 
    The Council shall have the power to incur, create, refund and refinance indebtedness and borrow money for public purposes; to issue special or general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time warrants, certificates of obligation and other evidences of indebtedness and to secure and pay the same in the manner and in accordance with the procedures provided and required by State law. 
9.19 - Bonds Incontestable. 
    All bonds of the City having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable and all bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall and after said exchange, be incontestable. 
9.20 - Borrowing in Anticipation of Property Tax. 
    In any budget year, the Council may, by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money in anticipation of the collection of the property tax for the same year whether levied or to be levied. Notes may be issued for periods not exceeding one (1) year and must be retired by the end of the budget year in which issued. 
9.21 - Use of Bond Funds. 
    Any and all bond funds approved by a vote of the citizens of Decatur will be expended only for the purposes stated in the bond issue. 
C. - REPORTS AND AUDITS 

9.22 - Financial Reports. 
    The City Manager shall submit to the Council a report of the financial condition of the City budget items for the fiscal year to date, periodically as directed by the council or required by law. 
9.23 - Independent Audit. 
    At the close of each fiscal year, and at such times as it may be deemed necessary, the Council shall cause an independent audit to be made of all accounts of the City by a Certified Public Accountant. The Certified Public Accountant shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the City or any of its officers. Upon completion of the audit, the results thereof in a summary form shall be presented to the Council. A copy of the Audit shall be made available to the public for inspection upon request. Commencing the first year after adoption of this Charter, no Certified Public Accountant shall serve more than ten (10) consecutive years. 
D. - TAXATION 

9.24 - Power to Tax. 
    The Council shall have the power to levy, assess and collect taxes within the jurisdiction of the City for any municipal purpose. 
9.25 - Tax Rate. 
    The tax rate shall be calculated, publicized and adopted in accordance with State law. 
9.26 - Other Rules and Regulations. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the Council shall have the power to provide by ordinance such rules, regulations and mode of procedure to enforce and facilitate the collection by and payment to the Tax Assessor and Collector of all taxes due the City as it may deem expedient, and may provide such penalty and interest as prescribed by State law for the failure to pay such taxes. 
CHAPTER X. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

10.01 - Inalienability of Control of Public Property. 
    The sole right of control, easement, use, ownership of and title to the public streets, sidewalks, highways, bridges, alleys, public places, and other real property of the City is hereby declared to be inalienable, except by ordinance adopted by a majority of the City Council. 
10.02 - Powers of the City. 
    The City shall have the power to buy, sell, construct, lease, maintain, operate, and regulate public services and utilities within or without the City limits, and to distribute and sell such utility services, including but not limited to water, gas, electric, telephone, cable, waste management and transportation services. The City shall have such regulatory powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
10.03 - Power to Grant Franchise. 
    The Council shall have the power by ordinance, after public hearing, to grant, renew, and extend all franchises for all utilities of every character operating within the City and, to amend the same, provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for an indeterminate term, and that no franchise shall be granted for a term exceeding twenty (20) years from the date of the grant, renewal or extension. Council action on all ordinances granting, renewing, extending or amending a utility franchise shall comply with the applicable provisions set forth in Section 3.11 of this Charter. No grant or franchise to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive. All required publication costs shall be paid by the utility. 
10.04 - Transfer of Franchise. 
    No utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance following a public hearing. The term "transferable" as used herein, shall not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the franchise holder from pledging said franchise as security for a valid debt or mortgage. 
10.05 - Right of Franchise. 
    All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of utility franchises shall be subject to the following rights of the City: 
(a)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing. 
(b)  To require an adequate extension of plant and service as is necessary to provide adequate service to the public, and maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(c)  To require at any time compensation and rental for use of public streets, sidewalks, highways, bridges, alleys, and public places. 
(d)  To require the franchisee to restore at the franchisee's expense, all public or private property to a condition equally as good as or better than before disturbed by construction, repair or removal. The franchise holder in opening and refilling of all earth openings shall repair the pavement and do all other work necessary to complete restoration of streets, sidewalks or grounds to a condition equally as good or better as when disturbed. 
(e)  To require every franchisee to furnish within a reasonable time to the City, without cost to the City, a general map, with updates outlining the location, character, size, length, and terminals of all facilities of such franchisee in, over, and under ground of property in the City and to provide detailed information on request in a format as specified by the City. 
(f)  To impose other reasonable regulations, requirements, and conditions as may be deemed necessary to promote the health, safety, welfare, or accommodation of the public and to insure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public. 
10.06 - Regulation of Rates. 
    The Council shall have full power after due notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges and fares of all public utility franchise holders operating in the City as authorized by state and federal law. 
10.07 - Records and Accounts. 
    The City Council shall periodically examine, and may, if deemed appropriate, request and audit the records of all franchise holders and municipally owned public utilities. The City Council shall also demand that all franchise holders and municipally owned public utilities keep a standard system of accounting and furnish reports on the local operations of the utility. Such reports shall be prepared in such form and contain such information as the City Council shall prescribe. 
10.08 - Municipal Owned Utilities. 
    The Council shall have the right to: 
(a)  Set rates of city-owned public services; and 
(b)  Require any city-owned public services to keep accounts of financial operations. Accounts must show actual cost of each service to the City, including costs of extensions and improvements and source of funds extended for these purposes. Costs and revenues of services furnished to other cities of government agencies must be included. 
10.09 - Franchise Records. 
    The City shall compile and maintain a public record of utility franchises. 
10.10 - Extensions. 
    All extensions of service of utilities within the City limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the utility, shall operate as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in this Chapter. In case of extension of a utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
10.11 - Franchises Granted Before Ratification of this Charter. 
    All franchises granted before ratification of the Charter are recognized as contracts between the City and the grantee, and the contractual rights contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of the Charter. 
CHAPTER XI. - PLANNING AND ZONING 

11.01 - State Law Adopted-Zoning. 
    The City Council shall have the power and authority to zone the City and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules and regulations governing same, under and by virtue of the authority given to cities and the legislative bodies thereof by the Texas Local Government Code, together with all amendments which may hereafter be made thereto. 
11.02 - State Law Adopted-Subdivision Regulation. 
    The Council shall have the power and authority to regulate the layout, development and platting of the subdivisions of land within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules and regulations governing same, under and by virtue of the authority given to cities and the legislative bodies thereof by the Texas Local Government Code, together with all amendments which may hereafter be made thereto. 
11.03 - The Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(a)  There shall be established by the Council a Planning and Zoning Commission, with no more than seven (7) members, which shall have all the powers and authority set forth in the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and such additional powers and privileges as may be duly assigned to it by the ordinances of the City. If the Council chooses, it may establish separate planning and zoning boards and establish the duties of each. 
(b)  A member of the Commission may be removed with the consent of a majority of the Council. If a vacancy occurs upon the Planning and Zoning Commission, by either resignation or otherwise, the Council shall appoint a commissioner to fill such a vacancy for the unexpired term. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings which shall be a public record. The Commission shall serve without compensation. No member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold another salaried or elected City office. 
11.04 - Purpose, Object, Powers and Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The  Planning and Zoning Commission is created to act as an advisory board to the Council in matters relating to the physical development of the City. The Commission is expected to advise the Council on matters relating to zoning; public improvements; civic improvements; City planning; opening, widening, and changing of streets; routing of public utilities; controlling and regulating traffic upon the public streets and ways of the City; development regulatory ordinances; annexation proposals/plans; and such other matters related to City improvements as the Commission and Council may deem beneficial to the City. The specifically delegated duties of the Commission shall be as follows: 
(a)  Recommend a comprehensive master plan for the physical development of the City together with its related components. 
(b)  Conduct periodic reviews of the City's comprehensive master plan and its component elements to recommend modifications, changes, revisions, or updates to ensure that the comprehensive master plan adequately and accurately reflects the policy, goals and objectives of the City. 
(c)  Hold required public hearings on any proposed changes to the zoning plan, map, and ordinances of the City for the purpose of making recommendations to the Council on the reasonableness of these proposals. To recommend any change to the plan, map or ordinances of the City where the Commission deems it necessary in the furtherance of the City's comprehensive master plan. 
(d)  Conduct appropriate hearings on any proposals for the subdivision/platting of land within the corporate limits of the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions of state law and requirements of the City's subdivision regulation ordinances. The Commission shall take action on those proposals as it deems appropriate and conforming to the requirements of the City's comprehensive master plan. The Commission shall ensure that proposals for subdivision or development of land are consistent with the City's plan components as an element of the review process. As an element of this Charter, the City of Decatur has determined that it is a reasonable legislative enactment to require subdivision plats to conform to the City's comprehensive master plan and failure to achieve conformance shall be a legitimate ground for the denial of a development proposal. 
(e)  The Commission shall hold such hearings as are mandated by the Council on any proposals for annexation or for the development of capital improvement programs or plans to secure information for the purpose of making recommendations to the City Council on these proposals. 
11.05 - Board of Adjustment. 
    The Council, shall appoint a Board of Adjustment which shall have all of the powers and authority as set forth in the Texas Local Government Code, and as hereafter amended, and such additional powers and privileges as may be duly assigned to it by the ordinances of the City. 
11.06 - Comprehensive Master Plan. 
    No later than two (2) years after the adoption of this Charter, the City Council of the City of Decatur shall adopt a comprehensive master plan projecting for at least five (5) years the growth and physical development of the City pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Local Government Code or any subsequent modification, amendment, or change in that statutory authorization. The City Council shall establish and adopt by ordinance a procedure for periodic review and/or revision of the comprehensive master plan. The City may adopt the comprehensive master plan by resolution or by ordinance following a public hearing upon which public input is received. The purpose of the comprehensive master plan is to guide the growth and development of the City and to establish the standards that the City will seek to attain through the adoption of its development regulations to include its zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, building and construction regulations, landscaping regulations, signage regulations, and other related police power enactments. The comprehensive master plan shall identify the goals and objectives of the community for growth and development and shall serve as the basis of the City's capital improvement program for the development and construction of public works infrastructure. 
11.07 - Legal Effect of the Comprehensive Master Plan. 
    Upon adoption or modification of a comprehensive master plan or element or portion thereof by the City Council, all land development regulations including zoning regulations and districts, subdivision regulations, roadway or thoroughfare plans, all public improvements, public facilities, public utilities projects and all City regulatory actions relating to land use, subdivision and development approval shall be consistent with the comprehensive master plan, element or portion thereof, as adopted or modified. It is the intent of the City that to the maximum extent permitted under state law, City development regulations of every type shall require conformity to the purpose and intent of the comprehensive master plan as a condition of approval for development proposals. A development proposal which is inconsistent with the comprehensive master plan may be approved by the appropriate board, commission or Council only if that board, commission or Council notes the inconsistency with the plan and states a specific reason or basis for the approval not withstanding the inconsistency. An approval of a development project that is inconsistent with the comprehensive master plan shall immediately mandate a review of that portion of the comprehensive master plan to determine if plan modification is necessary or appropriate. 
CHAPTER XII. - GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

12.01 - Effect of Charter on Existing Law. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force in the City on the effective date of this Charter, and not in conflict with this Charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed. All taxes, assessments, liens, encumbrances and demands, of or against the City, fixed or established before such date, or for the fixing or establishing of which proceedings have begun at such date, shall be valid when properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of beginning of such proceedings or under the law after the adoption of this Charter. 
12.02 - Continuation of Present Offices. 
    All persons holding administrative office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made in accordance therewith for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the City by the laws of the State shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this Charter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by the Council unless otherwise provided herein. 
12.03 - Public Meetings. 
    All meetings of the Council and all boards and commissions appointed by the Council shall be governed by the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, Texas Government Code and any amendments thereto. This section shall not be construed to require any action or measure beyond that required by state law. 
12.04 - Public Records. 
    Access to the records of every office, department or agency of the City shall be subject to public inspection as provided by the Texas Public Information Act and any amendments thereto. This section shall not be construed to require any action or measure beyond that required by state law. 
12.05 - Official Newspaper. 
    The Council may designate by resolution one or more a newspapers of general circulation in the City as the official newspaper of the City, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matters which are required to be published by this Charter, the ordinances of the City or the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas. 
12.06 - Notice of Injury or Damage. 
    Before the City shall be liable for any claim for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damages to property, the complainant or his authorized representative shall notify the City Secretary in accordance with this Section. The notification shall be in writing and shall state specifically how, when and where the death, injury or damage occurred; the amount of loss claimed; and the identity of any witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim. The notification shall be filed within six months of the date of injury or damage or in the case of death, within six months (6) of the date of death. 
12.07 - Bond or Security Not Required. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the city is a party, for any bond, including supersedeas bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law. 
12.08 - Judicial Notice. 
    This Charter shall be deemed a public act and shall have the force and effect of a general law; may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places without further proof. 
12.09 - Continuance of Contracts and Succession of Rights. 
    All contracts entered into by the City or for its benefit prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws or ordinances existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws or ordinances. All suits, taxes, penalties, forfeitures and all other rights, claims, and demands, which have accrued under the laws, heretofore in force governing the City shall belong to and be vested in and shall be prosecuted by and for the use and benefit of the corporation hereby created, and shall not in any way be diminished, affected or prejudiced by the adoption and taking effect of this Charter. 
12.10 - Continuance of Present Governing Body. 
    All members of the Council, including the Mayor, holding office at the time of passage of this Charter shall continue to hold their respective place and office until their respective term of office for which they were elected expires, in accordance with Chapter 2 of this charter. 
12.11 - Indemnification of Officers. 
    The Council may by appropriate ordinance, provide for the indemnification and defense of the officers and employees of the City, including members of the Council, or any board, commission, or committee, including volunteers, against any loss, cost, or expense, including court costs and attorneys' fees, to the extent allowed by law, arising out of any claim, suit, or judgment, or settlement thereof, resulting from any alleged negligent act or omission of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer during the discharge of his duties and within the scope of his office, employment, membership, or assigned voluntary position with the City, or in any other case where the City is directed or authorized by law to do so, provided however, that such indemnification will not be provided for any act arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of any penal statute or ordinance arising out of any conduct determined by final judgment to be an act of fraud or to have been taken with the intent to deceive or defraud, or for any personal or private business of such officer, employee, member or volunteer, or for the gross negligence or official misconduct, or willful or wrongful act or omission of such officer, employee, member or volunteer. 
12.12 - Property Not Subject to Execution. 
    No property owned or held by the City shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature. 
12.13 - Garnishment. 
    No funds of the City shall be subject to garnishment and the City shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings. 
12.14 - Persons Serving on Boards. 
    Persons serving on any board at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall continue to serve on the board to which they were appointed until their term shall have expired or until their successors shall have qualified. 
12.15 - Assignment of Wages. 
    The City shall never be liable to the assignee of any wages of any officer, agent or employee of said City, whether earned or unearned, upon any claim or account whatsoever, and as to the City such assignment shall be absolutely void. 
12.16 - When General Law Applicable. 
    The general laws of the State of Texas and ordinances of the Council shall furnish the authority for the power and exercise thereof and control all matters to the extent not specifically and completely covered by this Charter. 
12.17 - Severability Clause. 
    If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part to which such holding shall directly apply. 
12.18 - Meaning of Words. 
    The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed for the purpose of effecting the objects and ends thereof. Unless some other meaning is manifest the word "CITY" shall be construed to mean the "CITY OF DECATUR." All references to state law or laws of the State of Texas, however expressed, shall mean "as presently enacted or hereinafter enacted." 
12.19 - Amendment of Charter. 
    Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided in the Texas Local Government Code, as now or hereafter enacted, or amended. 
12.20 - Submission of Charter to Voters. 
    The Charter Commission in preparing this Charter concludes that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the Charter Commission directs that the said Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City at an election to be held for that purpose on Saturday, February 1, 2003. Not less than thirty days prior to such election, the Council shall cause the City Secretary to mail a copy of this Charter to each qualified voter of the City as appears from the latest certified list of registered voters. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall immediately become the governing law of the City, until amended or repealed. 
    We, the undersigned members of the City of Decatur Charter Commission heretofore duly appointed to prepare a Charter for the City of Decatur, Texas, do hereby certify that this publication constitutes a true copy of the proposed Charter for the City of Decatur, Texas, as adopted by the members thereof. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
  This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. 
Ordinance 
Number Adopted Election 
Date Section Section 
this 
Charter  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the Code of Ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas, and may be so cited. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  53.001. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Decatur, Texas, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City council, council. The terms "city council" and "council" shall mean the city council of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
    Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
    County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Wise, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Gender. Words used in the masculine gender in this Code or in other ordinances of the city include the feminine and neuter unless a contrary intention plainly appears. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Number. Words used in the singular number in this Code or in other ordinances of the city include the plural, and the plural the singular, except where a contrary intention plainly appears. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" includes natural persons, corporations (private and public), partnerships, all other unincorporated organizations, trusts, estates, government agencies, and other legal entities, except when a contrary intention plainly appears. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place subject to the primary control of any public agency, including but not limited to any park, street, public way, cemetery, or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The terms "the state" and "this state" shall mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The word "street" shall embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city. 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The words "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
    Written and in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(Code 1975,  9-1-9-5) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.005; application of Titles 1, 2 and 3 of Penal Code, V.T.C.A., Penal Code  1.03. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as aids and guides to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas, 1975, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeals. 
    The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the provision repealed. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones; 
(9)  Any land use, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map; 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city; 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations; 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(16)  Any subdivision ordinance; 
(17)  Any ordinance regulating plumbing; 
(18)  Any ordinance regulating or establishing rates for public utilities in the city; 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code and as are on file in the city secretary's office. 
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Decatur, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: ...." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ ." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for violation of a rule, ordinance and police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation including dumping of refuse, nor exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in subsection (a) shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a specified penalty other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so specified shall be held to relate to the amended section, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  54.001; authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  53.001; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code  29.003. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The City of Decatur is a Class A general law city under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  5.001. 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 3; finance and taxation, Ch. 5; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; nuisances, Ch. 10; sales, Ch. 11; solid waste, Ch. 12; utilities, Ch. 14. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Liability for property damage or for personal injury. 
(a)  The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within sixty (60) days or within six (6) months for good cause shown from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(b)  No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall ever prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(c)  All notice required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following location: 201 East Walnut, Decatur, Texas 76234. All such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(d)  The above-written notice requirements shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have actual knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the city. 
(e)  The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(f)  With the exception of the notice provisions set forth above, nothing in this section shall constitute a waiver of any provision of the Texas Tort Claims Act. (Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code,  101.001, et seq.) 
(g)  If any provision of this section or the application hereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section which can be given effect without defeating the purpose or objective of the provisions, and to this end, the provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 5-96,  1-7, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2-2. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment of municipal court technology fund. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now known as the fund, pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. Art. 102.0172. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00). 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after passage and approval of this section. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the city administrator of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated uses of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the Municipal Court of the City of Decatur, Texas, including: 
a.  Computer systems; 
b.  Computer networks; 
c.  Computer hardware; 
d.  Computer software; 
e.  Imaging systems; 
f.  Electronic kiosks; 
g.  Electronic ticket writers; 
h.  Docket management systems; or 
i.  Service and maintenance agreements on technology purchased for courts. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of Decatur. 
(Ord. No. 12-99,  1-3, 11-8-99; Ord. No. 03-09-14,  1, 9-22-03) 
Sec. 2-3. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the "fund") pursuant to Article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The Municipal Court of the City of Decatur, Texas (the "municipal court") is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) against all Defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if: 
(1)  Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person receives deferred disposition; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
(d)  The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the Treasury of the City of Decatur, Texas. All fees so collected and paid over to the Treasury of the City of Decatur, Texas shall be segregated in the fund. 
(e)  The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or buildings housing the Municipal Court of the City of Decatur, Texas. "Security devices and/or services" shall include any and all items described in Article 102.017(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(f)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-08,  1, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 2-4-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-26. - Regular meetings. 
    The city council shall hold a regular meeting at 6:30 p.m. on the second Monday of every month in the council chamber in the city hall. 
(Code 1975,  1-1) 
Secs. 2-27-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-46-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CEMETERY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3-96,  1-7, adopted April 8, 1996, repealed the prior Div. 2,  2-61-2-63, which pertained to similar subject matter, and set out new provisions. 

Sec. 2-61. - Created. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Decatur Cemetery Board. Said board shall consist of nine (9) persons. All members shall be resident citizens of Wise County, Texas. Five (5) members of such board shall be appointed each odd numbered year, and four (4) members shall be appointed each even numbered year. Each member shall serve for a term of two (2) years, or until their successor is appointed. Appointments to said board shall be made at the first regular meeting after the city council annual election, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably feasible. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the term so filled. A quorum shall consist of five (5) members. Members of the board may be removed by a majority vote of the council. 
(b)  Said board shall meet monthly or otherwise as deemed appropriate by said board. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, which shall be of public record. 
(Ord. No. 3-96,  1, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 06-01-05, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 2-62. - Officers. 
    The cemetery board shall select from among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, and it shall adopt, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations governing its proceedings as it may deem proper. Such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city. The cemetery board shall appoint a secretary, who may, but need not be, a member of the board. The secretary shall keep a record of all transactions of the board. The city employees charged with maintenance and management of the cemetery properties shall provide the cemetery board with all information necessary for the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 3-96,  2, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2-63. - Duties of board. 
    The cemetery board shall from time to time make such general studies of cemetery construction and operation as may be useful in keeping the municipal cemetery properties efficient and adequate for the needs of the city and of the local area population. The cemetery board shall make recommendations to the city council in respect to construction, expansion, subdivision, platting, improvements, maintenance and operation of such cemetery properties, including such budget recommendations upon the above matters as the board may deem appropriate. The cemetery board shall supervise the management and operations of the cemetery properties and the sale of cemetery lots in the cemetery properties, and shall establish prices for such lot sales subject to approval of the city council. It shall call the city staff's attention to any failure by cemetery personnel to carry out any orders or policies adopted by the cemetery board and by the city council; and it shall, acting in an advisory capacity, work toward the general improvement of the cemetery properties. 
(Ord. No. 3-96,  3, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2-64. - No compensation. 
    All members of the cemetery board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of such board, when authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3-96,  4, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2-65. - Previous cemetery board replaced. 
    This division shall supersede and replace any previous ordinance, memorandum or resolution establishing or governing the duties and operations of the previous cemetery board. 
(Ord. No. 3-96,  5, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2-66. - Ex officio members. 
    The city council may from time to time designate any member of the council, as well as any other member of the city staff, to serve as ex officio members of the cemetery board. 
(Ord. No. 3-96,  6, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2-67. - Permanent endowment fund established. 
(a)  Purpose. The Permanent Endowment Fund of the City of Decatur Public Cemetery System (hereinafter the "endowment fund") is hereby established for the purpose of providing members of the general public with the opportunity to make charitable gifts to the City of Decatur, Texas (hereinafter "the city"), which gifts will become a permanent endowment of financial support and a living memorial. The endowment fund is intended for purposes that are not a part of the city's established operations which are funded through the annual operating budget of the city. 
(b)  Administration. The endowment fund will be administered by the cemetery board, as established above. 
(c)  Endowment fund investment objectives. The endowment fund's investment objectives are: 
(1)  Conservation of principal. 
(2)  Regular income at a reasonable rate. 
(3)  Growth of income and principal. 
(4)  Investment of assets in sound institutions, companies, corporations or funds. 
(d)  Investment of endowment funds. All gifts received by the endowment fund shall be invested through the establishment of one (1) or more accounts with such institution, company, corporation or fund as may be approved by the city council and the board. No endowment fund account may be established or maintained at any financial institution or agency unless such institution or agency has been previously approved for such purpose by the city council and the board. For purposes of initial establishment of the endowment fund, the First National Bank of Texas, in Decatur, Texas, is hereby recognized to be an approved institution. 
(e)  Limitation on use of principal. The objectives of the endowment fund are to conserve principal and make use of only the income from the fund. Any part of the principal may be withdrawn only in extreme and overwhelming circumstances, bordering on the survival of the city itself. Any withdrawal of principal must be approved by a two-thirds majority of the city council in open public hearings held on two (2) consecutive regular meeting dates. 
(f)  "Designated," "undesignated" and "operating" gifts. Gifts to the endowment fund shall be classified as "designated" or "undesignated." "Designated" gifts are defined as those gifts for which the donors have made specific and reasonable directions or instructions regarding the distribution and expenditure of income. "Undesignated" gifts are defined as all other gifts to the endowment fund. "Operating" gifts are defined as all gifts made to the city or to the board for the operating purposes of the cemetery department and which are not intended to be gifts to the endowment fund. The board shall be entitled to establish, and from time to time revise, guidelines regarding the purpose, manner and size of specifically "designated" donations as may be accepted for inclusion in the endowment fund. For purposes of initial establishment of the endowment fund, ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) is hereby established as the initial minimum size of any single gift, in order for such gift to be accepted as "designated." The board shall have the authority and responsibility to accept or reject any and all gifts to the endowment fund in keeping with the guidelines which the board may adopt with regard to such gifts, and in keeping with such other guidelines which the city council may adopt with regard to such gifts, and in keeping with applicable law and public policy. Nothing herein shall require the city or the board to accept any such donor direction or instruction unless such gift and direction shall be in conformance with such guidelines, law and policy. All provisions of the endowment fund as to investment of funds, administration of funds, and limitation of use of income shall be applicable to both "designated" and "undesignated" gifts, and all gifts made to the endowment fund shall be accepted subject to the terms and limitations set forth herein. 
(g)  Distribution of income. The income of the endowment fund shall be distributed to the operating account or accounts as may be maintained by the city cemetery department, for purposes of operation, maintenance, improvement or expansion of the cemetery properties, as may be approved by the city council through its regular budget procedures or other special operations. To the extent reasonable and feasible, the city shall endeavor to expend and distribute income from "designated" gifts to the fund as reasonably directed by the donors at the time of their gift or as directed by will or other gift document, if such direction is in conformity with the general purposes and provisions set forth herein. 
(h)  Reinvestment of "operating" gifts and income. Upon recommendation of the board, the city council may at any time authorize the reinvestment of any portion of income from the endowment fund or of "operating" gifts to the cemetery department, to the principal corpus of the endowment fund. In this regard, it is specifically contemplated that a portion of the proceeds from the sale of cemetery lots, in an amount to be from time to time recommended by the board and approved by the council, shall be reinvested in the endowment fund. 
(i)  Liability of members of the cemetery board. In the absence of gross negligence or fraud, no member of the cemetery board shall be personally liable for any action made or omission with respect to the endowment fund. 
(j)  Amendments. Technical corrections and amendments to section 2-67, which do not alter the stated purpose of the endowment fund, may be made only by two-third majority of the city council in open public hearings held on two (2) consecutive regular meeting dates. 
(Ord. No. 3-96,  7, 4-8-96) 
Secs. 2-68-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-76. - Created. 
    It is in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority, to be comprised of the territory presently included in the corporate limits and boundaries of the city; and such hospital authority is hereby created. The same shall hereafter be a body politic and corporate, under the name of Decatur Hospital Authority which is hereby designated as the name by which the authority shall be known. 
(Code 1975,  1-21) 
Sec. 2-77. - Board of directors. 
    The hospital authority shall be governed by a board of directors composed of ten (10) members. Each of the directors shall, unless other provisions be made in the bond resolution or indenture in connection with the issuance of bonds as provided in Chapter 262 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas (formerly Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Art. 4437e), serve for a term of two (2) years or until their successors are elected or appointed by the city council, and have been duly qualified. Each of the directors, and their successors in office, shall qualify by taking the oath of office required of appointed officials of the state. 
(Code 1975,  1-22; Ord. No. 4-95, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 00-12-15,  1, 12-11-00) 
Secs. 2-78-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LIBRARY BOARD 

Sec. 2-91. - Established. 
    There shall be established the Decatur Public Library Advisory Board. Said board shall consist of seven (7) persons. All members shall be resident citizens of Wise County, Texas. Four (4) members of such board shall be appointed each even numbered year, and three (3) members shall be appointed each odd numbered year. Each member shall serve for a term of two (2) years, or until their successor is appointed. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the term so filled. Members of the board may be removed by a majority vote of the council. The city librarian shall be an ex officio, non-voting member of said board. 
(Ord. No. 06-01-07, 1-23-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-01-07, adopted January 23, 2006, repealed the former  2-91, and enacted a new  2-91 as set out herein. The former  2-91 pertained to created and derived from  1-23 of the 1975 Code. 
Sec. 2-92. - Operations. 
    The board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman, and shall meet monthly or otherwise as deemed appropriate by said board. The chairman of said board shall be non-voting except in cases of a tie. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, which shall be of public record. The board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 06-01-07, 1-23-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-01-07, adopted January 23, 2006, repealed the former  2-92, and enacted a new  2-92 as set out herein. The former  2-91 pertained to membership and derived from  1-24 of the 1975 Code. 
Sec. 2-93. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-01-07, adopted January 23, 2006, repealed  2-93, which pertained to election of officers; meetings; bylaws, etc.; quorum and derived from  1-25 of the 1975 Code. 
Sec. 2-94. - Powers and duties. 
    The library board shall have the following powers and perform the following duties: 
(1)  It shall encourage development of the public library. 
(2)  It shall recommend to the city council policies and programs for the advancement of the library. 
(3)  It shall review the annual budget for the library prior to submission of the budget to the city council. 
(4)  It shall cooperate with all other public and private groups in advancing the best interests of the public library. 
(5)  It shall render to the city council all recommendations it considers advisable regarding the library. 
(Code 1975,  1-26) 
Secs. 2-95-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-94,  1, adopted Nov. 14, 1994, set out provisions repealing Div. 5, Parks Board,  2-111-2-113. 

Secs. 2-111-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 

Sec. 2-126. - Membership and terms. 
    A seven (7) member Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Decatur has heretofore been established by Section 11.03 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Decatur. Pursuant to general authority vested in the City Council of the City of Decatur it is hereby established that each such board member shall be a resident of the City of Decatur, or an owner of real property within said city residing within Wise County, or an owner or co-owner of a business within said city residing within Wise County. Four (4) members of such board shall be appointed each even numbered year, and three (3) members shall be appointed each odd numbered year. Each member shall serve for a term of two (2) years, or until their successor is appointed. The board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman, and shall meet monthly or otherwise as deemed appropriate by said board. The chairman of said board shall be non-voting except in cases of a tie. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. 
(Ord. No. 06-01-09, 1-23-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-01-09, adopted January 23, 2006, repealed the former  2-126, and enacted a new  2-126 as set out herein. The former  2-126 pertained to created and derived from  13-1 of the 1975 Code. 
Secs. 2-127-2-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-01-09, adopted January 23, 2006, repealed  2-127-2-132, which pertained to membership; vacancies; officers; meetings; organization; mater plan; studies, recommendations; action as zoning commission and derived from  13-2-13-5, 13-7, 13-8 of the 1975 Code. 
DIVISION 7. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Airport regulations, Ch. 2.5. 

Sec. 2-136. - Created. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Decatur Airport Advisory Board. Said board shall consist of five (5) persons. All members shall be resident citizens of Wise County, Texas. Three (3) members of such board shall be appointed each odd numbered year, and two (2) members shall be appointed each even numbered year. Each member shall serve for a term of two (2) years, or until their successor is appointed. Appointments to said board shall be made at the first regular meeting after the city council annual election, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably feasible. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the term so filled. 
(b)  Board members shall serve at the discretion of the city council. Any board member may be removed upon majority vote by the city council. Any vacancy upon the board shall be filled by appointment by the city council of a new member or alternate to fill the unexpired term of the vacancy. 
(c)  Certain members of the heretofore existing Decatur Airport Advisory Board are hereby re-appointed, and new members appointed, with terms expiring as below shown: 
Officer Name Term Expires Chairman Gordon Hofstra April 30, 2004 Member Roscoe Armstrong April 30, 2004 Member Gene LaCosta April 30, 2004 Vice-Chairman Bob Johnson April 30, 2005 Member Denny Ewing April 30, 2005 Member Bill Goebel April 30, 2005 Member Glen Welsh April 30, 2005  
(Ord. No. 4-94,  I(1), 3-21-94; Ord. No. 03-04-02, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 06-01-04, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 2-137. - Officers. 
    The airport advisory board shall select from among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, and it shall adopt, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations governing its proceedings as it may deem proper. Such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city. The advisory board shall appoint a secretary, who may, but need not be, a member of the board. The secretary shall keep a record of all transactions of the board. The manager of the airport shall provide the advisory board with all information necessary for the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  I(2), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2-138. - Duties. 
    The airport advisory board shall from time to time make such general studies of airport construction and operation as may be useful in keeping the municipal airport efficient and adequate for the needs of the city and of the air transportation industry; it shall make recommendations to the city council in respect to construction, expansion, improvements, maintenance and operation of such airport. It shall call the manager's attention to any failure by personnel of the airport to carry out any orders or policies adopted by the city council; and it shall, acting in an advisory capacity, work toward the general improvement of the airport and the advancement of the city as an air transportation center. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  I(3), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2-139. - Conflict of interest. 
    No person having any financial interest in any commercial carrier by air, or in any concession, right or privilege to conduct any business or render any service for compensation upon the premises of the municipal airport shall be eligible for membership on the airport advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  I(4), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2-140. - No compensation. 
    All members of the airport advisory board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of such board, when authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  I(5), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2-141. - Previous Decatur Airport Board replaced. 
    This division shall supersede and replace any previous ordinance establishing or governing the duties and operations of the previous City of Decatur Airport Board. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  I(6), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2-142. - Dual service as airport zoning board of adjustment. 
    The members of the airport advisory board established by this division shall also serve, when called upon, as board of adjustment of the "Decatur Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance," as the same is more fully described and established in section 2.5-9, chapter 2.5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  I(7), 3-21-94) 
Cross reference- Zoning board of adjustment,  2.5-9. 
Sec. 2-143. - Ex officio members. 
    The mayor, the city secretary and the city airport manager shall be ex officio members of the airport advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  I(8), 3-21-94) 
DIVISION 8. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2004-01-02,  1, adopted January 26, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new Division 8,  2-144, 2-145 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-144. - Established. 
(a)  There shall be established a parks and recreation advisory board. Said board shall consist of seven (7) persons. Each such board member shall be a resident of the City of Decatur, or an owner of real property within said city, or an owner or co-owner of a business within said city. Four (4) members of such board shall be appointed each odd numbered year, and three (3) members shall be appointed each even numbered year. Each member shall serve for a term of two (2) years, or until their successor is appointed. The board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman, and shall meet monthly or otherwise as deemed appropriate by said board. The chairman of said board shall be non-voting except in cases of a tie. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the term so filled. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. Members of the board may be removed by a majority vote of the council. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, which shall be of public record. The board shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  The board member breakdown shall consist of four (4) positions representing the general public and three (3) positions representing the youth sports associations. The associations will include baseball, softball, soccer and football. 
(Ord. No. 04-01-02,  1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 04-03-06,  1, 2, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 06-01-10, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 2-145. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters, including finances pertaining to parks and recreation and coordinate with other governmental agencies, civic groups and all citizens of Decatur in advancement of sound parks and recreation planning and programming. 
(b)  Recommend policies on recreation services to the city council. 
(c)  Recommend usage of the "recreation fund" to city council. 
(d)  Recommend the adoption of standards for recreational areas, facilities, programs and their financial support. 
(e)  Have periodic inventories made of existing services and survey of services needed and interpret the needs of the public to the city council and to the director of public works. 
(f)  Recommend for acquisition by the city council certain lands and buildings deemed appropriate for the use of the city parks and recreation programs. 
(g)  Submit recommendation for the improvement and expansion of the parks and recreation facilities, equipment and programs. 
(h)  The parks and recreation board have the right to establish standing committees and other such committees as from time to time may be deemed necessary or appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 04-01-02,  1, 1-26-04) 
DIVISION 9. - CIVIC CENTER ADVISORY BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2004-04-10,  1, adopted April 26, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new Division 9,  2-146, 2-147 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-146. - Established. 
    There shall be established a Decatur Civic Center Advisory Board. Said board shall consist of five (5) persons. Each such board member shall be a resident of the City of Decatur, or an owner of real property within said city, or an owner or co-owner of a business within said city. Three (3) members of such board shall be appointed each even numbered year, and two (2) members shall be appointed each odd numbered year. Each member shall serve for a term of two (2) years, or until their successor is appointed. The board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman, and shall meet quarterly or otherwise as deemed appropriate by said board. The chairman of said board shall be non-voting except in cases of a tie. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the term so filled. A quorum shall consist of three (3) members. Members of the board may be removed by a majority vote of the council. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, which shall be of public record. The board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-10,  1, 4-26-04; Ord. No. 06-01-06, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 2-147. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  To review and make recommendations to the city council on policies and procedures and fee structure of the facility. 
(b)  To develop long range plans for the use and marketing of the center. 
(c)  Recommend the adaptation of standards for food and beverage department. 
(d)  To provide to the city council a written report of the committee's activities and future plans on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-10,  1, 4-26-04) 
DIVISION 10. - CITY OF DECATUR BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Section 2-148. - Established. 
    Pursuant to Section 11.05 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Decatur, there is established the City of Decatur Board of Adjustment. Said board shall consist of five (5) persons, with three (3) persons named as alternates. Each such board member and alternate shall be either a resident of the City of Decatur, or an owner of real property within said city residing within Wise County, or an owner or co-owner of a business within said city residing within Wise County. Three (3) members and one (1) alternate of such board shall be appointed each odd numbered year, and two (2) members and two (2) alternates of such board shall be appointed each even numbered year. Each member an each alternate shall serve for a term of two (2) years, or until their successor is appointed. The board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman and shall meet monthly or otherwise as deemed appropriate by said board. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the term so filled. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members, including alternates. Any alternate may act and vote in place of an absent member at any meeting where any such member is absent. Members and alternates of the board may be removed by a majority vote of the council. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, which shall be of public record. The board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 06-01-08, 1-23-06) 
Secs. 2-149, 2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Building official,  4-30; electrical inspector,  4-53 et seq.; fire marshal,  6-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-151-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK 

Sec. 2-166. - City secretary designated. 
    The city secretary shall be ex officio clerk of the municipal court and shall hold his term of office as such ex officio clerk during his term as city secretary. 
(Code 1975,  1-43) 
Cross reference- Municipal court judge,  2-181 et seq. 
Sec. 2-167. - Duties. 
    The clerk of the municipal court shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the court, issue all process, and generally perform all the duties of a clerk of a court as prescribed by law for a county clerk, insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(Code 1975,  1-44) 
Secs. 2-168-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Municipal court clerk,  2-166 et seq. 

Sec. 2-181. - Appointment; term. 
    The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge, who shall be appointed by the city council, and who shall hold his term of office corresponding to the unexpired term of the mayor, and every two (2) years thereafter a judge shall be appointed by the council for a term of two (2) years. Any judge so appointed shall hold office for the term appointed and until his successor has been appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1975,  1-41) 
Sec. 2-182. - Qualified voter of city. 
    No person shall be so appointed as judge of the municipal court except a qualified voter of the city. 
(Code 1975,  1-42) 
Sec. 2-183. - Special expense for issuance and service of arrest warrant. 
(a)  Any person who is arrested after issuance and service of an arrest warrant for an offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code  38.11 or under the uniform act regulating traffic on highways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,  149 shall be assessed a special expense by the judge of the municipal court in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Such special expense shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(b)  After due notice of default of personal bond, a person who is arrested after issuance and service of an arrest warrant for failure to appear under the code of criminal procedure Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 17.04 shall be assessed a special expense by the judge of the municipal court in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Such special expense shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 6-86, 8-11-86) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.06. 
Secs. 2-184-2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  141.007, 142.003, 341.012. 

Sec. 2-196. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a police reserve force for the city, hereafter referred to as the police reserves. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  1, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 2-197. - Composition. 
    The police reserves shall be an auxiliary police force composed of volunteers who shall serve without pay. The chief of police shall establish the size, composition and organization of the police reserves, which shall not exceed fifteen (15) in number. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  2, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 2-198. - Appointment, termination. 
    Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed and/or terminated at the discretion of the chief of police with the consent and approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  3, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 2-199. - Supervision by chief. 
    The police reserve shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into active service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  4, 7-11-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  341.012(e). 
Sec. 2-200. - Compensation; benefits. 
    Members of the police reserve force will serve without compensation. Uniforms may be provided to the reserve police officers at the discretion of the chief of police. The city may provide hospital and medical assistance to members of the police reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties, in the same manner as provided by the city for its full-time police officers, and reserve officers shall be eligible for death benefits as set out in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6228f. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of a police reserve force to become eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statutes, to which regular officers may become members by payroll deductions or otherwise. Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of regular police officers. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  5, 7-11-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  141.00, 142.003. 
Sec. 2-201. - Mayor's power to summon special police force. 
    This section does not limit the power of the mayor to summon into service a special police force as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  341.011. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  6, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 2-202. - Status as police officers. 
    Reserve officers of the police reserves shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties, subject at all times to the direction, control, and supervisory authority of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  7, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 2-203. - Reserve police officer standards. 
(a)  Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the state commission on law enforcement officers standard and education for all reserve law enforcement officers. The chief of police shall establish the qualifications and standards of training for members of the police reserve force and shall establish rules and regulations governing reserve police officers. 
(b)  The chief of police may establish minimum physical, mental, educational and moral standards as used by the regular police department, but in no case shall the standards be less than the standards established by the state commission on law enforcement officers standard and education. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  8, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 2-204. - Authority of chief. 
    The chief of police shall be the head of the police reserves and the members of the reserve force shall be under the authority, control and command of the chief of police, and to such subordinates as he shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  9, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 2-205. - Weapons. 
    Persons appointed to the police reserves may carry a weapon while serving as a police reserve officer except at the express direction of the chief of police. The chief of police may authorize members of the police reserve to carry arms only in discharging official duties in active service. 
(Ord. No. 8-88,  10, 7-11-88) 
State Law reference- Approval by city council, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  341.011. 
Sec. 2-206. - City administrator. 
(a)  The office of city administrator is hereby created. The salary for such office shall be as determined annually by the city council and as may be stated in an employment contract with specific individuals hired to serve by the city as such city administrator. 
(b)  The city administrator shall have the following authority: 
(1)  To hire, train and fire where necessary all city employees. 
(2)  To hire and employ consultants, contractors and professionals where necessary and where provided for within the budget of the city. 
(3)  To assist the mayor in the preparation of a budget for the mayor to timely present to the city council annually. 
(4)  To expend funds of the city as provided in the budget of the city. 
(5)  To report monthly to the city council and the mayor on the financial and other operations of the city. 
(6)  To supervise the city secretary in the preparation of agendas for all meetings, regular and called. 
(7)  To provide to the city council detailed information about each agenda item, together with city staff recommendations for city actions and ordinances. 
(c)  The city administrator shall further act as a public relations servant to the citizens of the city. 
(d)  The city administrator shall supervise all city staff. In this connection, the city administrator shall supervise the said city staff in its preparation and delivery to the city council of monthly reports concerning the operations of the city, and its various departments and projects. 
(e)  If the city council should find that the city administrator has failed to perform the above authorities and duties with competence and integrity and in accordance with the directives of the mayor and council, the city council shall have the right to terminate the employment of the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, 10-11-99) 
Secs. 2-207-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RETIREMENT AND OTHER BENEFIT PROGRAMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-221-2-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Municipal Retirement System, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  61.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-236. - City to participate in system. 
    On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  61.001 et seq. All of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(Code 1975,  1-51) 
Sec. 2-237. - Notice to board of trustees. 
    The mayor or city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above departments participate in the system. 
(Code 1975,  1-52) 
Sec. 2-238. - Employees to become members of system. 
    Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(Code 1975,  1-53) 
Sec. 2-239. - Deposits fixed. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  65.401, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of five (5) percent of the earnings of each employee of such departments, and in determining the deposits to be made on account of such service, the maximum earnings of this city is full salary. 
(Code 1975,  1-54) 
Sec. 2-240. - Remittance of contributions; certification of prior service. 
    The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the board under the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  61.001 et seq. The city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city, the prior service rendered to the city by each of the employees of the participating departments. The average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  61.001 et seq., or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Code 1975,  1-55) 
Sec. 2-241. - Participation in supplemental benefits fund. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1971, the city, by its city council, hereby elects to have the employees of all departments of the city participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B and all the benefits and obligations of participation in the fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)  The city secretary is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above-mentioned departments participate in the supplemental benefits fund of the system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in the fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the supplemental benefits fund of the system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to the fund, but shall never discontinue any members who are covered into the fund. 
(d)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of the city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System; provided that the rate of contribution to the fund shall not exceed one-half of one (1) percent of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under this fund. Such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe. 
(Code 1975,  1-56-1-59) 
Sec. 2-242. - Retirement eligibility. 
    Effective January 1, 1988, pursuant to the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  62.105, 64.202, 64.204, 64.405, 64.406, and 64.410, the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System: 
(1)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may terminate employment and remain eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity at any time after that member attains an applicable age and service requirement, if that member has at least ten (10) years of credited service performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  64.202(c) or are subject to  64.102(e) of such act. 
(2)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if that member is at least sixty (60) years old and has at least ten (10) years of creditable service performed for one (1) or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility under this subsection or are subject to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  64.102(e). 
(3)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least twenty-five (25) years of credited service in that system performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  64.202(e). 
(4)  If a vested member, as that term is defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed with the system elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of such  64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(5)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom (4) above applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. If such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(6)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system and who performed service for this city prior to September 1, 1987, (for which service that employee did not receive credit with the system because the employee was not at that time a member of the system due to his age at the date of his employment) is hereby granted service credit with the system for all of such service (performed after the date of his latest employment by the city) that is prior to September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not previously received credit with the system, pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  62.105. 
(7)  The rights, credits and benefits authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this ordinance pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(8)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a "standard occupational disability annuity" under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  64.408 or an "optional occupational disability retirement annuity" under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  64.410 upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees: 
a.  That the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employments; 
b.  That the disability is likely to be permanent; and 
c.  That the member should be retired. 
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  64.409. 
(9)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in (8) above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B,  64.301 through 64.308. 
(Ord. No. 3-87,  1, 7-13-87) 
Sec. 2-243. - Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 4-87,  2, 7-13-87; Ord. No. 05-11-20,  2, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 2-244. - Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act) 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-87,  1, 7-13-87; Ord. No. 05-11-20,  1, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 2-245. - Participation in supplemental death benefits fund. 
(a)  The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits for each of the city's employees who are members of said system and for the purpose of providing postretirement death benefits for annuitants whose last-covered employment was an employee of the city in the amounts and on the terms provided for in Sections 852.004, 854.601 through 854.605, 855.314, 855.408 and 855.502 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended. 
(b)  The city is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of the adoption of this section and of the participation of the city in said fund. 
(c)  Participation of the above-mentioned employees and annuitants in the supplemental death benefits fund shall be effective on the first day of March, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 4-90,  1-3, 2-12-90) 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. No. 4-90,  1-3, adopted Feb. 12, 1990, has been codified herein by the editor as  2-245. 
Sec. 2-246. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.305, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said section 853.305 provided that (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service, and (2) the service meets the requirements of said section 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take action required under said section 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 11-99,  1, 10-11-99) 
Sec. 2-247. - Contributions at the actuarially determined rate of total employee compensation. 
    Pursuant to Section 855.407(g) of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service contributions to its account in the municipal accumulation fund of the system at such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the system, as the system's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the city under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of city contributions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10-16,  1, 10-24-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2011-10-16,  1, adopted October 24, 2011, effective January 1, 2012, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as  2-247 at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 2-248-2-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OLD AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE 

Sec. 2-256. - Agreements. 
    The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 695g and Public Law 734, 81st Congress, ch. 809, 2d, H. R. 6000. 
(Code 1975,  1-61) 
Sec. 2-257. - Agent designated. 
    The mayor is hereby appointed an agent of the city council and of the city to execute all agreements and instruments necessary to implement the provisions of this division for and in behalf of the city council and city. 
(Code 1975,  1-62) 
Sec. 2-258. - City secretary to make assessments. 
    The city secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments, and reports as required by the state for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1975,  1-63) 
Sec. 2-259. - Part-time employees. 
    As of January 1, 1958, the exclusion from coverage under this division of employees in part-time positions shall be deleted. 
(Code 1975,  1-65) 
Secs. 2-260-2-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TORT CLAIMS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Tort claims, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code  101.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-276. - Notice to be given city. 
    Before the city shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injury of any person, the person injured, if living, or his representatives, if dead, shall give the mayor or city secretary notice in writing of such death or injury, duly verified, within six (6) months after such death or injury has been sustained, stating in such written notice when, where, and how the death or injury occurred, the apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is presented, and the names and addresses of all witnesses relied upon to establish such claim for damages. 
(Code 1975,  9-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code  101.101. 
Sec. 2-277. - Notice may not be waived. 
    No member of the city council or any employee or officer of the city shall have the power to waive the requirement of notice of death or injury as provided in section 2-276. 
(Code 1975,  9-7) 
Sec. 2-278. - Failure of notice to exonerate city. 
    The failure of any claimant to notify the mayor or city secretary in the manner required by the provisions of this article shall exonerate, relieve, and exempt the city from any and all liability whatsoever for such death or injury. 
(Code 1975,  9-8) 
Secs. 2-279-2-284. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2007-02-05, arts. I, II, adopted March 12, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as amending article VII to read as herein set out. Formerly, Art. VII,  2-291-2-298 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-90,  1-8, 10-8-90. 

DIVISION 1. - REGULATIONS DURING TIMES OF NORMAL OPERATIONS 

Sec. 2-285. - Organization. 
    The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
    There is hereby created the office of emergency management director for the city which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law and pursuant to executive order. 
    An emergency management coordinator (EMC) shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director (mayor), in coordination with the county. The selection process for the coordinator will be controlled by the city for purposes of continuity of management. The director (mayor) hereby approves the appointment of the police chief as the emergency management coordinator. At such time as emergency management duties affect the normal duties of the police chief, an emergency management assistant may be appointed who shall be authorized to execute and perform all duties of the coordinator, as enumerated in this article. Such appointment shall be approved by the emergency management director, the coordinator and city council. Should the mayor be unable to act, the mayor pro tempore shall assume all responsibilities outlined in this article. 
    The director of the office of emergency management (mayor) shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator and the assistant, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
    The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of martial law, but shall not interfere with the managerial duties and responsibilities of the city manager. The council shall, as soon as possible after an annual election, elect from its membership a mayor pro tem. the mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor and if a vacancy occurs shall become mayor for the completion of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  1, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-286. - Emergency management director powers and duties. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director, which, with the exception of subsections (3), (4) and (6) of this section, may be carried out by the coordinator or the assistant and shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur; 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city and recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan; 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary; 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary; 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the City of Decatur emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city; 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations; 
(8)  Marshalling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management plan; 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(10)  Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions that may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; 
(11)  Authorizing agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes; 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for in this article; 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.S. Article 6889-7) Tex Government Code Chapter 418 (Vernon 1988). 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  2, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-287. - Emergency management plan. 
    A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  3, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-288. - Interjurisdictional program. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in a program of emergency management insofar as the program may affect the City of Decatur. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  4, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-289. - Override. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  5, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-290. - Immunity. 
    This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this division, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  6, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-291. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council except in accordance with the approved city and/or county budgets or as authorized by law. No person shall have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council, unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  7, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-292. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  8, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-293. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of section 2-292 of this division shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each and every day that the provisions of this division are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. This penalty is in addition to and cumulative of any other remedies as may be available at law and equity. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. I,  9, 3-12-07) 
State Law reference- Similar penalty, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.173. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS DURING TIMES OF CRISIS OR EMERGENCY 

Sec. 2-294. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is declared to be the prevention of any sale or transfer of any potentially dangerous product to any person not under the mayor's direct supervision, to reduce the availability of such dangerous products to a minimum and to keep all unauthorized persons off public property and from gathering into groups having riot or looting potential. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. II,  1, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-295. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this division and shall be liberally construed to effectuate its general purpose: 
    Crisis means any disaster, natural or manmade, rioting, catastrophe or similar public emergency, actual or impending, as determined by the mayor. A state of crisis shall be considered the same as a state of emergency for the purposes of V.T.C.A., Government Code  433.001 et seq. 
    Curfew means the period during which no person other than expressly authorized officials of the city, county, state or federal government may be present in or upon public streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places or on private property without the consent of the owner or tenant thereof or at any other place where such person has no right or authority to be during such a period. 
    Dangerous product means any material or product which could reasonably be expected to be used as a tool of arson, explosive or weapon, including but not limited to: gasoline and other liquid flammable and combustible products; dynamite and other explosives; firearms and ammunition; and knives and other dangerous weapons. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the city or the mayor pro tem in his absence or the next councilmember in succession who may be available if the mayor pro tem is absent. 
    Public place means any public road, street or alley within the city or immediately adjacent thereto or any property owned or leased by the city or under its control or any store, building or place at which people are assembled or to which people commonly resort for purposes of business, amusement or education. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. II,  2, 3-12-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 2-296. - Authority to declare state of crisis. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to declare by proclamation a state of crisis and to take any action deemed necessary to provide adequate control over persons and conditions during such periods of impending or actual public crisis or disaster, and it is the intent of the city council to provide the means whereby the mayor may take steps to protect lives and property and maintain the operation of the government, until the city council or the governor of the state shall further act. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. II,  3, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-297. - Powers of mayor upon declaring crisis. 
    Upon declaring a crisis as provided in section 2-296, the mayor shall have the following powers: 
(1)  During a time of riot or assembly of three (3) or more persons acting together by use of force or violence or if a clear and present danger exists of the use of force or violence or during time of natural disaster or manmade calamity, to establish or impose a general or limited curfew and regulations pertaining thereto; 
(2)  To limit or prohibit the sale or dispensing of any dangerous product or alcoholic beverage, with or without the imposition of a curfew; 
(3)  To place any limitation upon or prohibition against the operation of any establishment selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away any dangerous product or alcoholic beverage; 
(4)  The full power and authority to provide by proclamation all regulations reasonably necessary to protect the health, security, safety, peace, life and property of the city and its inhabitants during the time of such crisis. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. II,  4, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-298. - Notice of proclamation and regulations. 
    Notice of such proclamation and regulations during a time of crisis shall be given in the official newspaper of the city or by local radio or by circulating notice or by posting signs at conspicuous places within the affected area. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. II,  5, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-299. - Termination, extension of proclamation. 
    The proclamation declaring the crisis and imposing the regulations shall automatically terminate at the end of seventy-two (72) hours from the time of declaration, unless extended by the city council or by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. II,  6, 3-12-07) 
Sec. 2-300. - Penalty for violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article or any regulation proclaimed hereunder, including a curfew, and, upon conviction, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-05, art. II,  7, 3-12-07) 
ARTICLE VIII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8-91, adopted Sept. 9, 1991, did not specifically amend this Code, hence, inclusion of  1-16 of said ordinance as Ch. 2, Art. VIII,  2-301-2-316 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-301. - Definition of city council records. 
    All documents, paper, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (Ord. No. 8-91,  1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-302. - Additional definitions. 
    Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency of disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the record management program may require. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records liaison officers means the persons designated under section 2-310 of this chapter. 
    Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-306 of this chapter. 
    Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-305 of this chapter. 
    Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-307 of this chapter. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. (Ord. No. 8-91,  2, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-303. - City council records declared public property. 
    All city council records as defined in section 2-301 of this chapter are hereby declared to by the property of the city. No city council official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (Ord. No. 8-91,  3, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-304. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city council records through a comprehensive system on integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. (Ord. No. 8-91,  4, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-305. - Designation of records management officer. 
    The city secretary and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. (Ord. No. 8-91,  5, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-306. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
    A records management committee consisting of the department heads is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. (Ord. No. 8-91,  6, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-307. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city council, and to properly preserve those records of the city council that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his other duties prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, department, division, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this chapter and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department heads as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. (Ord. No. 8-91,  7, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-308. - Duties of records management officer. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administrate the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standard for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal department by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development records control schedules as required by state law and this chapter; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the city is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) above; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. (Ord. No. 8-91,  8, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-309. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. No. 8-91,  9, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-310. - Designation of records liaison officer. 
    Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interest of the records management program no more than one (1) records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. (Ord. No. 8-91,  10, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-311. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. (Ord. No. 8-91,  11, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-312. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for such records. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head, the city attorney and the city secretary. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. (Ord. No. 8-91,  12, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-313. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-307 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the records is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. (Ord. No. 8-91,  13, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-314. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
    A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. (Ord. No. 8-91,  14, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 2-315. - Records center. 
    A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-307, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer, policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-307. 
Sec. 2-316. - Micrographics. 
    Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming, and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. (Ord. No. 8-91,  16, 9-9-91) 
Chapter 2.5 - AIRPORT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- For purposes of clarity, the title of Ch. 2.5 has been changed from "airport zoning" to "airport regulations" to accommodate the addition of provisions set out in Ord. No. 4-94,  II, III, adopted March 21, 1994, which sections have been codified herein as Arts. II and III. 

ARTICLE I. - AIRPORT ZONING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. No. 15-90,  1-14, adopted May 29, 1990, has been codified herein as  2.5-1-2.5-14 of Ch. 2.5;  15-17 of such ordinance, pertaining to severability, repeal and effective date, respectively, have not been included herein. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Airport Zoning Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  241.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2.5-1. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Decatur Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  1, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms are hereby defined: 
    Airport: Decatur Municipal Airport. 
    Airport elevation: The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. 
    Airport hazard: Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the air space required for the flights of aircraft or which obstructs or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport or at any installation or facility relating to flight and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; hazardous, interfering with or obstructing such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft or which is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles. 
    Airport hazard area: Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in this article. 
    Airport reference point: The point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
    Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 2.5-4 of this article. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Approach, transitional, horizontal and conical zones: These zones are set forth in section 2.5-3 of this article. 
    Board of adjustment: A board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the city council as provided by Texas Local Gov't. Code Ann., Section 241.032 (Vernon 1988). 
    Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
    Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
    Joint airport zoning board: A board consisting of five (5) members, two (2) members appointed by the city council and two (2) members appointed by the commissioners court of Wise County. The four (4) members so appointed shall elect a fifth member who shall serve as chairman of said joint airport zoning board. 
    Landing area: The surface area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff or taxiing of aircraft. 
    Nonconforming use: Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article or an amendment thereto. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument-approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance or area-type navigation equipment for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
    Obstruction: Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 2.5-4 of this article. 
    Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or body politic and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative. 
    Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of a primary surface for other than utility runways is: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet for visual runways having only visual approaches. 
(2)  Five hundred (500) feet for nonprecision instrument runways having visibility minimums greater than three-fourths (3/4) statute mile. 
    Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but not limited to buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines. 
    Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal surface. 
    Tree: Any object of natural growth. 
    Visual runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  2, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-3. - Zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surface, horizontal surface and conical surface as they apply to the municipal airport. Such zones are shown on a zoning map consisting of one (1) sheet, prepared by the Texas Department of Aviation, Austin, Texas, and dated February 15, 1990, which is attached to this article and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones. 
a.  Runway 17 approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of runway 17 on the municipal airport for nonprecision instrument landings and takeoffs with visibility minimums greater than three-fourths (3/4) statute mile. The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of five hundred (500) feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond the end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet at the horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet beyond the end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
b.  Runway 35 approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of runway 35 on the municipal airport for visual landings and takeoffs. The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of five hundred (500) feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond the end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet at the horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet beyond the end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located on either side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transitional surfaces extend outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) to one (1) from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of approach surfaces. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. The area beneath a horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of ten-thousand-foot radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of runway 17/35 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)  Conical zone. The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  3, 5-29-90) 
Editor's note- The zoning map referred to in this section is not included herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city secretary. 
Sec. 2.5-4. - Height limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones. 
a.  Runway 17: One (1) foot in height for every thirty-four (34) feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point ten thousand (10,000) feet from the end of the primary surface. 
b.  Runway 35: One (1) foot in height for every twenty (20) feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point five thousand (5,000) feet from the end of the primary surface. 
(2)  Transition zones slope seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is one thousand thirty-six (1,036) feet above mean sea level. 
(3)  Horizontal zone established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation or a height of one thousand one hundred eighty-six (1,186) feet above mean sea level. 
(4)  Conical zone slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
(5)  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the land. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  4, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-5. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird-strike hazards or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  5, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-6. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this article or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city secretary to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport about the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  6, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-7. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in (1) and (2) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (d) herein. 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
(2)  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
    Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitted or intending to permit any construction or alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any height limits established by this article except as set forth in subsection (e) herein. 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be made or become higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this article or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the city secretary determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more then eighty (80) percent torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any tree or use his property in violation of the regulations prescribed in this article may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations in question. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the municipal airport advisory board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the municipal airport advisory board does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application. 
(e)  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable by the city secretary or the board of adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to allow the city secretary to install, operate and maintain at the expense of the city such marks and lights as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  7, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-8. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the city secretary to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permit shall be made to the city secretary upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the city secretary shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Applications for variances shall be made to the board of adjustment by first filing said application for variance with the city secretary who shall forthwith transmit said application to the board of adjustment for determination. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  8, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-9. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city secretary in the enforcement of this article; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass; 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the city council, and each shall serve for a term of two (2) years and removable for cause by the appointment authority upon written charges after a public hearing. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman or in his absence the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city clerk/secretary and shall be a public record. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the city secretary or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article or to effect any variation in this article as provided in the Texas Local Gov't. Code Ann., Section 241.032(d) (Vernon 1988). 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  9, 5-29-90) 
Cross reference- Airport advisory board dual service as airport zoning board of adjustment,  2-142. 
Sec. 2.5-10. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the city secretary made in his administration of this article, if of the opinion that a decision of the city secretary is an improper application of these regulations, may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment by filing with the city secretary a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city secretary shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city secretary certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the city secretary, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the city secretary and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  10, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-11. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the board of adjustment may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, Texas Local Gov't. Code Ann., Section 241.041 (Vernon 1988). 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  11, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-12. - Enforcement and remedies. 
    The city council may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this article or of any order or ruling made in connection with its administration or enforcement, including but not limited to an action for injunctive relief as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, Texas Local Gov't. Code Ann., Section 241.044 (Vernon 1988). 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  12, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-13. - Penalties. 
    Each violation of this article or of any regulation order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  13, 5-29-90) 
Sec. 2.5-14. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, Texas Local Gov't. Code Ann., Section 241.901 (Vernon 1988). 
(Ord. No. 15-90,  14, 5-29-90) 
Secs. 2.5-15-2.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT OPERATIONS IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2.5-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acrobatic flying means any intentional aircraft maneuver or stunt not necessary to air navigation, or operation of aircraft in such a manner as to endanger human life or safety by the performance of unusual or dangerous maneuvers. 
    Aircraft means any device now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or other device used primarily as safety equipment. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(1), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-32. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any person operating or handling an aircraft in violation of this article may be removed or ejected from the airport or may be temporarily refused use of airport facilities by or under the authority of the airport manager and, upon the order of the city council, may be deprived of further use of the airport and its facilities for such length of time as may be deemed necessary to ensure the safeguarding of the airport and its facilities and the public and its interest therein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or refuse to abide by any provision of this article or any provision of existing law incorporated in this article. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each and every violation and day the violation is allowed to continue. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(2), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-33. - Exemption for government aircraft. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to public aircraft of the federal government or of the state, or to aircraft licensed by a foreign country with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement covering the operation of such aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(3), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-34. - General rules and regulations. 
    The following general rules and regulations are hereby prescribed for the Decatur Municipal Airport: 
(1)  The airport shall be conducted as a terminal facility for the promotion and accommodation of air commerce and shall be operated as a public air terminal. 
(2)  The airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day, subject to such restrictions due to inclement weather, the conditions of the landing area, the presentation of special events and like causes as may be determined by the airport manager, the city council or the city secretary. 
(3)  Special services may be rendered or special facilities may be provided under such terms as the city council may prescribe from time to time. 
(4)  The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user to obey all the regulations provided in this section. 
(5)  The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk of the user, and he shall release, save harmless and indemnify the city, its officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use. 
(6)  The air traffic rules now or hereafter promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration (or its successor entity) are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this section the same as if particularly set forth herein. 
(7)  The airport manager shall have authority to take necessary steps for the protection of the public, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(8)  No person shall use the airport as a base for the conduct of commercial activities involving carrying passengers, freight, express or mail; instruction in aviation or any of its branches; the sales of fuels, refreshments or any other commodities; or for any other commercial purpose, unless a permit has been granted for such activity by the airport manager and the city council. Permit fees shall be determined by the city from time to time by periodic adoption or approval of or revision to the fee schedule, which shall be maintained on file at the city secretary's office. 
(9)  No person shall act as pilot in command of any aircraft within or over the corporate limits of the city unless such person has first been issued an airman certificate by the Federal Aviation Administration, and unless such aircraft shall have first received a certificate of airworthiness, which is still in effect, from the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(10)  No person shall operate any aircraft on or over the airport or conduct any operation thereon in violation of the terms of this chapter or of the rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(11)  Every person stationed or employed at the airport or operating therefrom shall register at the office of the airport manager and shall state his name, address, telephone number and the nature of his business or occupation. Persons and businesses operating from the airport shall maintain records including the name, address and telephone number of all customers receiving instruction at the airport or otherwise doing business at the airport, and shall make such records available to the airport manager upon request. 
(12)  No person shall take or use any aircraft, parts or accessories thereof or tools or other equipment owned or controlled by any other person without the consent of the owner or operator thereof or other satisfactory evidence of his right to do so. 
(13)  No person shall knowingly: 
a.  Damage or destroy any building, sign, equipment, marker, structure, lawn or public property on the airport; 
b.  Trespass on restricted airport property; 
c.  Abandon personal property on the airport; or 
d.  Interfere or tamper with any aircraft or equipment on the airport. 
(14)  Any person who negligently damages airport property shall immediately report such damage to the airport manager and shall be liable for the cost of repair or replacement. 
(15)  The city, its employees and representatives assume no responsibility for loss, injury or damage to persons or property by reason of fire, theft, vandalism, wind, flood, earthquake or collision damage, nor does the city assume liability for injury to persons while on the airport or while using its facilities. 
(16)  No person shall knowingly dispose of garbage, papers, refuse or other waste materials on the airport, except as provided by city ordinance and airport rules and regulations. 
(17)  No person shall burn trash or refuse on the airport at any time. 
(18)  All signs erected within the airport shall comply with all applicable federal, state and municipal laws and regulations. 
(19)  The city may suspend airport operations if such action is considered to be in the best interest of the city and the using public by NOTAM (Notices to Airmen for Airport Operations). Such suspension of operations shall prevail until the suspension is lifted. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(4), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-35. - Taxiing rules. 
(a)  At the municipal airport, all aircraft shall be taxied at a slow and reasonable speed and when not equipped with adequate brakes shall have an attendant beside at least one (1) wing when taxied in the vicinity of a hangar or other building. 
(b)  When in the vicinity of aircraft landing or taking off, an aircraft being taxied shall be brought to a complete stop. 
(c)  If a takeoff is to be made from a runway, the aircraft shall be taxied along the taxiway to a point thereon nearest the leeward end of the proper runway, and thence to the runway. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(5), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-36. - Miscellaneous traffic rules. 
(a)  At the municipal airport, no person shall take any aircraft from the landing area or hangars or operate such aircraft while using or under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or habit-forming drug. 
(b)  No aircraft shall be permitted to remain on any part of the landing area, taxiway or the takeoff areas for the purpose of repairs, and all repairs shall be made at the places designated therefor. 
(c)  Every aircraft owner, his pilot and agents shall be severally responsible for the prompt removal, under the direction of the airport manager, of wrecked or disabled aircraft. 
(d)  The airport manager may refuse use of airport facilities, including runways and taxiways, to any aircraft until all charges for storage, supplies and services have been paid. 
(e)  No aircraft shall operate on any part of the airport with tail skids having such insufficient base area as to cause damage to the airport surface. 
(f)  No person shall park any aircraft within the airport other than in areas designated and approved for such purposes by the city. Authorization to park in locations other than the specified parking areas must be obtained from the city in writing. 
(g)  Owners or operators of aircraft remaining overnight on leased city property shall pay fees in accordance with the fee schedule approved by the city and posted in the airport manager's office or otherwise maintained in the office of the city secretary. 
(h)  Motor vehicles shall not be operated in excess of the posted speed limits. If no speed limit is posted, the following speed limits prevail: 
(1)  On all named airport streets, thirty (30) miles per hour; 
(2)  On internal roadway and access driveways, twenty (20) miles per hour; and 
(3)  On aircraft aprons, ten (10) miles per hour. 
(i)  Motor vehicle parking is restricted to those areas specifically established for public and tenant parking. No person shall park any motor vehicle within a hangar or in such a way as to obstruct roadways, taxiways, or in to any other way interfere with airport operations. 
(j)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (i) above, an aircraft owner may temporarily leave a motor vehicle parked in his hangar while operating the aircraft, and motor vehicles may be temporarily parked on the apron for loading or unloading of aircraft. 
(k)  Aircraft shall always have the right-of-way over other vehicles and pedestrians. It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian or operator of a motor vehicle to knowingly fail to yield the right-of-way to any moving aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(6), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-37. - Instruction and practice flying. 
(a)  Every person instructing students in flying at the airport shall acquaint such students with the airport rules and regulations. 
(b)  The airport manager, by appropriate notices, may restrict practice flights and student training to designated portions of the airport. 
(c)  No aircraft shall remain on the landing area, taxiway or takeoff areas for the purpose of instructing students between flights. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(7), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-38. - Running engines. 
(a)  At the municipal airport, engines shall not be started on aircraft unless the aircraft is equipped with adequate brakes fully set or unless the wheels have been set with blocks that are equipped with ropes or other suitable means for removing them. 
(b)  No aircraft engine shall be started or run unless a competent operator shall be at the controls of the aircraft. 
(c)  No aircraft engine shall be run or warmed up unless the aircraft is in such position that the propeller blast clears all buildings, groups of people in the observation areas and the flight path of landing aircraft. 
(d)  No aircraft engine shall be started or run within a hangar or other building. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(8), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-39. - Fire regulations. 
(a)  Every person using the airport facilities in any way shall use the utmost caution to prevent fire. 
(b)  No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while its engine is running or while in a hangar or other enclosed place. Adequate grounding shall be continuously maintained during any fueling operation. 
(c)  No cylinder or flask of compressed flammable gas shall be kept or stored, except at a place designated by the airport manager and the fire marshal for that purpose. 
(d)  The cleaning of motors or other parts of aircraft shall not be carried on in any hangar, except with nonflammable substances. 
(e)  No person shall smoke or ignite any match or cigarette lighter in any building or hangar. 
(f)  Repairs on storage floors of hangars shall be limited to inspection and replacement of parts. 
(g)  No automobile or other motor equipment shall enter or remain inside any hangar, except in connection with and only while engaged in necessary aircraft operations, as may be determined and expressly approved and authorized by the airport manager. 
(h)  Hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times. 
(i)  Floors shall be kept clean and free from oil, and no volatile flammable solvent shall be used for cleaning floors. 
(j)  No boxes, crates, rubbish, paper or other litter shall be permitted to accumulate in or about any hangar, and all oil, paint and varnish cans, bottles or other containers shall be removed from the hangar immediately upon being emptied. All rags or waste used in cleaning shall be kept in closed metal containers. 
(k)  No person shall knowingly start the engine of an aircraft when there is fuel, other than preflight inspection drainage, on the ground under the aircraft. 
(l)  No person shall knowingly store or allow to be stored automobile or aviation fuel within any building within the airport. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(9), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-40. - Minimum height prescribed. 
    Except while taking off or landing at an established landing field or airport, no person shall fly or permit to be flown, within the corporate limits of the city, any aircraft except at a height sufficient to permit a reasonably safe emergency landing, which in no case shall be less than one thousand (1,000) feet above ground level. The provisions of this section may be deviated from by special permit from the city council or when special circumstances render a departure necessary to avoid immediate danger or when such departure is required because of stress of weather conditions or other unavoidable cause. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(10), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-41. - Acrobatic flying. 
    Acrobatic flying by any person flying over any portion of the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(11), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-42. - Landing place designated. 
    Except in the case of an emergency or with written permission from the city secretary, no person shall land any aircraft within the city except upon a regularly established runway at the Decatur Municipal Airport, or such other airport as may in the future be approved and authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(12), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-43. - Lights for night operation required. 
    All aircraft when flying within or over the city at night shall have lights and other equipment for such flying required by the rules, regulations or orders of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(13), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-44. - Ultralight aircraft. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, an ultralight aircraft means an aircraft which meets the requirements set forth in 14 CFR 103.1. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an ultralight aircraft on or about the premises of the Decatur Municipal Airport, unless such operations occur at such premises due to engine failure of the ultralight aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(14), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-45. - Lighter-than-air aircraft. 
(a)  No person may operate any unpowered lighter-than-air aircraft on or over the municipal airport within three hundred (300) feet of the centerline of any runway below an altitude of three thousand five hundred ninety (3,590) feet MSL, same being two thousand five hundred (2,500) AGL. 
(b)  Every person operating a lighter-than-air aircraft landing or taking off from the municipal airport must have a VHF radio on board and announce the intended flight route using Unicom 122.8 MHZ. 
(c)  Initial approach to any landing area designated for unpowered lighter-than-air aircraft shall be made at an altitude not exceeding fifteen hundred ninety (1,590) feet MSL, same being five hundred (500) feet AGL. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(15), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-46. - Dropping of objects. 
    No person in any aircraft shall cause or permit to be thrown out, discharged or dropped within the corporate limits of the city any object or thing, except loose water or loose sand ballast when absolutely essential to the safety of the occupants of the aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(16), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-47. - Private stores of fuel prohibited. 
    No private individuals or aviation businesses shall be permitted to supply and dispense aviation fuel upon the premises of the Decatur Municipal Airport, except for those entities making delivery to the fuel facilities operated by the airport manager and his/her assistants. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  II(17), 3-21-94) 
Secs. 2.5-48-2.5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADVERTISING FLIGHTS 

Sec. 2.5-61. - Permit required. 
    No person shall make exhibition flights by carrying banners on or distribute circulars from or operate a loudspeaking device from any aircraft flying within or over the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the airport manager and paying in advance to the city secretary a permit fee, as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, for each flight. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  III(1), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-62. - Conditions for issuance of permit. 
    The airport manager shall issue the permit required by section 2.5-61 of this article, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The person who will operate the aircraft is duly licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration; 
(2)  The aircraft to be used is licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration; 
(3)  The safety and lives of the inhabitants of the city will not be endangered by the proposed flight; and 
(4)  The proposed permit has been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  III(2), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-63. - Refusal to issue permit. 
    The city council may refuse to approve the permit required by section 2.5-61 of this article, for any reason which it deems sufficient to justify such refusal. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  III(3), 3-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-64. - Term of permit. 
    A permit required by section 2.5-61 of this article may be issued for any period of not longer than six (6) months if the requirements necessary for an individual flight, as provided in this article, prevail throughout such period and if a permit fee as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary is paid to the city secretary upon the granting of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 4-94,  III(4), 3-21-94) 
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 01-10-10, adopted November 13, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code therefore such ordinance was treated as replacing chapter 3 in its entirety with the following new chapter 3. Formerly, such chapter pertained to similar provisions and derived from  2-1-2-15, 2-19, 2-31-2-35, 2-41, 2-42 of the 1975 Code; Mo. of 1-12-87. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; nuisances, Ch. 10; solid waste, Ch. 12; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Rabies control, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-6a; cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code  42.11; estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code  142.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Preamble. 
    The animal regulations as herein established have been made for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. The chapter contains standards regulating the use, type, location, maintenance, registration, confinement, euthanasia and harboring of certain animals. The intent of the regulations, prohibitions, and provisions is to protect values within the city, to enhance the quality of life of persons, pets, and other animals, and to protect the general public from damage and injury that may be caused by unregulated animals. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 1, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter the following words and terms, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted as follows: 
    Animal dealer: Any person engaging in the business of buying and/or selling any animal or animals for the purpose of resale to pet shops, research facilities, another animal dealer, or to any other individual or individuals other than the sale of an occasional litter or animal on a random basis, but including, herein any person engaging in the sale of any animal from any roadside stand, booth, flea market or other temporary site. Persons buying or selling animals for, and destined for, human consumption, are not included in this definition. 
    Animal control officer: Person designated by the city as the primary enforcement officer of ordinances regulating animals and owners of animals and for the enforcement of sections of the Texas Statutes pertaining to the care and control of animals. 
    Animal control center: Facility designated and operated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under authority of this chapter. 
    Boarding kennel or cattery: Any establishment where dogs, cats, puppies, or kittens are kept for the primary purpose of boarding for any part of a twenty-four-hour period. This does not include veterinary clinics where boarding is offered in addition to clinical services. 
    Dangerous animal: Any warm blooded mammal which is known to carry or be susceptible to the rabies virus and which cannot be effectively vaccinated against that virus with any vaccine approved by the Texas Department of Health. A dangerous animal includes any hybrid animal or any pet wildlife which has attacked a human, killed or maimed a domestic animal or a permitted restricted animal as referred to in article X of this chapter, or which is apprehended or observed unrestrained. However, this definition shall not apply to dangerous dogs as addressed in article IX of this chapter. 
    Domestic animal: Any animal whose physiology has been determined or manipulated through selective breeding and does not occur naturally in the wild and any animal which can be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies vaccine, and any animal which has an established rabies quarantine observation period. 
    Estray: Means any stray horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, jenny, jack, jennet, hog, pig, sheep, goat, confined and domesticated hares and rabbits, or any species of cattle. 
    Exotic species: Any animal born or whose natural habitat is outside the continental United States excluding non-venomous reptiles and fish. 
    Exotic livestock/ratites: Any species classified as exotic livestock by the Texas Animal Health Commission. 
    Harboring: The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premise to which the animal returns for food, shelter, or care for a period of ten (10) days or longer. 
    Non-registered dangerous dog: Any dog which: 
(1)  When unprovoked, severely attacked or inflicted serious injury or death to a person, whether on public or private property; or, 
(2)  Has been deemed non-registerable by the animal control division and upheld or unchallenged in the court of jurisdiction. 
    Owner: Any person who has right of property in an animal including a harborer. 
    Pet animal: Shall include dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, non-poisonous reptiles, and other species of animals which are sold or retained as household pets but shall not include skunks, ferrets, non-human primates, and any other species of wild, exotic, or carnivorous animals that are susceptible to rabies, but not animals that may be vaccinated for rabies, and that may be further restricted in this chapter. 
    Pet shop: Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling at retail or as a broker of animals of any species for profit-making purposes. 
    Poultry: All domesticated foul and all game birds which are legally kept in captivity except those classified as exotic livestock/ratite as defined above. 
    Proper enclosure: Means a house or a building, or in the case of a fence or structure/pen, the fence or structure/pen must be at least six (6) feet in height. The structure/pen must also have minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet. The fence or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young children and must be locked and secured such that an animal cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape of its own volition. The enclosure shall be securely locked at all times. The structure/pen shall have secure sides to prevent the dangerous animal or registered dangerous dog from escaping from the enclosure. The structure/pen shall provide protection from the elements for the animal. The Animal Services Division may require a fence higher than six (6) feet or require a secure top and a secure bottom to the structure/pen if the need is demonstrated. 
    Quarantine by owner: Following are required: 
(1)  Animal must be inside an enclosed structure, i.e., house or garage and must remain here for ten (10) days. 
(2)  If maintained outside, animal must be behind a fence from which it cannot escape and on a chain from which it cannot break loose or inside a covered pen or kennel from which it cannot escape. 
(3)  Animal must be kept away from other animals and people excepting those in the immediate household. 
(4)  Animal may not be removed from Corporate City Limits of Decatur while under quarantine. 
(5)  Owner shall notify animal control division immediately if animal becomes sick or displays any behavioral changes or dies or disappears. 
(6)  Owner shall not subject the animal to any medical procedure without first notifying the animal control division, this to include any vaccination. 
    Rabies vaccination: The vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the state department of health and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state. 
    Registered dangerous dog: Any dog registered with the city in compliance with Chapter 822 Texas Health and Safety Code, Subchapter D, and with the section of this chapter addressing registered dangerous dogs. 
    Running at large: An animal shall be considered running at large: 
(1)  Off premises: Any animal which is not restrained by means of a leash, chain, or other physical apparatus of sufficient strength and length to control the actions of such animal while off premises. 
(2)  On premises: 
a.  Any animal not confined to premises of owner by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom, or secured on the premises by a chain or leash sufficient in strength to prevent the animal from escaping from premises and so arranged that the animal will remain upon the premises when the leash is stretched to full length. 
b.  An animal intruding upon the property of another person other than the owner's shall be termed "at large." 
c.  Any animal within a vehicle in a manner that would not prevent that animal's escape or contact with other persons or animals. 
    Serious injury: Is defined as bodily injury caused by an animal which produces severe pain, trauma, loss of blood or tissue, and which requires medical treatment of wounds inflicted by the animal, and shall include bodily injury resulting from victim, whether human or animal, attempting to escape or prevent contact with injuring animal(s). 
    Severe attack: Is defined as one in which the animal repeatedly bites or vigorously shakes its victim, and the victim, or a person intervening, has extreme difficulty terminating the attack. 
    Stray animal: Any animal, for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer, which is found to be at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Theatrical exhibition: Any exhibition or act featuring "performing animals." Such exhibitions shall not include resident or non-resident dog and cat shows which are sponsored and/or sanctioned by Animal Services Division, American Kennel Club, the United States Kennel Club, the Cat Fanciers Association, American Cat Fanciers Association, or any affiliate thereof, nor shall it include any primary horse show. 
    Unprovoked: With respect to an attack by an animal shall mean that the animal was not hit, kicked, or struck by a person with an object or part of a person's body nor was any part of the animal's body pulled, pinched, or squeezed by a person. 
    Veterinarian: Any practitioner of veterinary medicine licensed by the state to practice such in Texas. 
    Wildlife: Any animal, which occurs naturally in a wild state. This includes any animal, which is part wildlife. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 2, 11-13-01) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 3-3. - Creating a health hazard. 
(a)  Any person who shall harbor or keep on his/her premises, or in or about a premises under his/her control, an animal and who allows his/her premises to become a hazard to the general health and welfare of the community, or who shall allow his/her premises to give off obnoxious or offensive odors due to the activity or presence of such animals, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall allow his/her animal to eliminate on public property or the property of another and does not remove same immediately shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 8(8.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-4. - Tampering with traps and equipment. 
    No person shall remove, alter, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment belonging to/set out by the animal control division. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 8(8.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-5. - Authority to destroy injured/diseased animals. 
    The animal control division or authorized representative, is authorized to destroy any injured or diseased animal, whether such animal is on public or private property, and the recovery from such injuries or disease is in serious doubt, and after a reasonable effort has been made to locate the owner of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 8(8.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-6. - Excessive noise. 
    Any person who shall harbor or keep on his premises, or in or about his premises under his control, any animal which by loud or unusual vocalization shall cause the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the occupant of adjacent premises to be disturbed, must file a written complaint with the city municipal court, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 8(8.4), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-7. - Inspection of premises. 
    Each person keeping animals or fowl within the corporate city limits shall, upon request of the animal control division, during reasonable times, permit the access to the area or places of keeping of animals or fowl, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. Should the animal control department be denied entry, then they shall make application for warrant to enter the premises, such warrant to be issued by the city municipal court judge or justice of the peace upon proper application therefore. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 8(8.5), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-8. - Giving away or selling of pets on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any, person, or business to allow the giving away or selling of any type of animal on there property without doing the following: 
(1)  Getting the name of the person, address, telephone number, and description of all animals to be given away; and making the person aware that they must provide their information to any receiving an animal; 
(2)  Having the person giving away or selling the animal to provide upon leaving, to the owner of the property, a list of all animals given away and to include the name address and phone number of each person who received an animal; 
(3)  Owner of property then shall provide the animal control department within ten (10) days a copy of the above information. Failure to provide the above information shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 8(8.6), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-9. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 13(13.1), 11-13-01) 
Secs. 3-10-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 3-26. - Impoundment. 
    Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or law of the state shall be taken into custody by an animal services officer or other designated official and impounded under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-27. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Dogs and cats with no identification: All dogs and cats impounded by the animal control division or brought to the animal control shelter by a person other than the harborer or owner of that animal shall be held for a minimum of ninety-six (96) hours during which time period the owner may present proof of ownership at the shelter and after paying all applicable fees, that owner may reclaim the dog/cat. In the event that the dog/cat is not claimed after ninety-six (96) hours in the shelter, that dog/cat shall become the property of the city. 
(b)  Dogs and cats with identification: All dogs and cats impounded by the animal control division or brought to the animal control shelter by a person other than the harborer or owner of that animal that are wearing traceable identification or where an owner is known shall be held in the shelter for a minimum of seven (7) complete days from the time the animal enters the facility, during which time the animal control division shall notify the owner, when known, of the impoundment. Unless the owner has notified the animal control division in writing of his/her intentions to claim the dog/cat after that date, listing a date by which time that owner will reclaim the dog/cat and satisfy all applicable fees and this arrangements has been approved by the animal control supervisor, the animal shall become the property of the city on the eighth day. 
(c)  Animals surrendered by owner/harborer: All animals surrendered by the owner/harborer to the animal control division shall become the property of the city immediately upon completion of the owner/harborer surrender form. 
(d)  Animals other than dogs, cats, or estrays impounded: All animals other than dogs, cats, estrays, or animals holding current restricted animal permits in Decatur impounded by the animal control division or brought to the shelter by a person other than the owner/harborer shall become the property of the city unless such ownership is prohibited by state or federal law. 
(e)  Disposition of animals: Final disposition of all unclaimed animals shall rest with the animal control division. The animal control division shall retain sole authority to determine the final disposition of each animal in its custody once that animal becomes the property of the city, and shall not place any animal for adoption that is classified in this chapter as prohibited. Animals shall be euthanized by an injection of sodium pentobarbital or substances approved for euthanasia by the American Veterinary Medical Association and/or the Texas Veterinary Medical Association to be administered by a certified animal control officer. All animals listed as endangered or protected shall be transferred to the proper authority at the earliest possible date. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-28. - Animals held on complaint. 
    If a complaint has been filed in municipal court for the city against the owner of an impounded animal for a violation of this chapter, the animal shall not be released except on the order of the animal control division which may also direct the owner to pay any penalties for violation of this chapter in addition to all impoundment fees. Surrender of an animal by the owner thereof to the animal control division does not relieve or render the owner immune from the decision of the court, nor from the fees and fines, which may result from a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-29. - Removal of animals from confinement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any dog or cat which has been confined as authorized, without the consent of the impounding agency. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.4), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-30. - Animals at large (restraint). 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or harboring an animal to permit such animal to run at large. Any officer or citizen of the city is hereby authorized to take up and deliver to the animal control center any animal mentioned in this chapter that may be found "at large" in the corporate limits of the city, subject to the applicable provisions of the law. Failure to notify and/or turn over to the animal control division any such animal within forty-eight (48) hours may subject the person taking up the animal to civil and/or criminal action. The animal services officer or his agent and peace officer are authorized to impound any animal mentioned in this chapter, which is in violation of the chapter. In the event the animal is on private property or property of the animal's owner the animal services officer may enter the property, other than a private dwelling, for the purpose of impoundment or issuance of a citation, or both, subject to the applicable provisions of the law. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any animal to "run at large" as defined in section 3-2 of this chapter. 
(2)  No dog or puppy may be restrained by leash, tether or chain unattended in the front yard of a residence or business unless there is a fence surrounding the area where the animal is restrained. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.5), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-31. - Confinement during estrus. 
    Any unsprayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building, or secure enclosure, and said area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animals. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to remove the animal in heat to a veterinary hospital or the animal control center. The owner shall pay all expenses incurred as a result of this confinement. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control division shall be a violation of this chapter, and the dog and cat will then be impounded as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.6), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-32. - Adoption of animal. 
    All animals which are adopted from the animal control shelter shall be surgically altered to prevent reproduction in that animal within thirty (30) days from leaving the animal control center provided the animal is eight (8) weeks or older or one pound or more in body weight. 
(1)  Animal not eligible for altering: If the animal is not eligible for altering before leaving the shelter due to age or medical condition, that animal shall be surgically altered as soon as medically safe. The person adopting that animal shall sign an agreement stating that he/she will have said animal surgically altered at that time. 
(2)  Responsibility for proof: It shall be the responsibility of the person adopting to provide proof of altering to the animal control division. 
(3)  Recovery of unaltered animal: Failure to comply with this section or failure to comply with the terms of either of the above agreements shall give the animal control division the right to recover the adopted animal in question and revoke the owner's adoption contract. Such failure shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Adoption fee: The adoption fee shall not include the cost of alteration. All cost for alteration will be at the adopter's expense. 
(5)  Rabies vaccination: A person adopting a dog or cat that is not yet four (4) months of age shall have that animal vaccinated for rabies by a veterinarian licensed within the State of Texas by the date specified during the adoption procedure. The person adopting the animal is responsible for providing proof of rabies vaccination to the animal control division within forty-eight (48) hours of vaccination date. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.7), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-33. - Surrender of animals. 
    There shall be a fee for surrender of animals by owner/harbor to the animal control shelter. 
(1)  Small animals: For small animals such as dogs or cats, a fee shall be charged per animal. In the event a litter (under sixty (60) days of age) is surrendered the charge shall be the same as a single animal, with or without the mother. The same charge shall apply to dead animals which are picked up by the animal services officer at the request of the owner. 
(2)  Large animals: For large animals such as horses, cows, goats, sheep and pigs, a fee shall be charged per animal. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.8), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-34. - Payment of fees. 
    It shall be a violation of this article to fail to pay all fees due in accordance with this chapter or the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.9), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-35. - Warning notice. 
    Where violations of restraint requirements are observed, any animal services officer may issue a warning notice in lieu of a citation. The warning notice will stipulate the violation observed and a compliance date. Failure to comply by the compliance date shall constitute a violation of this article and may result in the issuance of a citation. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 3(3.10), 11-13-01) 
Secs. 3-36-3-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - KENNELS/CATTERYS 

Sec. 3-46. - Boarding kennels or catterys. 
(a))  All boarding kennels or catterys shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a license pursuant to article V of this chapter and the issuance of a citation subjecting the owner to the penalties provided in this chapter. Facilities shall be subject to inspection by an animal services officer upon his/her request during reasonable hours. 
(b)  Indoor enclosures (cages, kennels or runs) shall be provided for each animal housed. These enclosures shall be constructed of an impervious material. Floors shall be metal, fiberglass, concrete or covered throughout with a minimum of three (3) inches of gravel. Enclosures must be cleaned daily with a disinfectant, cleanser or chlorine bleach. Cleaning materials must be present at the time of any inspection in amounts sufficient to clean the entire facility. Animals must be removed from enclosures during cleaning. 
(c)  Building temperature shall be maintained at a comfortable level. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained by means of windows, doors, vents, and fans. 
(d)  Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down, and turn around in a natural position without touching the sides or top of the enclosure. If additional space is not provided, either indoor or outdoor, then this enclosure must provide an adequate exercise area. 
(e)  Beds or resting benches shall be constructed of an impervious material. 
(f)  Outdoor runs or enclosures may be provided in addition to the indoor enclosures. These outdoor enclosures may be separated or attached to the indoor enclosures. They shall be constructed of an impervious material with floors as in subsection (a) of this section. 
(g)  All enclosures shall be kept clean and dry. 
(h)  All enclosures shall provide protection from the weather. 
(i)  The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(j)  All animals shall have fresh water available at all times except as part of a veterinary treatment regimen. Water vessels shall be mounted or secure in a manner that prevents tipping and be of the removable type, except in areas where animals are kept for medical recuperative purposes. 
(k)  Veterinary care shall be provided to maintain good health and general welfare and to prevent suffering. All costs for such care will be paid for by the kennel or cattery and reimbursed by the owner of the puppy, dog, cat or kitten unless such care is the result of negligent action or inaction of the owner of the kennel or cattery. 
(l)  Animals over the age of three (3) months which are boarded must have proof of a valid City of Decatur animal license (if applicable) and rabies vaccination. 
(m)  Owners of boarded animals which do not have proof of a valid pet license shall be presented with a license application by the boarding kennel or cattery. The animal control division shall supply such application. The owner shall be advised by the boarding kennel or cattery of the licensing requirement and that they are subject to a citation should the kennel or cattery be inspected while their animal is being boarded. The boarding kennel or cattery shall provide the name and address of any animal being boarded to the animal control division upon request. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 4(4.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-47. - Kennels or catterys. 
    All kennels or cattery's shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a license pursuant to article V of this chapter and the issuance of a citation subjecting the owner to the penalties provided in this chapter. Facilities shall be subject to inspection by an animal services officer upon request during reasonable hours. 
(1)  Each kennel or cattery shall comply with the standards set forth in section 3-46 of this chapter in addition to the following standards. 
a.  Each dog or cat, four (4) months of age or older, must have proof of a valid vaccination against rabies. 
b.  Each purchaser of a dog, cat, puppy, or kitten shall be provided with a copy of the city animal license application. 
(2)  Animals kept primarily indoors: shall be provided with wholesome food and clean water, a clean living environment free of accumulated waste and debris, comfortable temperature and ventilation, and provided veterinary care when needed. If allowed access to outdoors on a temporary basis, the outdoor area shall be kept free of waste and debris and well drained. Such outdoor area shall comply with all restraint requirements contained in this chapter. 
(3)  Animals kept primarily outdoors: shall be provided with proper shelter, a clean living environment free of accumulated waste and debris, supplemental protection from weather extremes and well drained. Such outdoor area shall comply with all restraint requirements contained in this chapter. 
(4)  Each kennel or cattery license shall apply to no more than ten (10) dogs and/or ten (10) cats, three (3) months of age or older. Any additional dogs or cats three (3) months of age or older must be licensed individually. 
(5)  Enclosures and the training area must be locked at all times to prevent unauthorized entry or escape of the animals. 
(6)  No training shall employ the use of chemicals, electrical or mechanical devices that may cause pain, injury or death. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 4(4.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-48. - Pet shops. 
(a)  All pet shops, as defined herein, including pet shops run in conjunction with another holding facility, shall in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for the issuance of a citation subjecting the owner to the penalties provided in this chapter. Facilities shall be subject to inspection by an animal services officer upon his/her request during reasonable hours. 
(b)  There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of one hundred forty (140) Fahrenheit for washing cages and disinfecting and cold water easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water shall be available to all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers shall be mounted so the animal cannot turn them over, and be of the types that are removable for cleaning. 
(c)  Room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every species of animals kept in the shop. 
(d)  All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn, and lie down in the natural position. Each cage must be cleaned and disinfected each day. 
(e)  Food for each animal shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over and be of the type that are removable for cleaning. Disposable feeding dishes are acceptable for one-time use only. 
(f)  Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall be placed horizontal to each other in the same cage. Cages must be cleaned every day, and cages must be disinfected when birds are sold or otherwise transferred. Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds. 
(g)  There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet needs of each individual animal. 
(h)  All animals must be fed and watered, and all cages cleaned every day including Sundays and holidays. 
(i)  Each purchaser of a dog, cat, puppy or kitten shall be provided with a copy of the Decatur Animal License application by the pet shop. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 4(4.4), 11-13-01) 
Secs. 3-49-3-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTRAY 

Sec. 3-61. - Unattended estray. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow an estray(s) to be unattended upon any public street, alley, thoroughfare or upon the property of another in the corporate city limits of Decatur. The person, firm or corporation having ownership of right to immediate control of such estray(s) shall have the burden to keep such estray(s) off the public streets, alleys, and thoroughfares or the property of another in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-62. - Impoundment. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control division in, to take up any and all estray that may be found in and upon any street, alley, or upon any unenclosed lot in the city, or otherwise to be found at large, and to confine such estray for safe keeping. Upon impounding an estray, the animal control division shall prepare a "notice of estray" and file such notice in the "estray book" located in the animal control shelter. Each entry shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person who notified the animal control division of the estray; and 
(2)  The date, time and location of the estray when found; and 
(3)  The location of the estray until disposition; and 
(4)  A description of the animal including its breed, color, sex, age, size, all markings of any kind, and other identifying characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-63. - Advertisement of impounded estray. 
    When an estray has been impounded, the animal control division shall make a diligent search of the register of recorded brands in the county for the owner of the estray. If the search does not reveal the owner, the animal control division shall advertise the impoundment of the estray in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least twice during the next fifteen (15) days following impoundment and post a notice of the impoundment of the estray on the public notice board of city hall and the Wise County Courthouse. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-64. - Recovery by owner. 
    The owner of an estray may recover possession of the animal at any time before the animal is sold under the terms of this article if: 
(1)  The owner has provided the animal control division with an "affidavit of ownership" of the estray containing at least the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the owner; and 
b.  The date the owner discovered that the animal was an estray; and 
c.  The property from which the animal strayed; and 
d.  A description of the animal including its breed, color, sex, size, all markings of any kind, and any other identifying characteristics. 
(2)  The animal control division has approved affidavit; and 
(3)  The affidavit has been filed in the "estray book"; and 
(4)  The owner has paid all estray handling fees to those entitled to receive them; and 
(5)  The owner has executed an "affidavit of receipt" containing at least the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the person receiving the estray; and 
b.  Date of receipt of estray; and 
c.  Method of claim to estray (owner purchaser at sale); and 
d.  If purchased at sale, the amount of gross purchase price; and 
e.  Amount of estray handling fees paid; and 
f.  The net proceeds of the sale. 
(6)  The animal control division has filed the "affidavit of receipt" in the "estray book." 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.4), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-65. - Fees. 
    For each and every estray taken and impounded there shall be paid to the city by the owner thereof or his agents a fee for the taking and impounding of the estray and a fee set for each night, except for the first day, for each and every subsequent day that the animal shall remain in the custody of the animal control division. Such fee being charged for the caring and feeding of such animals. The owner shall also pay for any veterinarian or drug fees incurred for the animals(s) while in the custody of the animal control division. These fees are set out in city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.5), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-66. - Sale of estray. 
    If the ownership of an estray is not determined within fourteen (14) days following the final advertisement required by this article, title to the estray rests with the city, and the animal control division shall then cause the estray to be sold at a public auction. Title to the estray shall be deemed vested in the animal control division for purposes of passing a good title, free and clear of all claims to the purchaser at the sale. The disposition of the proceeds derived from the sale of an estray at public auction will be as follows: 
(1)  Pay all handling fees to those entitled to receive them; 
(2)  Execute a report of sale of impounded stock; 
(3)  The net proceeds remaining from the sale of the estray after the handling fees have been paid shall be delivered by the animal control division to the city secretary. Such net proceeds shall be subject to claim by the original owner of the estray as provided herein. 
(4)  If the bids are too low, the animal control division shall have the right to refuse all bids and arrange for another public auction or sealed bidding procedure. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.6), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-67. - Recovery by owner of sale proceeds. 
    Within twelve (12) months after the sale of an estray under the provisions of this article the original owner of the estray may recover the net proceeds of the sale that were delivered to the city secretary if: 
(1)  The owner has provided the animal control division with an affidavit of ownership; and 
(2)  The animal control division has approved the affidavit; and 
(3)  The approved affidavit has been filed in the "estray book." 
(4)  After the expiration of twelve (12) months from the sale of an estray as provided by the article, the sale proceeds shall escheat to the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.7), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-68. - Use of estray. 
    During the period of time an estray is held by one who impounded the estray, the estray may not be used by any person for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.8), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-69. - Death or escape of estray. 
    If the estray dies or escapes while held by the person who impounded it, the person shall report the death or escape to the animal control division. the report shall be filed in the "estray book." 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 5(5.9), 11-13-01) 
Secs. 3-70-3-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LICENSING 

Sec. 3-81. - Vaccination. 
    Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies. All such dogs or cats shall be re-vaccinated at one (1) year intervals thereafter. Any person establishing residence within the City of Decatur shall comply with this chapter within the ten (10) days of establishing such residency. If an unvaccinated dog or cat inflicts a bite, scratch, or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits, a rabies vaccine shall not be administered to the dog or cat until that animal is released from quarantine. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-82. - Certificate of vaccination. 
    Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat as evidence thereof, a certificate of vaccination. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy of the certificate, and one (1) copy shall be filed with the owner. Such certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat; and 
(2)  The date of vaccination; and 
(3)  The type of rabies vaccine used; and 
(4)  The year and number of the rabies tag; and 
(5)  The breed(s), age, color, and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-83. - Rabies tag. 
    Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination, the owner of the dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated animal a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance. Such tag shall at all times be securely attached to a collar or harness around the neck of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-84. - License required. 
    All dogs and cats four (4) months of age or older which are kept, harbored, or maintained within the corporate limits of the city shall be licensed. The animal control division or their agent upon payment of the required fee for each cat or dog shall provide cat and dog licenses. Before a city license will be issued, the owner of the cat or dog must present a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that said cat or dog has been vaccinated for rabies within the preceding twelve (12) months. The owner shall state his name and address, and the breed, color and sex of the cat or dog to be licensed. Said license shall be valid for one (1) year from date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.4), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-85. - Fees. 
    A yearly license fee as set out in city fee schedule, shall be in effect with the passage of this chapter for the following categories. 
(1)  A new or renewed license. 
(2)  Dogs which are professionally and specifically trained to assist disabled owner. 
(3)  Duplicate replacement tag. 
(4)  Guard dog. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.5), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-86. - Tag and collar. 
    Upon payment of the license fee where applicable, the city shall issue to the owner a license certificate and metal tag having stamped upon it the number corresponding with the number of the certificate. Such tag shall at all times be securely attached to a collar or harness around the neck of the animal. In case a tag is lost, the animal control division or its agent upon presentation of the receipt showing the payment of license fee for the calendar year will be issued a duplicate. Tags shall not be transferable from one animal to another and no refunds shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.6), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-87. - Guard dogs. 
    All dogs which are professionally trained and kept solely for the protection of persons and property, residential, commercial or personal, shall be permitted from the animal control center. The area or premises in which such dog is confined shall be conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two (2) inches high, stating "GUARD DOG ON PREMISES." Said area of premises shall be subject to inspection by the animal control division to determine that the animal in question is maintained and secured at all times in such a manner so as to prevent its coming in contact with the public. The animal control division shall issue the dog a tag, varying in color from the license tag, and a fee shall be charged. The Guard Dog permit shall expire one (1) year from date of issuance and is not transferable. The tag must be secured to the collar or harness of the dog at all times. Dogs permitted under this section shall not be required to obtain a city license, but shall be required to comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.7), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-88. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The animal control supervisor or his/her agent may revoke any cat or dog license after a hearing for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Impoundment of a cat or dog by the animal control division more than two (2) times during a twelve-month period; or 
(2)  More than two (2) final convictions of a person for violating this article when such convictions relate to the cat or dog which is being considered for revocation of its license certificate; or 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) totaling three (3) incidents; or 
(4)  Upon a determination that the animal is a non-registerable dangerous dog, as defined in article IX. 
(b)  Upon revoking the license of any cat or dog, the animal control division shall notify the owner of the cat or dog of said action in writing. Written notification shall be deemed made when a certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known mailing address of the cat or dog's owner is deposited in the U.S. Mail. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of the ten (10) days after written notification of revocation is deposited in the U. S. Mail, as provided above, no cat or dog which has had its license revoked shall be kept, maintained, or harbored within the city limits, and each twenty-four-hour period shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.8), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-89. - Authority to conduct license verification programs. 
    The animal control division shall have the authority to conduct random or city wide verification programs in a manner calculated to determine compliance with the license and rabies vaccination requirements. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.9), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-90. - Violation notice. 
    Where violations of the licensing and/or rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter are observed, any animal services officer may issue a warning notice in lieu of a citation. The warning notice will stipulate a compliance date. Failure to comply by the date specified shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may result in the issuance of a citation. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 6(6.10), 11-13-01) 
Secs. 3-91-3-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ANIMAL BITES 

Sec. 3-101. - Reporting bites/scratches. 
    Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons for any animal bite or scratch or any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch shall within twelve (12) hours report such treatment to the animal control division giving the name, age, sex and precise location of the bitten/scratched person or persons and such other information as the officer or agency may require. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 7(7.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-102. - Reporting suspected rabies. 
    Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or other domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the incident to the animal control department stating precisely where such animal may be found. If a known suspected rabid animal bites or scratches a domestic animal, such incident shall also be reported as required above. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 7(7.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-103. - Quarantine of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Any owned dog or cat which has bitten or scratched a person shall be observed for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the bite. The investigating officer or responsible agency, in compliance with state law, shall designate the procedure and place of observation. If the dog or cat is not confined on the owner's premises, confinement shall be by impoundment in the animal control center, or at a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice, within a twenty-mile radius of Decatur. Such confinement shall be at the owner's expense. Stray dogs and cats or those animals whose owner's cannot be located shall be confined in the animal control center for a period of four (4) days and if unclaimed may be destroyed and the brain of such animal immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for rabies examination at the victim's expense. The owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to inflict a bite on any person shall, on demand, produce said dog or cat for impoundment, as prescribed in this article. Home quarantine as defined in section 3-2, may be allowed only in those incidents where permitted by state law and agreed to by the animal control division. Refusal to produce said dog or cat constitutes a violation of this section and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and individual violation. 
(b)  Any wild, exotic or dangerous animal as defined in section 3-2, and considered "high risk" according to state law, which has bitten or scratched a person shall be caught and humanely killed and the brain submitted for rabies examination. Those wild animals, which are classified, as "low risk" animals shall be handled as dictated by state law. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 7(7.3), 11-13-01) 
Secs. 3-104-3-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LIVESTOCK/FOWL/RABBITS 

Sec. 3-116. - Keeping of fowl; area and sanitation requirements; declarartion of nuisance. 
(a)  Area requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain or permit any person to keep, harbor, maintain or permit the presence on any lot or parcel of land within the city of more than one of any fowl of any kind, sex, or description for each ten (10) square feet of ground area available for such purpose, and must be at least one hundred (100) feet from any residence, building or place people may congregate. It shall be further unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain, or permit the presence on any lot or parcel of land within the city of more than ten (10) of any mature poultry of fowl of any kind, sex or description on any lot or parcel of land on one acre or less. It shall be further unlawful for any person to permit such fowl to run at large upon any property with the city limits of Decatur. 
(b)  Sanitary requirements. Each place in the city used for feeding, harboring, or keeping any poultry or fowl shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times and kept free from offensive odors, flies, rodents, and other pests. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 9(9.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-117. - Keeping of rabbits, or other small animals. 
    Area requirements It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping rabbits or any other small animal to keep such animal in a pen of not less then five (5) square feet, and must be at least one hundred (100) feet from any residence, building or place people may congregate. And shall not permit such pen to become a public health nuisance. It shall be further unlawful for any person to permit such rabbit or other small animal to run at large upon any property with the city limits of Decatur. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 9(9.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-118. - Swine prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to keep/harbor any swine within the city limits of Decatur, except for any animal kept at a veterinary clinic or any public or private school for agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 9(9.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-119. - Prohibited livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful any person to harbor inside the city limits of Decatur any jack, bull, stallion, billy, ram. This provision shall not apply to any animal kept at a veterinary clinic, or upon the premises of any public or private school for agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 9(9.4), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-120. - Livestock enclosures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any horse, cow, cattle, sheep, or goats within two hundred (200) feet of another resident or occupied building and at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per animal; except that property containing at least three (3) acres of land, with no more than five (5) horses or cattle and no other offending animals, shall not be in violation if the horses or cattle were being legally kept before the construction of the residence which would give rise to the violation. This provision shall not apply to any animal kept at a veterinary clinic, or upon the premises of any public or private school for agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 9(9.5), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-121-3-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ANIMAL CARE 

Sec. 3-131. - Provide care. 
    No owner shall fail to provide an animal in his/her care with sufficient good and wholesome food or water, adequate housing consisting of a three-sided structure with a cover or roof, shelter and protection from weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 10(10.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-132. - Cruel treatment. 
    No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dog fight, cock fight, butt fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 10(10.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-133. - Abandonment. 
    No person shall abandon an animal in his/her custody. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 10(10.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-134. - Inducement. 
    No person shall give away any live animal as a prize or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition or an inducement to enter a place of business; offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 10(10.4), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-135. - Injured animal. 
    Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local animal control. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 10(10.5), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-136. - Poisonous substance/traps. 
    No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any domestic animal or person. This section is not intended to prohibit use of herbicides, insecticides, or rodent control materials. No person shall expose an open trap or metal jaw type that shall be liable to injure any domestic animal or person; however, this shall not preclude use of humane box traps. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 8(8.6), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-137. - Theatrical exhibits. 
    All theatrical exhibits as defined herein shall, in addition to other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Facilities shall be subject to inspection by an animal control officer upon his/her request during reasonable hours. 
(1)  Animal quarters shall be of sufficient size to allow each animal to stand up, lie down, and turn around in a natural position without touching the sides or top, or any other animal or waste. 
(2)  Each enclosure shall be maintained in comfortable and healthy temperature level as well as adequate ventilation. 
(3)  No enclosure, performance or exhibit area shall be located in such a manner as to allow the public to come in contact with the animal. 
(4)  No animal shall be made to perform by means of any prod, stick, electrical shock, chemical or physical force, or by causing pain or discomfort. Any whip or riding crop must be used so as to not cause injury to the animal. 
(5)  No animal shall be caused to fight, wrestle or be physically matched against any other animal or person. 
(6)  No animal shall perform or be displayed in any dangerous situation presenting the danger of physical injury to the animal or person. 
(7)  The animal control division must be notified of all displays or performances, including date, time and exact location at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of a display or performance. 
(8)  No dog or cat may be killed for the purposes of human consumption or for its fur within the city limits of Decatur. No domestic animal may be killed for human consumption in such a manner as to disturb the sensibilities of neighboring residences. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 10(10.7), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-138. - Removal of animal in immediate danger. 
    Any animal observed by a police officer or animal services officer to be in immediate danger may be removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable means available. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 10(10.8), 11-13-01) 
Secs. 3-139-3-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DANGEROUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Animal regulations and rabies control, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-6a. 

Sec. 3-151. - Non-registered dangerous dogs. 
    No person shall own or harbor a non-registered dangerous dog within the city. Such an animal may be impounded as a public nuisance. If impoundment of said non-registered dangerous dog is being attempted away from the premises of the owner and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner or harborer. If an attempt is made to impound a non-registered dangerous dog from the premises of the owner or harborer and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the owner or harborer will be given twenty-four (24) hours notice, that if that animal is not surrendered to the animal control division for impoundment within said twenty-four-hour period, then the animal will be destroyed wherever it is found. After this notice, the non-registerable dangerous dog my be destroyed during an attempt to impound, if impoundment is attempted. Notice under this article may be verbal or in writing. A written notice left at the entrance to the premises where the non-registered dangerous dog is harbored will be considered valid notice under this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-152. - Determination of non-registered dangerous dog. 
    A dog is determined to be a non-registered dangerous dog if: 
(1)  A dog is automatically determined to be non-registered if it commits acts as defined in section 3-2, "non-registered dangerous dog," of this chapter; or 
(2)  The animal control division may find and determine a dog to be non-registered if: 
a.  Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals, made under oath before an individual authorized by law to take sworn statements or made at the animal control center before a certified animal control officer, setting forth an act described in section 3-2, "dangerous animal," and set forth as follows: 
1.  Nature and the date of the act described in section 3-2, "non-registered dangerous dog"; and 
2.  The location of the event; and 
3.  The name and address of the owner of the animal in question; and 
4.  The description of the animal in question. 
b.  The animal control division shall investigate the complaint and may determine that an animal is non-registered under this chapter and/or state law. 
(3)  The dog has been registered as, or finally determined or declared to be a dangerous dog either in Decatur or in another city or county in Texas and has made an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and caused injury to such person or a person assisting or intervening on behalf of such person; or 
(4)  The owner of a dog determined to be a registered dangerous dog under this chapter, or any previous other ordinance of this city or any other city or state law, cannot or will not comply with the requirements set out in this article for the keeping of a registered dangerous dog. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-153. - Notification of determination of a non-registered dangerous dog. 
(a)  Within five (5) working days of determining an animal non-registered, the animal control division will notify, by verified mail, return receipt requested, the person owning the animal of its designation as a non-registered animal. In the event that certified mail cannot be delivered, that animal control division may then give notice by ordinary mail to last known address of owner. For the purposes of this section, notice may be delivered by the animal control division in person to the owner/harborer 
(b)  If the animal is determined to be non-registered under this chapter, the owner may appeal to the city municipal court within ten (10) days of notification. Failure to appeal the determination of non-registered dangerous dog shall result in the animal control division's determination as final. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-154. - Status of dog pending appeal. 
    Pending the outcome of the appeal to city municipal court, the animal must be confined at the animal services center the cost of which shall be borne by the owner. If the dog in question is not in the possession of the animal control center at the time of the declaration, the owner must surrender said dog to the animal control division when ordered to do so by any animal control officer or police officer. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the dog, the animal control division shall have the right to take the dog into its possession from the premises of the owner or elsewhere, wherever the dog may be found within the city limits. If the animal control division cannot take the dog into custody, it may be taken into custody under a search warrant for contraband issued by the city municipal judge or other magistrate having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.4), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-155. - Defense to determination of non-registered dangerous dog. 
    It is a defense to the determination of a dog as a non-registered dangerous dog and to the prosecution of the owner of that dog: 
(1)  If the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the own of the animal; or 
(2)  If the person was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal; or 
(3)  If the person was committing or attempting to commit a crime; or 
(4)  If the dog was protecting or defending a person while in that person's control, from an unjustified attack or assault; or 
(5)  If the dog was injured and responding to pain. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.5), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-156. - Disposition on non-registered dangerous dog. 
(a)  If the city municipal court upholds the determination by the animal control division, the court shall order the dog to be euthanized in a safe and humane manner at the animal control center. 
(b)  In the event the city municipal court reverses that determination, the dog in question shall be returned to or released to its owner provided the owner reimburses the city for any veterinary medical treatment administered to said dog while in the custody of the animal control division. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.6), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-157. - Registered dangerous dog. 
    Shall refer to a dog determined dangerous under this article or in compliance with State Law or that meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property in an apparent attitude of attack such that the person reasonably believes that the animal will cause physical injury to the person; or 
(2)  Any dog that commits an unprovoked act in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and the act causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; or 
(3)  Any animal that has killed or seriously injured or caused to be seriously injured a domestic animal or a permitted restricted animal as defined in article X without provocation while off the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.7), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-158. - Determination of registered dangerous dog. 
    A dog is determined to be a registered dangerous dog if it meets the requirement(s) set out in section 3-157 of this article; and 
(1)  The owner of the dog in question knows of such an attack as defined in this article; or 
(2)  The owner is notified by the animal control division that the dog in question is a registered dangerous dog. The animal control division may find and determine a dog to be a registerable dangerous dog if: 
a.  Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals, made under oath before an individual authorized by law to take sworn statements or made at the animal control center before a certified animal control officer, setting forth an act described in section 3-157 of this article and set forth as follows: 
1.  Nature and the date of the act described in article VI; and 
2.  The location of the event; and 
3.  The name and address of the owner of the animal in question; and 
4.  The description of the animal in question. 
b.  The animal control division has been notified by another agency that the dog has been determined to be dangerous under the state law or applicable ordinance of notifying city. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.8), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-159. - Notification of declaration of a registered dangerous dog. 
(a)  Within five (5) working days of determining a dog a registered dangerous dog, if written notification cannot be given personally to the owner of the dog the animal control division will notify, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the person owning the animal of its designation as a registered dangerous dog. In the event the certified mail, return receipt requested, cannot be delivered, the animal control division may then give notice by ordinary mail. 
(b)  If the dog is determined to be registered under this chapter, the notice shall inform the owner of the dog he/she may appeal the determination to municipal court no later than ten (10) days after the date the owner is notified of the determination. Failure to appeal the determination of registered dangerous dog within the ten-day period shall result in the animal control division's determination becoming final. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.9), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-160. - Status of dog on appeal. 
    Pending the outcome of the appeal, the animal must be confined at a licensed veterinarian clinic or at the animal control center, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner of the dog in question. If the dog in question is not in the possession of the animal control center or a veterinary clinic at the time of the determination, the owner must surrender the said dog to the animal control division when ordered to do so by any animal control officer or police officer. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the dog, the animal control division shall have the right to take the dog into its possession from the premises of the owner or elsewhere, wherever the dog may be found within the city limits. If the animal control division cannot take the dog into custody, it may be taken into custody under a search warrant for contraband issued by the municipal judge or other magistrate having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.10), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-161. - Defense to determination of registered dangerous dog. 
    Section 3-155(a) through (e) of this article shall serve as a defense to the determination of a dog as a registered dangerous dog and to the prosecution of the owner of that dog. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.11), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-162. - Disposition of registered dangerous dog. 
(a)  If the municipal court upholds or has ever upheld under previous or other ordinances of this city or other cities or state law, the determination by the animal control division, the owner shall, no later than ten (10) days after the determination hearing comply with the provisions of this chapter for the keeping of a registered dangerous dog in Decatur and the dog shall be returned to the owner provided all costs involved in the impoundment, holding and medical treatment of said dog are paid. 
(b)  In the event the municipal court reverses that determination, the dog in question shall be returned to or released to its owner provided the owner has paid all veterinary medical costs administered to such dog while in the custody of the animal control division. 
(c)  If the animal control division has information or belief, or has determined that a court of competent jurisdiction has ever made or upheld a determination of declaration that a dog is dangerous, or if the animal control division has determined that a declaration or determination of dangerous dog became final for failure to appeal or any other reason, under previous or other ordinances of this city or other cities or state law, the animal control division shall notify the person owning or keeping such dog in writing that the owner shall no later than ten (10) days after the date of the notice comply with the provisions of this chapter for the keeping of a registered dangerous dog in Decatur. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.12), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-163. - Requirements for registration and possession of a registered dangerous dog. 
    Owner must register the dog at the animal services center, and pay an annual fee. The registration shall not be transferable and shall expire one (1) year from date of issuance. The animal control center shall provide to the owner of the registered dangerous dog a tag which must be placed on the dog's collar and worn at all times; and 
(1)  The owner must comply with the following to register the dog: 
a.  Present proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog which causes bodily injury to a person; and 
b.  Present proof of current rabies vaccination of the registered dangerous dog; and 
c.  Present proof that the dog has been altered so as to prevent reproduction; and 
d.  The owner must provide a proper enclosure as defined in section 3-2, "proper enclosure," of this chapter and that proper enclosure must be inspected and approved by the animal services division; and 
e.  The owner shall post a sign on his/her premises warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning, understandable by small children, of the presence of a dangerous dog; and 
f.  Owner shall caused to be placed around the dog's neck a collar indicating the dog is dangerous. This collar may be obtained at the animal control center and must be worn at all times; and 
g.  The dog shall be implanted with a microchip identifying it and this identifying number shall be recorded with the agency where the animal resides. Further identification may be required and designated by the order of the animal control supervisor. 
(2)  When the registered dangerous dog is taken outside the approved proper enclosure, the animal must be securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting a person or other animal, and the dog must be restrained by a substantial chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of one thousand (1,000) pounds and not to exceed six (6) feet in length; and 
(3)  Prior to selling or moving the registered dangerous dog either inside or outside the city limits of Decatur, the owner must notify the animal control division of his/her intentions. In the event the dog is moved permanently outside the city limits of Decatur, the owner must comply with the state law in notifying the animal control authority in control of the area into which the dog has been moved. 
(4)  Anyone bringing a dog into the city limits of Decatur that has been declared dangerous by another animal control authority must notify the animal control division of the new address where the dog will be kept and upon presentation of the dog's prior registration tag that has not expired, shall pay a fee, and the animal control division shall issue a new tag to be placed on the dog's collar. This owner must also comply with all requirements set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.13), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-164. - Attack by registered dangerous dog. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the animal control division immediately of any attacks the dog makes on people or animals. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.14), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-165. - Appeal from municipal court. 
    Any appeal of the decision or order of the Municipal Court of Decatur shall be made within twenty (20) days in the same manner as appeal from civil cases originating in the justice of the peace courts of the state. The municipal court shall order the appellant to post supersede bond payable to the city in such an amount as deemed appropriate by said court. The form of the bond shall be as prescribed in the laws pertaining to civil appeals originating in the justice of the peace courts in this state. The appellant shall be responsible for the cost of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.15), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-166. - Defense to prosecution for violation of registered dangerous dog. 
    It is a defense to prosecution of section 3-164 that the person is: 
(1)  Veterinarian, peace officer, employee of the city in the performance of his/her duties; or 
(2)  An employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes; or 
(3)  A dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company, while in the performance of his/her duties, under the Texas Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies Act in State Law. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.16), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-167. - Penalties for violation of this article. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's proper enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person whether or not the dog was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the dog escaped without fault of the owner. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and that dog kills or wounds a domestic animal while outside the dog's proper enclosure whether or not the dog was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the dog escaped without fault of the owner. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and that dog attacks a person who gains access to the proper enclosure due to negligence on the part of owner or owner's agent. 
(d)  In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this article is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The City Attorney of Decatur may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 11(11.17), 11-13-01) 
Secs. 3-168-3-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - WILD/EXOTIC/DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 3-176. - Exhibitions of wild/dangerous animals prohibited. 
    No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, on his premises any wild or dangerous animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 12(12.1), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-177. - Prohibited animals. 
    No person may possess a venomous reptile, elephant, rhinoceros, skunk, raccoon, fox, coyote, bat, lion, tiger, ocelot, cougar, leopard, cheetah, jaguar, hyena, bear, lesser panda, binturong, non-human primate, wolf or any hybrid of these animals or any other dangerous animal which is or may be here after listed as a "high risk" animal in the Texas Rabies Control Act. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 12(12.2), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-178. - Restricted animals. 
    No person may possess any individual species or subspecies of any of the following animals without a permit issued through the animal control division: ferret, miniature pig not to exceed one hundred (100) pounds in weight. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 12(12.3), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-179. - Non-venous reptiles. 
    Shall be registered with the animal control division and shall meet all requirements set out in section 3-180(2) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 12(12.4), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-180. - Permit requirement for restricted animal ownership. 
    Any person who wishes to possess a restricted animal in the city limits of Decatur must: 
(1)  Apply for said permit at the animal control center and provide the following information and documentation: 
a.  A health certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that the animal is free from symptoms of infectious disease or is under treatment. A new health certificate is required each time the permit is renewed. Copy will remain with the animal control division. 
b.  Copies of applicable state or federal permits or license as required by either of those entities for the keeping of the particular animal in question. The animal control division will retain these copies. 
c.  Information relating to the owner including emergency telephone numbers and telephone numbers for their veterinarian in case of emergencies. 
(2)  Before a permit is issued the animal control division shall inspect the facility where the animal is to be kept, which must meet the following criteria: 
a.  Each enclosure must provide adequate exercise area and sleeping quarters. 
b.  Proper temperature control and ventilation for the particular species must be provided in both areas. 
c.  Each enclosure must be kept locked and designed so that no one can enter or place appendages in the enclosure. 
d.  Each enclosure must be constructed so as to prevent the animal from escaping. 
e.  Each enclosure must be kept in good repair to prevent both escape and injury to the animal. 
f.  Each enclosure must have a water container which is secured so as to prevent its being overturned. 
g.  Each enclosure must be cleaned daily. 
(3)  Owners keeping permitted restricted animals as pets inside their residence are not required to provide for the requirements of section 3-180(2)a. through g. above, except there must be separate sleeping quarters. The animal(s) must remain in the owner's home or in the prescribed enclosure, if outdoors. If transported to the veterinarian, the animal must be kept in an escape-proof cage previously approved by the animal control division. 
(4)  Each animal must be provided with continuous clean water and must be fed a diet approved by a licensed veterinarian. 
(5)  Any animal which has bitten or scratched someone must be immediately surrendered to the animal control division for euthanasia and testing by the Texas Department of Health. (T.D.H.) A live test approved by T.D.H. may be substituted for euthanasia. 
(6)  A fee for restricted animal permit shall charged and the permit shall expire one year from date of issuance and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 12(12.5), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-181. - Violation of permit requirements. 
    Failure to comply with the permit requirements shall constitute a violation of this article and each day of non-compliance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 12(12.6), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-182. - Exempt. 
    The article does not apply to: 
(1)  Zoological park accredited by the American Association of Zoological parks and Aquariums. 
(2)  Federally-licensed research institutions. 
(3)  Any government agency or its employee who use the animals for an agency related to education, propagation, or behavior program. 
(4)  Anyone holding a valid rehabilitation permit from Texas Parks and Wildlife but only for animals which are in rehabilitation and scheduled to be released to the wild. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 12(12.7), 11-13-01) 
Sec. 3-183. - Permit required. 
    Any person in possession or in control of a restricted animal as defined in this article at the time of passage of this chapter shall have thirty (30) days from passage to obtain permit required by this chapter. From and after said thirty-day period, said person who fails to obtain a permit shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-10, art. 12(12.8), 11-13-01) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Airport zoning,  2.5-1 et seq.; animals, Ch. 3; fire prevention code adopted,  6-56 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; nuisances, Ch. 10; solid waste, Ch. 12; utilities, Ch. 14; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 4-26. - Codes adopted. 
(a)  2012 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council with local amendments as provided in Exhibit A. 
(b)  2012 International Mechanical Code as published by the International Code Council with local amendments as provided in Exhibit B. 
(c)  2012 International Plumbing Code as published by the International Code Council with local amendments as provided in Exhibit C. 
(d)  2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association with local amendments as provided in Exhibit D. 
(e)  2012 International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council with local amendments as provided in Exhibit E. 
(f)  2015 International Energy Conservation Code as published by the International Code Council with local amendments as provided in Exhibit F. 
(g)  2012 International Fuel Gas Code as published by the International Code Council with local amendments as provided in Exhibit G. 
    The International Building Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code, International Energy Code, International Fuel Gas Code and National Electrical Code are available for public inspection during regular business hours at Decatur City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 8-98,  1-6, 12, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 01-11-12,  1, 2, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  1, 11-9-09; Ord. No. 2016-06-10,  2, 3, 6-27-16) 
Editor's note- Amendments to the codes adopted hereunder are hereby adopted as provided for in Exhibits A, B, C, D, E, F, and G attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
Note- The International Building Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, National Electrical Code, International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, International Energy Code and the International Fuel Gas Code are available for public inspection during regular business hours at Decatur City Hall. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 4-27. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the building code adopted in this article, it shall be held to mean the City of Decatur, Texas. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the building code adopted in this article, it shall be held to mean the city attorney of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
(Code 1975,  3-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 4-28. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The fee schedule charged by the city for building permits is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  Permit fees shall be collected prior to the issuance of any construction work permit and in accordance with the fee schedule of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-86,  2, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 8-98,  10, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 4-29. - Trench safety standards. 
    On all construction projects, public or private, within the boundaries of the city, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the bid document and the contract shall contain detailed plans and specifications for adequate safety systems that meet OSHA standards, and a pat item for those safety systems. This requirement shall not apply to persons subject to safety standards adopted under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6053-1 and subject to the administrative penalty provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6053-2. 
(Ord. No. 1-88, 1-11-88) 
Sec. 4-30. - Building official. 
(a)  The building official of this city shall be appointed by the City Manager or his designee, and shall have the powers and duties prescribed for the "Building Official" by the International Building Code; provided that his powers and duties may be exercised by his authorized representatives under his supervision and control. 
(b)  The terms "building official," "electrical inspector," and "plumbing inspector" wherever used in this Code or the ordinances of the city, each refer to and mean the building official, unless a separate building inspector, electrical inspector, and/or plumbing inspector is appointed. 
(Code 1975,  3-4; Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  1, 11-9-09) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees,  2-151 et seq. 
Sec. 4-31. - Permit required for moving building; fee. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter, remove from the city, move from without the city into the city, or from one (1) place within the city to another place within the city, or demolish a building or structure, or to begin to do the same, without securing from the city building official a permit therefor. 
(b)  The fees for building permits are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  3-6) 
Sec. 4-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8-98,  12, adopted May 26, 1998, repealed the former  4-32, which pertained to the adoption of the 1991 plumbing code and 1991 IAMPO installation standards and derived from Ord. No. 3-94,  II(1), 2-14-94. Prior to Ord. No. 3-94,  4-32 pertained to the adoption of the 1981 plumbing code and derived from Code 1975,  3-21. 
Secs. 4-33-4-35. - Repealed. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  2, adopted November 9, 2009, repealed  4-33-4-35, which pertained to plumbing permit, inspection fees; improper plumbing practices; penalties for violations and derived from  3-22 of the 1975 Code; Ord. No. 3-94,  I(1-6), IV, 2-14-94. 
Sec. 4-36. - Building contractor registration required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any, person, firm or corporation to initiate any building, mechanical, electrical or plumbing construction work within the corporate limits of the city without having first applied for and obtained registration from the city. Said application for the registration shall require such information as the building official may determine appropriate and proper with respect to the name, address, background, experience and previous licensing of the applicant. 
    Upon application and approval by the building official, registration shall be issued to the applicant to perform construction work within the corporate limits of the city, provided such application has been completed in all respects. 
(Ord. No. 8-98,  7, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  1, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 4-37. - Mechanical, plumbing, and electrical license required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall be authorized to secure permits without being a valid registered contractor with the city. Homeowners doing work on their homestead are exempt as provided in section 4-38. 
(a)  Mechanical. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform or cause to be performed mechanical work upon or in structures within the corporate limits of the city, unless the person performing such work is currently licensed through the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR). 
(b)  Plumbing. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform or cause to be performed plumbing work upon or in structures within the corporate limits of the city, unless the person performing such work is currently licensed through the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners. 
(c)  Electrical. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform or cause to be performed electrical work upon or in structures within the corporate limits of the city, unless the person performing such work is currently licensed through the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR), recognized and approved by the building official as either a master or journeyman electrician. 
    A valid registered contractor is a person, firm or corporation who is licensed according to the appropriate trade or profession, has paid the prescribed fees as provided in the city's fee schedule (section 4-39), and is not delinquent in any fees or debt to the city. 
    The registration applicant shall file an application for a permit in writing on a form furnished by the planning department for this purpose. Failure by the applicant to have obtained appropriate licenses shall be cause for rejection of the application. 
(Ord. No. 8-98,  8, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  1, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 4-38. - License exception for homeowners. 
    Nothing contained within the ordinance from which this section derives (Ord. No. 8-98) shall be construed or interpreted to prevent any person from actually doing his or her own mechanical, plumbing or electrical work on his or her own property or premises with proof of the property being their homestead, provided a permit has been obtained, and that the material, equipment and work conducted is in strict compliance with the other provisions of the ordinance from which this section derives (Ord. No. 8-98). The property owner must actually perform the work. 
(Ord. No. 8-98,  9, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  1, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 4-39. - Required permits and schedule of permit fees. 
(a)  Permits that pertain to this article include, but are not limited to building, electrical, plumbing, irrigation, mechanical and fire sprinkler. 
(b)  A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(c)  Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions as set forth in the fee schedule on file in the city secretary's office, as may be amended from time to time. All permit fees shall be paid to the City of Decatur. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  3, 11-9-09) 
Secs. 4-40-4-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8-98 reorganized parts of this chapter, and in conjunction with Ord. No. 8-98, at the city's request, the former Art. III was repealed. The former Art. III pertained to electricity and derived from Code 1975,  3-31-3-41; Mo. of 10-12-87. 

Secs. 4-51-4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FENCING OF OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS, HOT TUBS, SPAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. No. 5-90,  1-4, adopted July 9, 1990, has been codified herein by the editor as Art. IV,  4-71-4-74;  5 and 6 of such ordinance, pertaining to severability and effective date, respectively, have not been included herein. 
Cross reference- Accessory building and use regulations and swimming pools, zoning, App. B, app. 10. 

Sec. 4-71. - Definition. 
    The term swimming pool as used herein shall mean an artificial or semiartificial receptacle or container designed to contain fluid, whether actually containing a fluid or not, which is either temporarily or permanently located outdoors and is used or intended to be used for public, semipublic or private human use involving submersion of all or part of the body, whether or not a fee is paid for such use. Such use may include but is not limited to swimming, wading, soaking, floating or recreational bathing by any number of persons. These terms do not apply to a receptacle or container that is located outdoors and is not used or intended to be used for public, semipublic or private human use involving submersion of all or part of the body, such as fountains and reflection pools. This term includes hot tubs and spas. 
(Ord. No. 5-90,  1, 7-9-90) 
Sec. 4-72. - Applications. 
    The requirements of this article shall be applicable to all outdoor swimming pools which have a depth capacity of eighteen (18) inches or more of fluid at any point, whether actually containing fluid or empty. 
(Ord. No. 5-90,  2, 7-9-90) 
Sec. 4-73. - Requirements. 
(a)  Fence required. Every owner, lessee, tenant, licensee or other person in possession of land within the corporate limits of the city upon which is situated a swimming pool shall at all times maintain a fence, wall or barrier that completely surrounds the swimming pool. The fence, wall or barrier shall be not less than four (4) feet in height with no openings, holes or gaps large enough for a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass through. A single-family, duplex or accessory building may be used as a part of such enclosure provided that all outside entrances into the swimming pool area or court are equipped with gates as described in this section. 
(b)  Gates. All gates opening directly into a swimming pool enclosure shall swing away from the pool and shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed to keep and capable of keeping such gates securely closed at all times when not in actual use. The gate handle must be at least fifty-four (54) inches above grade. 
(c)  New installations. A person who on or after July 9, 1990, obtains a permit to install a swimming pool is responsible for assuring compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Contractor's responsibility. Before the pool is filled with water, the swimming pool contractor is responsible for: 
(1)  Ensuring that the fence/enclosure is complete. 
(2)  Ensuring that all required gate latches and self-closures are in place and operating. 
(3)  A final inspection shall be obtained from the city prior to the actual use of the swimming pool. 
(e)  Existing installations. All fences and gates around swimming pools which lawfully existed prior to July 9, 1990, shall be made to fully comply with the provisions of this article before January 1, 1991. 
(Ord. No. 5-90,  3, 7-9-90; Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  1, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 4-74. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon final conviction thereof fined in an amount not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation. Any violation of this article is a class C misdemeanor as set out in the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 5-90,  4, 7-9-90) 
Secs. 4-75-4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REGULATING PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2007-04-09,  1-17, adopted April 23, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as  4-81-4-97 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 4-81. - Adoption of standards for swimming pools and spas. 
(a)  The City of Decatur adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules, any future version or amended rules by the Texas Department of State Health Services entitled, Standards for Public Swimming Pools and Spas, 25 TAC 265, Subchapter L, that apply to the design, construction, operation and maintenance of all swimming pools and spas. 
(b)  The purpose of this article shall be to control and regulate the design, construction, operation, and maintenance of all public swimming pools and spas within the city; to provide for the issuance of operating permits, and to provide penalties and remedies so that health and safety hazards may be minimized. 
(c)  The intent of this article shall be to address clean, healthful, and safe practices for all public swimming pools and spas which may be constructed and operated within the city. 
(d)  This article shall apply to the design, construction, operation and maintenance of all non-residential swimming pools and spas which may be located within the city regardless of when the swimming pool or spa was constructed. 
(e)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certified pool operator (CPO) means any individual who has taken and successfully passed a certified pool operator course and who has in their possession a certificate or documentation of such current status. 
(1)  Certified pool operator course means a course accredited by the department of state health services as provided in 25 TAC 265.203. 
(2)  Make-up water means water which is added to a swimming pool to bring the water level up to the design or normal operating level. 
(3)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, governmental agency, club or organization of any kind. 
(4)  Public swimming pool or spa means any pool or spa as defined under 25 TAC 265.182(99) that is not constructed or maintained in conjunction with a single-family residence or two-residence town house. 
(5)  Regulatory authority means the City of Decatur Inspections Department. 
(6)  Remodel means the replacement of or modification to a public swimming pool or spa, structure, circulation system and/or its appurtenances such as the design, configuration and/or operating characteristics, but does not include normal maintenance and repair. If the work involves the replacement of equipment which had been previously approved, but that does not meet the standards set forth in this article, then the equipment or structure must be designed and constructed to comply with all provisions of this article. 
(7)  Residual chlorine level means the amount of measurable chlorine remaining in the water following chlorination and is composed of the following components: 
a.  Free available residual chlorine level means the amount of chlorine which is available to inactivate microorganisms and which has not reacted with ammonia, nitrogenous material and other material in swimming pool water; 
b.  Combined residual chlorine level (also called "chloramine") means the amount of chlorine which has reacted with ammonia and other nitrogenous material to form chloro-ammonia compounds; 
c.  Total residual chlorine level means the arithmetic sum of free available residual chlorine and combined residual chlorine. 
(8)  Shall is mandatory and not merely directory; should is recommendatory; and may is permissive. 
(9)  Superchlorinate means the addition to swimming pool water of an amount of chlorine sufficient to produce a free available residual which is at least equal to ten (10) times the amount of combined residual chlorine plus the required minimum level of free available residual chlorine in order to oxidize the ammonia and nitrogenous materials which may be dissolved in the public swimming pool or spa water. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  1, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-82. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
    The enforcement of the rules and provisions of this article shall be by the city health officer. Any reference in the rules to regulatory authority or local regulatory representative shall mean the city health officer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  2, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-83. - Issuance of operating health permit. 
(a)  No owner, operator or person in control of a public swimming pool or spa shall allow anyone to use it unless a valid health permit to operate such swimming pool or spa has been applied for and obtained from the city regulatory authority. Such permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked for cause as prescribed in this article. 
(b)  Applications for a permit to operate a swimming pool or spa shall be made to the city regulatory authority on forms provided by that department. The applicant shall certify that he is knowledgeable about and understands and is capable of operating the swimming pool for which the operating permit is requested. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of an operating health permit for a public swimming pool or spa at least one preopening and preoperational inspection must be conducted. No operator of a permitted public swimming pool or spa shall reopen after having been closed for 30 days or longer, without having first obtained a preopening and preoperational inspection. This inspection is to verify that the pool or spa is constructed in accordance with all approved plans and requirements, and the water chemistry meets or exceeds the minimum requirement set forth by this article, prior to its opening and use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-84. - Permit fees; exemptions. 
(a)  No operating permit shall be issued for a public swimming pool or spa until the applicant has paid the permit fees as provided in the fee schedule included in this article. 
(b)  No fee shall be charged to obtain an operating permit for any public swimming pool or spa owned and operated by a governmental agency, independent school district, and/or other nonprofit organizations. Proper documentation of tax-exempt status under federal or state law must be provided to the regulatory authority at the time of application in order to be exempt from the permit fee. 
(c)  All permit fees shall be paid to the regulatory authority. The fee schedule charged by the city for swimming pools and spas operating permits is on file in the City Secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  4, 4-23-07; Ord. No. 2009-11-14,  1, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 4-85. - Certified pool operator required. 
(a)  Employment of certified pool operator. 
(1)  No person shall open a public swimming pool or spa for use on or after 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless the person shall have employed a registered certified pool operator. 
(2)  A registered certified pool operator must be employed by the permitted facility at all times. 
(b)  Duties of the certified pool operator. 
(1)  The certified pool operator shall be responsible for the sanitation, safety, and proper maintenance of the pool or spas and all associated physical and mechanical equipment. 
(2)  The certified pool operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all records and logs as required under this article. 
(c)  Registration with the city. 
(1)  The regulatory authority shall issue an official certified pool operator registration certificate to any individual who submits the required application, pays the required fee as provided in the fee schedule found in section 4-84 of this article and provides acceptable documentation of completion of a certified pool operator course. 
(2)  A certified pool operator registration certificate shall be prominently posted at the permitted facility. 
(d)  Registered certified pool operator replacement. 
(1)  A permitted public swimming pool or spa shall notify the regulatory authority, in writing, within seven days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the certified pool operator; and 
(2)  A permitted public swimming pool or spa shall employ another certified pool operator within 30 days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the previous certified pool operator. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  5, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-86. - Pool and spa construction and remodeling. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall hereafter construct or remodel a public swimming pool or spa without having first obtained a building permit. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a new public swimming pool or spa, or the remodel of an existing public swimming pool or spa, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction or remodeling shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval. 
(b)  Plans for review. Plans submitted for review must contain the following: 
(1)  Three (3) full sets of blueprints must be submitted for review. 
(2)  Plans must be drawn to scale, and include a top view and a side cross section view. 
(3)  All dimensions and specifications must be referenced on the plans, including surface area of the pool, spa, and deck, in square feet, and total volume of pool and/or spa in cubic feet and gallons, as well as turn-over rates, type of disinfection, etc. 
(4)  All plans submitted shall bear the stamp of the designing professional engineer or professional architect, along with a statement by the designing professional engineer or professional architect that the plans submitted are designed in compliance with all state and local codes relating to the design, construction, and operation of the public swimming pool or spa in effect at the time of the submission of plans. 
(5)  Plans must contain detailed drawings, descriptions and specifications to include: 
a.  Type, location, and number of drains (outlets); 
b.  Type, location, and number of inlets (jets); 
c.  Type, location, and number of skimmer drains; 
d.  Type, location, and number of filters; 
e.  Type, location, and number of pumps; 
f.  Type, location, and number of lights; 
g.  Type, location, and number of depth markers; 
h.  Entries into pool/spa (steps, stairs, ladders, etc.); 
i.  Type and location of anti-backflow protection, and its location, installed between the city potable water supply and the pool or spa; 
j.  Type and number of chemical feeders (sanitizer dispensers-chlorinators, brominators, etc.); 
k.  Locations of all gauges, flowmeters, etc.; 
l.  Diving boards; 
m.  Lifeguard stands (if required) and life saving equipment; 
n.  Bathhouse and associated appurtenances; 
o.  Fencing, to include materials, height, layout, gates, hardware, etc.; 
p.  Telephone; 
q.  Clock (by spa); 
r.  Description, location, and drawings of all required signage. 
(c)  Inspections. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a newly constructed or remodeled swimming pool or spa at least one preopening or preoperational inspection must be conducted by the regulatory authority. This inspection is to verify that the pool or spa is constructed in accordance with all approved plans and requirements, and the water chemistry meets or exceeds the minimum requirement set forth in this article, prior to its opening and use by the public. 
(d)  Fee. An appropriate fee for plan review, inspection and reinspection shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of section 4-84 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  6, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-87. - Operation of a public swimming pool or spa. 
(a)  If upon inspection at any time the public swimming pool or spa is found not to be constructed in accordance with approved plans, the public swimming pool or spa shall cease operations until adequate evidence is provided to show compliance with this article. 
(b)  A manager of operations, a manager of the premises on which a public swimming pool or spa is located, the owner of a public swimming pool or spa, or the certified pool operator on duty shall not: 
(1)  Knowingly permit a condition to exist that endangers the life, health, or safety of a swimmer or that violates a provision of this article; 
(2)  Knowingly permit a person to occupy a pool or spa who is known to be or suspected of being infected with a transmissible condition of communicable disease; 
(3)  Fail to post any of the required placards or signage containing pool and/or spa regulations and instructions in conspicuous places within a pool or spa area or enclosure, as required. 
(c)  Every public swimming pool and spa shall be free of scum and foreign matter including sediment, dirt, slime, algae, and all other foreign matter that might be conducive to the transmission of disease. Debris shall be removed daily. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  7, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-88. - Manual application of chemicals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall add chemicals manually and directly to the water of any public swimming pool or spa except under special or emergency conditions, or as directly authorized by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to manually add any chemicals directly to the pool or spa waters, bathers shall be excluded from the pool or spa until the chemical is dissolved completely or completely diffused thoroughly throughout the swimming pool or spa water. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  8, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-89. - Water chemistry testing frequency. 
(a)  A test for the disinfectant level, pH, and clarity shall be performed and recorded a minimum of once every four hours that the public swimming pool or spa is open for use. This frequency shall be increased as defined in 25 TAC 265.204 for specific types and uses of pools. 
(b)  In lieu of the above testing frequency, if an automated sanitizer and pH dispensing system is installed and in use, a test for sanitizer and pH shall be conducted and recorded once per day. 
(c)  The operator of a public pool and/or spa shall be required to provide and maintain a test kit which is capable of detecting disinfectant residual by the DPD method (dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine), in parts per million, (ppm). The pH test kit shall be accurate to the nearest 0.2 pH units. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  9, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-90. - Operational records. 
(a)  Proper operating, maintenance and test records shall be maintained for every public swimming pool or spa when in use, and shall be available for inspection by the regulatory authority upon request. 
(b)  Operating records shall include daily figures for at least the following items: 
(1)  Disinfectant residual readings; e.g., free available residual chlorine and total residual chlorine, or equivalent; 
(2)  pH readings; 
(3)  Amounts of chemicals used; 
(4)  Cyanuric acid (if used); 
(5)  Total alkalinity; 
(6)  Readings of any other chemical tests; 
(7)  Water temperature for heated pools and spas; 
(8)  Clarity of the swimming pool water at the deepest point; 
(9)  Maintenance and servicing of equipment; and 
(10)  Space for general comments. 
(c)  Calcium hardness shall be tested and recorded once a month. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  10, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-91. - Requirement of bathers. 
    No person shall be allowed the use of a public swimming pool or spa if he has an infectious/communicable disease, open cuts, wounds, burns, etc., engages in rough or inappropriate activity; brings animals (except guide animals assisting the disabled) into the pool area; purposely spits or blows the nose into the pool/spa; misuses lifesaving equipment; or brings glass (except eyeglasses) into the pool/spa area. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  11, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-92. - Temporary closure of swimming pool/spa. 
(a)  If it is determined by the regulatory authority that the operation or maintenance of the public pool or spa facility constitutes a serious health or safety hazard as specified in 25 TAC 265 for the users, the regulatory authority shall require closure of the pool or spa facility immediately. A public swimming pool or spa facility shall be temporarily closed for use whenever any of the following conditions occur and shall not be reopened for use until the condition has been brought into compliance and the appropriate reinspection fee paid, and a reinspection conducted by the regulatory authority to verify that all hazardous conditions have been eliminated, such as: 
(1)  The amount of a residual disinfectant is less than, or greater than, the minimum and/or maximum amounts specified in 25 TAC 265.204 (a); 
(2)  The pH of the swimming pool/spa water does not comply with the provisions in 25 TAC 265.204 (a); 
(3)  If any of the main drain covers are loose, missing, damaged and/or of a nonapproved anti-vortex design; 
(4)  The clarity of the water does not comply with the provisions in 25 TAC 265.204 (a); 
(5)  The temperature of a heated pool is greater than 98 degrees Fahrenheit or spa water is greater than 104 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(6)  There is malfunction or nonfunction of the recirculation system; 
(7)  If the public swimming pool or spa yard enclosure is found to not be in compliance with the provisions of 25 TAC 265.200; 
(8)  The swimming pool or spa does not conform to the construction permit plans; 
(9)  There is any other condition, which may endanger the health, safety, or welfare of persons using the swimming pool. 
(b)  Failure to pay the required reinspection fees in the instances noted in section 4-84 of this article will result in the immediate suspension of the public swimming pool or spa's permit to operate, and the facility ordered to cease operation immediately. The public swimming pool or spa shall remain closed until the violations are corrected, all required fees are paid, and a reinspection is conducted. 
(c)  The reinspection fee shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of section 4-84 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  12, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-93. - Suspension of operating permit. 
(a)  If the regulatory authority determines that the permitted public swimming pool or spa cannot be properly maintained at the required disinfectant levels, pH levels, water testing, record maintenance, and/or the maintenance of a full time staff member who is a certified pool operator (CPO) any time the facility is open for use, the regulatory authority may suspend the operating permit and order the permit holder to equip or retrofit the pool or spa with a fully automated chemical control system, capable of both monitoring and dispensing sanitizing chemicals and pH maintenance chemicals into the pool or spa, and maintaining those levels at the accepted levels set forth by this article. 
(b)  If the regulatory authority determines that the operation or maintenance of any public swimming pool or spa is such as to constitute an imminent hazard to the health and safety of the public, the operating permit shall be suspended immediately and the swimming pool or spa shall be closed immediately for use and shall remain closed until the necessary remedial action has been completed, the appropriate reinspection fee paid, and a follow-up inspection has been conducted by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  An operating permit that has been suspended may be reissued only upon presentation of evidence that the deficiencies and/or irregularities that caused the suspension have been corrected, and the appropriate reinspection fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  13, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-94. - Closed swimming pools and spas. 
(a)  Upon an order of closure, the public pool or spa operator shall post signs at every entrance that is accessible to patrons, or at least two signs at opposite ends of the pool or spa, that state "pool closed" or "spa closed" in at least four-inch minimum high letters. No individual or person shall enter a public swimming pool or spa, or its enclosure that has been closed by the regulatory authority or its operator, when such signs are posted. 
(b)  The operator of a pool or spa closed by order of the regulatory authority shall secure the pool or spa yard with an enclosure adequate to exclude any unauthorized entry. 
(c)  The regulatory authority shall have the right to lock and/or chain entrances to public swimming pools and/or spas if in the regulatory authority's opinion the facility is dangerous to public health, the operator is not enforcing closure and/or bathers are disregarding warnings. 
(d)  The regulatory authority shall have the right to post signs at a public swimming pool or spa stating that the facility is closed. A person commits an offense if he covers, removes, damages, or alters any sign or notice posted by order of the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  14, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-95. - Abandoned, neglected, inoperable, and hazardous public swimming pools and spas. 
(a)  No owner, operator or person in control of any public swimming pool or spa, permitted or unpermitted, shall suffer or permit the pool or spa to remain in a condition so as to create a public health hazard or a nuisance to the general public, regardless if the pool is open, closed, not in operation, or abandoned. 
(b)  The following conditions are hereby declared a public nuisance: 
(1)  Any time a public swimming pool or spa containing any amount of water shall not maintain water clarity so all parts of the pool or spa bottom can be easily seen. 
(2)  Any time a public swimming pool or spa fails to maintain an adequate fence or barrier around the pool or spa that complies with state law. 
(3)  Any time a public swimming pool or spa is not adequately secured to prevent unauthorized entry. 
(4)  Any time a public swimming pool or spa shall become a harborage or breeding place for insects and/or rodents. 
(c)  When the regulatory authority determines that an imminent risk to public health exists, the regulatory authority shall have the authority, but not an obligation, to enter private property, without notice, to abate a public nuisance thereon by erecting a fence or barrier adequate to prevent entry to a public swimming pool or spa. The regulatory authority shall be able to recover its costs expended to abate the nuisance, including placing a lien upon the real property affected, only after compliance with the procedures for the abatement of dangerous structures. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  15, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-96. - Interfering with or hindering the regulatory authority. 
    It shall be unlawful for any permit holder, owner, certified pool operator, manager, person-in-charge, other employee, or user of a public swimming pool or spa to interfere with or hinder the regulatory authority in the exercise of its duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  16, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 4-97. - Penalty; additional enforcement provisions. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), such offenses being violations of the health and safety ordinance of the city. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for abatement of the nuisance by the city and charging the cost of such against the owner of the property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (a) of this section any violation of any provision of this article which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purpose. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this article, the city may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 54 which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(d)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-09,  17, 4-23-07) 
Chapter 5 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; utilities, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Budgets, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  102.001 et seq.; competitive bidding, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  252.001 et seq. and 271.901. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Water supply district. 
(a)  The services of the city tax collector are hereby made available to the county water supply district. 
(b)  The city tax collector shall be authorized to act as and shall perform the duties of the tax collector of the county water supply district all in accordance with law. 
(Code 1975,  5-11, 5-12) 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 14. 
Secs. 5-2-5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 5-26-5-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALES AND USE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Ordinance 4-1969, the voters of the city, at an election held August 5, 1969, approved a one (1) percent city sales and use tax as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code  321.001 et seq. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; utilities, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 5-41. - Telecommunication services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(c)  The city secretary shall forward to the state comptroller by United States registered mail a copy of this division along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote and discussion on this division. 
(Ord. No. 2-87,  1, 4-13-87) 
State Law reference- Telecommunications exemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  321.210. 
Secs. 5-42-5-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  2, adopted April, 13, 2015, repealed the former division 3,  5-56-5-61, and enacted a new division 3 as set out herein. The former division 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ordinance No. 11-88,  1-6, adopted August 8, 1988. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  351.001 et seq. 

Sec. 5-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City shall mean the City of Decatur, Texas. 
    City attorney shall mean the city attorney of the City of Decatur or his or her designated representative, or such other attorney as designated by the city. 
    City auditor shall mean the city auditor of the City of Decatur or his or her designated representative, or such other person designated by the city to act in the capacity of city auditor. 
    Consideration shall mean the cost of a room, sleeping space, bed, or other facility or space in a hotel only if such room sleeping space, bed, or other facility or space is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and such cost is two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, but shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room, sleeping space, bed, or other facility or space for occupancy. 
    Director shall mean the finance director of the City of Decatur, or his or her designee. 
    Hotel shall mean a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or bed and breakfast. The term does not include: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by Section 61.003, Education Code, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution; or 
(3)  An oilfield portable unit, as defined by Section 152.001 of the Texas Tax Code. 
    Interruption of payment shall mean a breach of the obligation to make continuous timely payment for one (1) or more days or parts of a day within a period of thirty (30) consecutive days of occupancy. 
    Lodging provider [shall mean] any person owning, operating, managing or controlling a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel and who is subject to collecting and remitting the tax imposed upon guests. 
    Occupancy [shall mean] the exclusive use or possession, or the exclusive right to use or possess, any room or rooms in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
    Occupant or guest [shall mean] any individual, corporation, governmental agency, partnership or association, who has paid consideration for the exclusive right to use, possess or has the exclusive right to use or possess any room or rooms of sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concessions, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
    Oilfield portable unit shall mean means a bunkhouse, manufactured home, trailer, or semitrailer that: 
(1)  Is not a travel trailer, as defined by Section 502.166(e), Transportation Code; 
(2)  Is designed to be used for temporary lodging or as temporary office space; 
(3)  Is used exclusively at any oil, gas, water disposal, or injection well site to provide to well site employees, contractors, or other workers sleeping accommodations or temporary work space, including office space; and 
(4)  Does not require attachment to a foundation or to real property to be functional. 
    Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period. 
    Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarter or quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February, and March, and the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
    Revenue shall include any interest derived from the revenue or tax levied on hotel occupancy pursuant to Texas law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  1, 4-13-15) 
Sec. 5-57. - Levy of tax and rate. 
(a)  Tax rate. There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room ordinarily used as a sleeping room furnished by any hotel within the city where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more each day, such tax to be equal to the maximum tax as is now or as hereafter permitted by state law. This tax shall be levied on all occupancy except as specifically exempted by state law or this division. 
(b)  Room price or cost of occupancy. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel, the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person, except for those services related to cleaning and readying the room for use or possession, any tax assessed by any other governmental agency for occupancy of the room, or the cost of any other products or services not included in or allowed as a part of the price of a room. 
(c)  Extraterritorial jurisdiction. Pursuant to state law, the tax authorized by this division shall be imposed on all hotels located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Decatur; provided that the combined rate of state, county, and municipal hotel occupancy taxes in the extraterritorial jurisdiction does not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the price paid for a room in the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  1, 4-13-15) 
Sec. 5-58. - Collection; remittance; collection upon sale or purchase of a hotel. 
(a)  Collection. Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel, shall collect the tax imposed in this division and pay and report the as required by this division. The director shall provide written notification to the city attorney of delinquent accounts that are thirty (30) days delinquent in the payment of taxes in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more or who have failed to report. The city attorney is authorized to take all necessary legal action, including filing litigation, upon authorization by the city council. 
(b)  Remittance. The revenue obtained by a hotel as a result of this tax shall be collected by the hotel and paid to the city monthly. A report shall be filed with the city in the form required by the director to accurately reflect the amount of taxes owed and revenue obtained. The tax and report shall be submitted to the city on or before 5:00 p.m. on the twentieth (20th) day following the last day of each reporting period. The director shall have the authority to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively report and collect, the tax, penalty and/or interest levied by this division and state law. If the report is filed or tax is paid after the due date required by this division, in addition to the amount of tax due hereunder, a penalty shall be imposed as follows: 
(1)  If the report and/or tax are received by the city within ten (10) days following the due date, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due shall be paid to the city. 
(2)  If the report and/or tax are received by the city on or after the eleventh (11th) day after the due date, a penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount due shall be paid to the city. 
(c)  Collection procedures-Sale and purchase of hotel. 
(1)  If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this division is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount due until the seller provides a receipt by the director showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate showing that no tax is due. 
(2)  The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price is liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(3)  The director shall issue the certificate or statement not later than the sixtieth (60th) day after the date that he/she receives the request. Failure of the director to timely provide the certificate or statement required by this section shall release the purchaser from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this division and state law is liable to the city for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  1, 4-13-15) 
Sec. 5-59. - Exemptions and refunds. 
(a)  Exemptions. This division does not impose a tax on any of the following occupants: 
(1)  Qualifying religious, charitable or educational entities. A corporation or association that is organized and operated exclusively for a religious, charitable, or educational purpose if no part of the net earnings of the corporation or association inure to the benefit of a private shareholder or individual. For purposes of this exemption, a public or private institution of higher education is organized and operated exclusively for an educational purpose only if the institution is defined as a Texas institution of higher education or as a Texas private or independent institution of higher education under any subdivision of Section 61.003, Texas Education Code, as amended. 
(2)  United States Government. The United States Government agencies and their officers or employees when traveling or otherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity. 
(3)  Military personnel. Military personnel traveling on official military business. 
(4)  Qualifying State of Texas entities. The State of Texas, or any agency, institution (excluding state educational institutions), board or commission of the State of Texas and their officers or employees when traveling or otherwise engaged in the course of official duties. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a state governmental entity described by this section shall pay the tax imposed by this chapter but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(5)  Qualifying state officer or employee. A state officer or employee of a state governmental entity who is entitled to reimbursement for the costs of lodging and for whom a special provision or exception to the general rate of reimbursement under the General Appropriates Act applies and who is provided with photo identification verifying the identity and exempt status of the person is exempt from the payment of the tax. 
(6)  Diplomatic personnel. Diplomatic personnel who present a tax exemption card issued by the United States Department of State. 
(7)  Occupants qualifying as permanent residents. Occupants whose use, possession or whose right to use or possession of a hotel sleeping room extends for at least thirty (30) consecutive days and where there is no interruption of payment for the period as defined herein, and where such person has complied with the requirement to execute a written agreement for thirty (30) days of consecutive use prior to commencing such use or possession as required by the Texas State Comptroller. 
(8)  Exemption certificate received in good faith. The right to use or possess a room in a hotel is exempt from taxation under this chapter if the person required to collect the tax receives, in good faith from a guest, an exemption certificate stating the following qualifications for an exemption: the person is a state officer or employee of a state governmental entity for whom a special provision or exception to the general rate of reimbursement under the General Appropriations Act applies and who is provided with photo identification verifying the identity and exempt status of the person is not required to pay the tax and is not entitled to a refund. 
(b)  Refunds. Refunds are allowed as provided by state law and shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Time limitation. A governmental entity claiming a refund must file a refund claim with the city only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. Claims filed outside of this time period will not be reimbursed. 
(2)  Refund form. In order to receive a refund, the governmental entity entitled to the refund shall file a refund claim on a form provided by the city and containing the information required by the city as prescribed by the rules of the state comptroller. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  1, 4-13-15) 
Sec. 5-60. - Availability of records, reports, and payments. 
(a)  Records inspection. Each person required to collect the tax must make records available for inspection by the city auditor. The director and/or city auditor shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to determine the correctness of a report filed under this division or the amount of taxes due under this division. The director shall have authority to require additional information to determine the correctness of a report filed under this division or the amount of taxes due under this division. The director and/or city auditor shall report any amount of taxes, penalty and/or interest found due to the director for collection by the city. 
(b)  Reports. Every person required to collect the tax imposed in this division shall file a monthly report with the director in the form required by the director accurately reflecting the amount of taxes owed, the amount collected, and the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month. This report shall be filed with the director no later than ten (10) days following the reported monthly period. The person filing the report shall pay the tax due at the time of filing such report. 
(c)  Required records/reports. Records required by this section shall include, but not be limited to, guest folios, tax exemption certificates, and any original documents such as posting ledgers and rate and stay adjustment reports, and any other documents necessary to provide the information on the city hotel occupancy tax reporting form required by the director and the State of Texas form for reporting hotel occupancy tax to the comptroller's office. These reports may be retained in any retrievable format, including but not limited to electronic form and shall be maintained for a period of not less than four (4) years; and shall be available for inspection upon request by any employee, agent, officer or representative of the city at all reasonable times. Any adjustments or allowances made or granted shall be reported to the City of Decatur on a form provided by the director. 
(d)  Compliance. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to perform an act required by this division, including but not limited to compliance with the requirements to collect, pay and accurately report, taxes as required by this chapter and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  1, 4-13-15) 
Sec. 5-61. - Tax lien. 
(a)  Tax lien. Any hotel as defined by Texas Tax Code Section 156.001(1), which fails to pay all hotel occupancy taxes or fails to file a tax report in a timely fashion as provided in this division 3, including without limitation, in accordance with section 5-60 herein, shall stand charged with a tax lien in favor of the City of Decatur which lien shall attach to and run with the land. The tax lien shall attach to the property of a person liable for tax on the day the tax becomes due and payable and this tax lien, including the tax assessed, together with any penalties provided by statute, shall be a prior and superior lien on all property of the motel or hotel. 
(b)  Notice. The director shall issue a tax lien notice which shall be mailed to the owner of the property at the owner's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, and to any other persons with an interest, including but not limited to persons managing, controlling, or operating the hotel as well as all recorded lien holders as reflected by the Wise County clerk's real property records. Should the property owner fail to pay the delinquent hotel occupancy taxes within ten (10) days of the date of the notice the director shall file the tax lien including all hotel occupancy taxes owed to date including interest, if any, and cost of filing the lien with the Wise County clerk's office. Such lien shall be second only to ad valorem tax liens and liens for street improvements, and any other lien determined to be superior as a matter of law and the amount thereof shall bear interest that the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date the statement is filed in accordance with the law. Suit may be instituted and recovered and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city in accordance with the law. A certified copy of the tax lien filed with the county clerk shall be prima facie proof of the amount owed. 
(c)  Remedies cumulative. The remedies allowed by this section are not exclusive but in addition to remedies provided by this Code, Texas Tax Code, Section 351.004, as amended or renumbered, and any other remedies provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  1, 4-13-15) 
Sec. 5-62. - Suit, estimate and audit. 
(a)  Suit. The city attorney or other attorney acting on behalf of the city is authorized to bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter and pay the collections over to the city and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due in order to collect the tax not paid or may enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed in accordance with a court order. In addition to the amount of any tax owed under this chapter, the person is liable to the city for: 
(1)  The city's reasonable attorney's fees; 
(2)  The costs of an inspection or an audit conducted under this section as determined by the city using a reasonable rate, but only if the tax has been delinquent for at least two (2) complete municipal fiscal quarters at the time the audit is conducted; and 
(3)  A penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent of the total amount of the tax owed. 
(b)  Audit. If the person required to file a tax report under this Chapter does not file the report as required by the city, the city attorney or other attorney acting for the city may determine the amount of tax due under this chapter by: 
(1)  Conducting an audit of each hotel in relation to which the person did not file the report as required by this division; or 
(2)  Using the tax report filed for the appropriate reporting period under Section 156.151 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
    The authority to conduct an audit under this section is in addition to any other audit authority provided by statute, charter, or ordinance. 
(d)  Failure to file report. If a person fails to a file a tax report as required under state law or this section for the required reporting period, the city attorney or other attorney acting for the city may estimate the amount of tax due by using the tax reports in relation to the hotel that were filed during the previous calendar year under this division or state law. An estimate made under this section is prima facie evidence of the amount of tax due for that period in relation to that hotel. 
(e)  Statute of limitations. A limitation period relating to the time allowed to assess taxes and bring a suit to collect taxes does not apply to a tax imposed under this chapter or to a suit brought under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  1, 4-13-15) 
Sec. 5-63. - Cumulative penalties. 
(a)  Conduct unlawful. It shall be unlawful and a person shall commit an offense if such person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Fails to collect the tax imposed by this division; 
(2)  Fails to file a report as required by this division; 
(3)  Fails to pay the director the tax when payment is due; 
(4)  Files a false report; or 
(5)  Fails to comply with this division when purchasing a hotel. 
(b)  Fine. An offense committed under subsection (a) of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Penalty. In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under subsection (b) of this section and/or state law, a person shall pay five (5) percent of the tax due as a penalty if the person fails to pay the tax or file the report as required by this division by the due date. An additional penalty of five (5) percent of the tax due shall be paid if the tax is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date the tax was due. Another penalty of five (5) percent of the tax due shall be paid if the tax is not paid within sixty (60) days from the date the tax was due. The penalties provided by this subsection may never be less than five dollars ($5.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date the tax was due. 
(d)  Attorney's fees. In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a Person is liable to the city for all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in enforcing this division against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person under this article. 
(e)  Settlement. The director may release, relinquish, compromise and/or settle the penalty and/or interest due as a result of an act or omission of an employee or officer of the city. 
(f)  No limitation imposed. This section shall not be construed to limit or restrict the city council's powers to release, relinquish, compromise and/or settle the penalty and/or interest due for delinquent hotel occupancy taxes as provided by the Texas Constitution or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-04,  1, 4-13-15) 
Chapter 6 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency management,  2-291, et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; building code adopted,  4-32; electrical code adopted,  4-51; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; solid waste, Ch. 12; utilities, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  342.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Standing arson reward offered. 
    The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-53) 
Secs. 6-2-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees,  2-151 et seq. 
State Law reference- State fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code  417.001 et seq. 

Sec. 6-26. - Office created; appointment; qualifications; removal. 
    The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, the fire marshal reporting directly to the mayor and city council. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office, and shall be removed only for cause. 
(Code 1975,  6-21) 
Sec. 6-27. - Investigations generally; records. 
    The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics, and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Code 1975,  6-22) 
Sec. 6-28. - Taking of testimony; arrest; etc. 
    The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. If he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offenses or either of them and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1975,  6-23) 
Sec. 6-29. - Witnesses; testimony, oaths. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Code 1975,  6-24) 
Sec. 6-30. - Refusal to testify; penalty. 
    Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear to testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such demeanor shall be fined in a sum not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00); provided, however, that any person so convicted shall have the right to appeal. 
(Code 1975,  6-25) 
Sec. 6-31. - Private investigations. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private; and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held; and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1975,  6-26) 
Sec. 6-32. - May examine premises. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1975,  6-27) 
Sec. 6-33. - Right of entry; remedial actions; etc. 
    The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city. It shall be his duty, quarterly or more often, to enter upon and make, or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied; and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. If the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1975,  6-28) 
Sec. 6-34. - Maintaining dangerous building. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises to keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause it is especially liable to fire and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein. 
(Code 1975,  6-29) 
Sec. 6-35. - Improper heating and lighting equipment. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises to keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace or other heating appliances of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others, or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires, or which shall create conditions dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the maintainor thereof. 
(Code 1975,  6-30) 
Sec. 6-36. - Prosecution only after notice. 
    No prosecution shall be brought under sections 6-34 and 6-35 until the order provided for in section 6-33 be given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(Code 1975,  6-31) 
Sec. 6-37. - Recovery of penalties. 
    The penalties provided for in this article shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures and punishments for offenses against the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-32) 
Sec. 6-38. - Prosecutions, etc.; manner. 
    All misdemeanors provided for in this article shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures herein provided for shall be recovered and enforced, in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, penalties and punishments for offenses generally against the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-34) 
Secs. 6-39-6-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; utilities, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 6-56. - Fire prevention code adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided, that certain code known as the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with local amendments as provided in Exhibit A including Appendix Chapters (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H) and (I), as published by the International Code Council, except such portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsections (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G) and (H), below. One (1) copy of said code and appendices shall be maintained on file with the office of the city secretary. Said above-named code with local amendments and appendix chapters are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city, including all provisions for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor (in such amounts as set forth and from time to time amended in the City of Decatur Fee Schedule Ordinance). 
(b)  Section 101.1 of said International Fire Code and Appendices is hereby amended to substitute "City of Decatur, Texas" for [name of jurisdiction]. 
(c)  Section 109.3 of said International Fire Code and Appendices is hereby amended to substitute "Class C. Misdemeanor" for [specify offense], to substitute "Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00)" for [AMOUNT], and to substitute "Zero (0) Days" for (number of days). 
(d)  Section 111.4 of said International Fire Code and Appendices is hereby amended and completed to provide for a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00). 
(e)  The geographic limits referred to in Section 3204.3.1.1 of said International Fire Code and Appendices is hereby established as the Incorporated City Limits of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
(f)  The geographic limits referred to in Section 3404.2.9.5.1 of said International Fire Code and Appendices is hereby established as the Incorporated City Limits of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
(g)  The geographic limits referred to in Section 3406.2.4.4 of said International Fire Code and Appendices is hereby established as the Incorporated City Limits of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
(h)  The geographic limits referred to in Section 3804.2 of said International Fire Code and Appendices is hereby established as the Incorporated City Limits of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
(Code 1975,  6-1; Ord. No. 2007-01-01, 1-8-07; Ord. No. 2016-06-11,  2, 6-27-16) 
Sec. 6-57. - Enforcement. 
    The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the fire department of the city, under the supervision of the fire chief. The fire chief shall be ex officio chief of the fire prevention bureau. The fire chief may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(Code 1975,  6-2) 
Sec. 6-58. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, it shall mean the City of Decatur. 
(b)  Whenever the word "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, it shall mean the city attorney of the City of Decatur. 
(Code 1975,  6-3) 
Sec. 6-59. - Storage of explosives, blasting agents prohibited. 
    Storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited in the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-4) 
Sec. 6-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-01-01, adopted January 8, 2007, repealed  6-60, which pertained to storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks prohibited and derived from  6-5 of the 1975 Code. 
Sec. 6-61. - Bulk storage of liquefied gases restricted. 
    The bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted in the city limits as provided in the fire code adopted in section 6-56. 
(Code 1975,  6-6) 
Sec. 6-62. - Modifications. 
    The fire chief, with approval of the council, shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1975,  6-7) 
Sec. 6-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-06-11,  2, adopted June 27, 2016, repealed  6-63, which pertained to appeals and derived from Code 1975,  6-8. 
Sec. 6-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-06-11,  2, adopted June 27, 2016, repealed  6-64, which pertained to new materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits and derived from Code 1975,  6-9. 
Sec. 6-65. - Violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the fire code adopted in section 6-56 or fail to comply therewith, or violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or to build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken or fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. 
    All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1975,  6-10) 
Sec. 6-66. - Sale, possession, discharge of fireworks prohibited; exception; permit. 
(a)  No person shall cast, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. 
(b)  No person shall exhibit or have in his possession, with intent to give away, sell, or offer to sell within the city any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the sale, storage or use of railroad track torpedoes, or other signaling devices used by railroads, nor to the sale, use, or storage of flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in photographer's supplies, or prevent any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind if conducted under proper police supervision after application is made and permit issued by the fire chief for such demonstrations. The permit shall not be granted unless such demonstration or display shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged, or fired as in the opinion of the fire chief after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. 
(Code 1975,  6-35-6-37) 
Cross reference- Miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 8. 
Chapter 6.5 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 

Sec. 6.5-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A. Water Code,  16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Decatur, Texas, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 1,  A, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-2. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of City of Decatur are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 1,  B, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 1,  C, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 1,  D, 11-14-11) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zones A, M, and/or E. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See "flood elevation study". 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. See "regulatory floodway". 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard". 
    Start of construction. (For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 2, 11-14-11) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.5-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of City of Decatur. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 3,  A, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-6. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), Community Number, 480678, dated December 16, 2011 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 3,  B, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-7. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 3,  C, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-8. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 3,  D, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 3,  E, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-10. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 3,  F, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-11. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 3,  G, 11-14-11) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 6.5-12. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The city engineer or his designated representative is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 4,  A, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-13. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 6.5-6, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 4,  B, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-14. - Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(a)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(c)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 6.5-17(2); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(e)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 6.5-13(1). 
(2)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(a)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(b)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(c)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(d)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(e)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(f)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(g)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(h)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(i)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 4,  C, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-15. - Variance procedures. 
(1)  the appeal board, which shall consist of a quorum of the city council, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be administratively issued by the floodplain administrator for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 6.5-14(2) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 6.5-3). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(a)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in section 6.5-15(1)-(9) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 4,  D, 11-14-11) 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 6.5-16. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 5,  A, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-17. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 6.5-6 (ii) section 6.5-13(8), or (iii) section 6.5-18(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 6.5-14(1)a., is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is two (2) feet or above the base flood elevation, or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 5,  B, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-18. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 6.5-2, 6.5-3 and 6.5-4 of this chapter. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 6.5-7; section 6.5-14; and the provisions of Article IV of this chapter. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 6.5-6 or section 6.5-13(8) of this article. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 5,  C, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-19. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 5,  D, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 6.5-20. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11-17, art. 5,  E, 11-14-11) 
Chapter 7 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 3; dog license required,  3-28; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; licensing of electricians,  4-57 et seq.; finance and taxation, Ch. 5; sales and use tax,  5-41 et seq.; hotel occupancy tax,  5-56 et seq.; regulation of trucks,  13-46 et seq.; sales, Ch. 11; zoning, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 03-07-09,  2, August 11, 2003, repealed  7-26-7-39 in their entirety and added new  7-26-7-33 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such sections pertained to itinerant vendors and photographers, peddlers and solicitors and derived from  4-1-4-11 of the 1975 Code; Ord. No 7-92,  1-5, 8-10-92. 

Sec. 7-26. - Purpose. 
    That this Chapter is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the state and of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience, and protection of the city and the citizens thereof, and all of the provisions of this Chapter shall be constructed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 03-07-09,  2, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 7-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable purpose means the solicitation of money or property, for the benefit of a charity, philanthropy, or non-profit organization or for the poor, underprivileged, needy, crippled, or handicapped persons; the teaching of patriotism or assistance to veterans or veteran's organizations; or for existing educational institutions or for the establishment or endowment of educational institutions. Non-profit organizations shall include but not be limited to, Multiple Sclerosis, American Heart Association, Muscular Dystrophy, American Cancer Society, Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts, etc. 
    City means the City of Decatur, Texas. 
    Consumer means an individual who acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal, family or household purposes. 
    Parkway shall mean the area between the edge of the designated street and the adjacent owner's property line. 
    Peddler, solicitor, or person means any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, trust, society, religious sect, organization, league, or other legal entity and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or similar representative. 
    Religious organization is an organization that is dedicated to the support of a church, religious society, or any other religious sect, group, or order. 
    Sidewalk means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
    Solicitation means conduct whereby a person or its agent, member, or representative, solicits property, financial aid, money, or any article representing monetary value; or sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service, publication, ticket, advertisement, or subscription. Solicitation shall include persons engaged in the delivery of handbills or circulars door to door for the solicitation of money, products, services or other items of pecuniary value. An offer of membership in any organization is expressly excluded. 
    Street means the portion of the street that is paved, designated, or used for vehicular traffic, and all areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes, which includes parkways, alleys, and sidewalks. 
    Traffic island means a barrier within a street or roadway to exclude vehicles, designated for the purpose of separating or directing streams of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 03-07-09,  2, 8-11-03) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 7-28. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt or to peddle, sell, solicit, canvass, or take orders for any services, wares, merchandise, or goods, or any article of value, including plants, flowers, paintings, novelties, painting house numbers on streets, firewood, books, magazines, photographs, or any articles for future delivery, on a sidewalk, parking lot or parkway within the city or from door to door without having first obtained a permit therefore from the city. 
(2)  Each person engaged in peddling or soliciting or selling as defined in paragraph (1) above must have a permit issued under the terms of this section, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be reproduced nor assigned nor transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction shall render the permit void. 
(3)  Each permit shall expire as of the date noted thereon, which date shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and such permit shall indicate the hours when peddling, solicitation and selling within the city is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person who shall solicit funds in the city to represent in connection with such solicitation of funds that the issuance of a permit or identification card by the city constitutes an endorsement thereof. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds for a purpose other than that set out in the registration statement or application upon which the permit was issued. 
(6)  A permit shall not be issued to any person under thirteen (13) years of age. 
(7)  Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, regardless of whether the person making the solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale. 
(b)  Permit application. Every person desiring to solicit in Decatur shall unless otherwise excepted apply for a permit from the police department. Each application for a permit required by this section shall be in writing, under oath, notarized and shall set out the following: 
(1)  Name of the applicant, with his permanent residence; 
(2)  Whether the person represents a partnership, corporation or association, and: 
a.  The business address and telephone number of the applicant; 
b.  If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone number of each partner; 
c.  If a corporation, the person applying shall state whether it is organized under the laws of Texas or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location, telephone number, name of the individual in charge of the Decatur office of such corporation, and the names and addresses of all officers and directors or trustees of said corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation; 
d.  If an association, the application shall show the association's principal business address and telephone number, if any, and shall show names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of all members of the association unless they exceed ten (10) in number, in which case the application shall so state and the person registering may alternatively list the names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and directors or trustees of the association. If the association is part of a multistate organization or association, the mailing address and business locations of its local office. 
(3)  Name and address of each person to solicit under the permit; 
(4)  The names mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct charge or control of the solicitation of funds. 
(5)  The kind, type and character of goods or services he proposes to offer for sale, including the name brand, manufacturer and distributor of goods and commodities and the name, publisher and distributor of all books, magazines or periodicals to be offered for sale; 
(6)  Names and addresses of five (5) persons as references, excluding relatives and persons living with the applicant; 
(7)  How often the applicant will solicit during the year; 
(8)  The time period within which the solicitation of funds is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion. 
(9)  A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds is to be accomplished. 
(10)  The names of any cities where applicant has worked within the previous six (6) months; 
(11)  Whether the applicant, or any solicitor listed in the application, has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(12)  State driver's license number or a state approved identification card number of applicant and each solicitor; 
(13)  Social security number of applicant and each solicitor. 
(c)  Permit attachments. In addition, there shall be attached to each application for a permit, the following: 
(1)  Two (2) recent photographic likenesses of the applicant's face, and any solicitor soliciting under said permit, which photographs shall not exceed one (1) inch square in size. 
(2)  A certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, sales manager, assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works, sells or solicits stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company. 
(3)  A reference to a recognized financial rating publication, which reference shall show the page on which the company's or firm's financial standing can be found; or a letter or a certificate from an association or organization which has as its purpose the protection of citizens of the United States against illegal or unsavory business practices stating that the firm or company is a member in good standing of such association or organization. 
(4)  In the event that the applicant is an individual who is not canvassing, selling or soliciting for any firm or company, letters of recommendation from two (2) citizens of the applicant's permanent residence shall be submitted. 
(d)  Application fee. The application shall be accompanied by a thirty-five dollar ($35.00) fee for the original solicitor or applicant, plus a thirty-five dollar ($35.00) fee for each additional solicitor, for the investigation and administration of the provisions of this chapter. This fee shall be paid to the city police department. In addition, the applicant shall pay a fifteen dollar ($15.00) fee for each identification card issued. 
(e)  Issuance of permit. A permit applied for under this chapter shall be issued by the city permits and inspections department within ten (10) days after the application is completed and filed, unless it is determined that the applicant has provided false or incomplete information on its application. A permit requested under this chapter shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed six (6) months. An expired permit may be renewed under the same terms and conditions as the original application and subject to the same fees. 
(f)  Form of permit. Each permit shall be printed in black except that the following shall be printed prominently thereon in red: "The issuance of the permit is not an endorsement by the City of Decatur or any of its officers or employees." Each permit shall bear a permit number, which is the same as the file containing the application filed by the applicant. 
(g)  Permit to be displayed. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit in the city without carrying the identification card and displaying the permit required, by this section on his person, in plain view, while engaged in such soliciting or selling. 
(h)  Exhibiting permit. Every solicitor or peddler or seller shall identify himself as a salesman upon approaching a citizen in a public place or at a private dwelling and explain his purpose, whether it be direct sales, solicitation or orders of the demonstration of goods or merchandise, or any combination of purposes thereof, and shall produce for inspection, upon request by any person, the solicitor's permit issued by this city. 
(i)  Solicitors' identification cards. Each identification card issued by the city police department shall bear the name of the applicant, the application number, the name of the solicitor, or agent, and the expiration date of the permit. It is your duty to verify all information given to you by this solicitor. The applicant shall provide, by a separate list, the names and addresses of all agents or employees for whom identification cards are to be issued. 
(j)  Responsibility for acts of solicitors. The recipient of a permit or named applicant shall be responsible for the acts of his/her authorized representatives or solicitors listed in permit application in connection with solicitation activities. In this regard, the recipient of the permit shall actively supervise all persons listed in the permit application, which supervision shall include but not be limited to remaining within the corporate city limits during all solicitation activity and responding promptly (within ten minutes) to calls by city representatives relative to the solicitation activity which may include responding to an on-site complaint from a citizen. 
(k)  Revocation of permit. 
(1)  If, after the permit required by this section has been issued, the building official, or his authorized designee, finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, or the permit has been reproduced or transferred or assigned to another person or the applicant has led someone to believe the permit is an endorsement of the applicant's product or service by the city, or in the event of fraud or misrepresentation by the permit holder, or in the event of conviction of the permit holder of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or in the event the permit holder has failed to furnish the items required by this chapter, such permit may be revoked by the city building official or his authorized designee. 
(2)  If a police officer or the code enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that a solicitor has engaged in prohibited conduct as defined by this chapter, the officer may revoke the permit of the permit holder. 
(3)  If more than one (1) complaint of misconduct by a solicitor or group of solicitors working for the same company is received, the permit may be immediately revoked by the city. 
(l)  Appeal from denial or revocation of permit. Should an applicant be denied a permit, or have a permit revoked, he may appeal that action to the city council of the City of Decatur by submitting a letter to the chief of police within ten (10) days to complain of that action. A hearing of the denial will then be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the city council, or a special meeting of the city council, to be held within fifteen (15) days of the appeal. The city council shall render a decision on the appeal within one (1) day of the date of the hearing. Such hearing shall be an administrative hearing. Adherence to formal rules of evidence shall not be required. The decision of the city council shall be final and binding. No new application for a permit will be considered for six (6) months after denial or revocation, unless said denial or revocation is without prejudice or is conditional and the conditions have been satisfied as determined by the city building official. 
(m)  Exemptions. 
(1)  The following persons engaged in the activities set out in paragraphs a. through d. below in the City of Decatur shall first register with the permits and inspections department by filling out a form to be promulgated by the city buildings and inspections department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and by furnishing proof that he is actually engaged in such activity in the city, and the city building official shall issue to such person a registration certificate exempting him from the terms and conditions of this section and from paying a fee therefore, namely: 
a.  Public utility companies or others operating under a franchise granted by the city; 
b.  Commercial agents dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of business; and 
c.  Insurance salesmen, real estate salesmen and others licensed by the state. 
d.  Local civic organizations engaged in the sponsorship of exhibitions, fairs, or other similar events at which goods and merchandise may be sold or traded. 
(2)  Solicitations related to children's activities, including but not limited to Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, and Big Brothers and Sisters, which may involve children under the age of thirteen (13). Children under the age of thirteen (13) may participate in such activities to the extent they are actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other adult person, at least eighteen (18) years of age, who is responsible for the well being of the child. 
(3)  Religious, political or non-profit organizations and their representatives distributing handbills or pamphlets only for the purpose of communicating issues of general interest to the public need not register with the city permits and inspections department or pay a permit fee. A donation received from the distribution of handbills or pamphlets does not affect this exemption. 
(4)  Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to persons selling and dealing in the same within the city. 
(n)  Bond. Each person engaging in solicitation activities requiring cash deposits or taking orders on delivery purchases (COD) or who requires a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the city a cash bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), naming the applicant for the permit as principal. The bond shall be in full force and effect for one (1) year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless otherwise extended by demand of the city due to the revocation of the permit, or an anticipated delivery date beyond twelve (12) months, in order to protect the citizens of the City of Decatur from potential losses associated with such solicitations. 
(Ord. No. 03-07-09,  2, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 7-29. - Prohibited location, activities and conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item or service in the following places in the city: 
(1)  On any public street or alley or traffic island; or 
(2)  Any residence which shall exhibit in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence containing the words "NO SOLICITORS." The letters shall be not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of an inch in height and should be displayed on a weather proof card not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct or hinder the free flow of traffic in the lawful use of the street or free passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk. No solicitations, sales, or distribution of merchandise, products, or service shall be offered or made to occupants of motor vehicles moving or stopped in traffic on a public street or alley. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person engaged in solicitation to: 
(1)  Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation; 
(2)  Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation; 
(3)  Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or buy anything from that solicitor; 
(4)  Represent the issuance of any permit or registration under this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation; 
(5)  Remove, deface, or render illegible a card placed by the occupant of a residence pursuant to (a)(2) above. 
(6)  Go on property upon which the owner of the property or the person controlling the property has posted signs prohibiting solicitation; or 
(7)  Remain on property after the property owner, or the property owner's designee, representative or agent, has instructed the solicitor to leave. 
(d)  No solicitor, or person working on his or her behalf, shall shout, make an outcry, blow a horn or whistle, or use any sound device, including any sound amplifying system, upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places of the city, or otherwise be in violation of the city's noise ordinance. 
(e)  No person shall engage in solicitation through the delivery of handbills or circulars by placing said handbills or circulars on motor vehicles, public utility posts, or other location such that the same constitutes littering under Chapter 365 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use children thirteen (13) years of age or younger for solicitation activities, unless otherwise expressly permitted herein, unless such children are actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other adult person at least eighteen (18) years of age who is registered as provided herein. For purposes of this section, actively supervised means that the adult person shall be within one hundred (100) feet of all children thirteen (13) years of age or younger for whom the adult person is responsible at all times when the children are engaged in solicitation activities. 
(g)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this chapter if the person is occupying the public right-of-way for the purpose of selling newspapers or publications or other printed material which deal with the dissemination of information or opinion; however, this defense is not available if said act occurred upon the paved surface or shoulder of any public street, highway or road. 
(Ord. No. 03-07-09,  2, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 7-30. - Times when soliciting prohibited. 
    No person shall peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item or service at a private residence in the City of Decatur after sunset on any day until 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the transaction is the result of a request made to such person by the occupant of such private residence. "Sunset" means the time of day identified by the National Weather Service as the time for sunset for that day for the city. There shall be no solicitations on Sunday, New Years Day, Fourth of July, Memorial Day (observed), Labor Day (observed), Thanksgiving, or Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 03-07-09,  2, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 7-31. - Consumers right to cancel. 
(a)  The merchant, peddler, or seller shall provide to the consumer in writing the right to cancel a solicitation transaction made in person or by telephone in which the consideration exceeds five dollars ($5.00), until midnight of the third business day after the day on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase in a solicitation transaction. For purposes of a telephone solicitation, date of transaction means the day that the consumer receives the goods, services, or realty purchased in a solicitation transaction. 
(b)  If the consumer chooses to cancel the solicitation transaction, notification by mail shall be considered given at the time mailed as evidenced by the postmark; notification by telegram shall be considered given at the time filed for transmission; and notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time delivered to the merchant's designated place of business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a merchant, peddler, or seller to refuse to allow the customer to cancel the solicitation transaction. 
(d)  Cancellations authorized, and the procedure and notice requirements set forth in Chapter 39 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code, as it may be amended, are applicable to this section, for transactions applicable thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 03-07-09,  2, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 7-32. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for proof of any offense defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-07-09,  2, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 7-33. - Public disclosure. 
    All applications, whether or not a permit has been issued, shall be a public record and shall be available for inspection by members of the public during regular business hours, and copies may be obtained at cost. 
(Ord. No. 03-07-09,  2, 8-11-03) 
Secs. 7-34-7-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OIL AND GAS WELLS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-09-14,  1, adopted January 26, 2004, amended article III by replacing it with provisions intended for use as  7-56-7-75. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 7-56-7-63, 7-71-7-77, 7-86-7-90. Former article III pertained to similar provisions and derived from  4-31-4-61, 4-63-4-75 of the 1975 Code; Ord. No. 8-92, 9-14-92; Ord. No. 11-92, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 12-98, 7-13-98. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-56. - Purpose. 
    The exploration, development, and production of gas and oil in the city is an activity which necessitates reasonable regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and regulations for present and future operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing of gas and oil and other substances produced in association with gas and oil within the city to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public; minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral resources. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-57. - Definitions. 
    All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of gas and oil wells not specifically defined in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable gas and oil industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandonment means "abandonment" as defined by the Texas Railroad Commission and includes the plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this article. 
    Blowout preventer means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well causing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portions thereof." 
    Cathodic protection means an electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current to the structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential in the immunity region. The required cathodic protection current is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an impressed current system. 
    City means the City of Decatur. 
    City Code means the Code of the City of Decatur. 
    City attorney means the City Attorney of the City of Decatur. 
    Commission means the Texas Railroad Commission. 
    Completion of drilling, re-drilling and re-working means the date the work is completed for the drilling, re-drilling or re-working and the crew is released by completing their work or contract or by their employer. 
    Derrick means any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure, which is required or used in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the production of gas and oil. 
    Drilling means digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing gas and oil or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
    Drilling equipment means the derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling. 
    Drill site means the premises used during the drilling or re-working of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of a well or wells or any associated operation. 
    Exploration means geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for gas and oil or other subsurface hydrocarbons. 
    Fire department means the Fire Department of the City of Decatur. 
    Gas means any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. 
    Gas well means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas. 
    High impact permit means a permit required if the proposed well is to be located within six hundred (600) feet of a residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park. 
    Inspector means the gas or oil inspector designated by the City Manager of Decatur. 
    Lease shall mean any tract of land subject to an oil, gas, and mineral lease or other oil and gas development contract, or any unit composed of several tracts and leases but operated as one (1) lease, and any tract of land in which the minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him, but which, due to the fee royalty ownership is developed and operated as a separate tract. 
    Oil means liquid petroleum as it comes out of the ground as distinguished from refined oils manufactured out of it. Also known as crude petroleum oil. 
    Oil well means any well which produces one (1) barrel or more crude petroleum oil to each one hundred thousand (100,000) cubic feet of natural gas. 
    Operation site means the area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with gas after drilling activities are complete. 
    Operator means, for each well, the person listed on the Railroad Commission Form W-1 or Form P-4 for a gas or oil well that is, or will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under a gas and oil lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no gas and oil lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator. 
    Person means both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind. 
    Public building means all buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons for such purposes as education, deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, schools, restaurants, hospitals. 
    Public park means any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional park-like recreational purposes, but shall not include privately owned amusement parks or privately owned or privately managed golf courses. 
    Re-drill means re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing well bore. 
    Religious institution means any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
    Residence means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or other building designed for dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a gas and oil well permit is filed with the planning department. 
    Re-working means re-completion or re-entry of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing well bore. 
    Right-of-way means public rights-of-way including streets, easements and other property within the city and which is dedicated to the use and benefit of the public. 
    Rural gas and oil permit means that permit required if the proposed well is located on a open space of not less than twenty-five (25) acres and no production equipment shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park. 
    School means any public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up through and including the twelfth grade level and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the State of Texas or by the City of Decatur that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six (6) children under fourteen (14) years of age, and for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
    Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way. 
    Tank means a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of gas and oil or other hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids. 
    Technical advisor means such person(s) familiar with and educated in the gas and oil industry or the law as it relates to gas matters who may be retained from time to time by the city. 
    Urban gas and oil well permit means a gas and oil well permit other than a high impact gas and oil well permit or rural gas and oil well permit. 
    Well means a hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose of producing gas and oil, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water or sulfur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or production of gas and oil, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-58 - Gas and oil inspector. 
(a)  The city manager shall direct the planning director to designate a gas and oil inspector who shall enforce the provisions of this article. The inspector shall demonstrate a proven background in the drilling, production, and operation of gas and oil wells. The inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. 
(b)  The inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state. The inspector shall conduct periodic inspections at least once a year of all permitted wells in the city to determine that the wells are operating in accordance within proper safety parameters as set out in this article. 
(c)  The inspector and the planning department shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any records sent to the commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to establish and determine compliance with the applicable gas and oil well permit. 
(d)  Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive issued by the appointed inspector or permit access to sites or provide requested material shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-59. - Operator's agent. 
    Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the State of Texas, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten (10) days notify the city secretary in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-60. - Periodic reports. 
(a)  The operator shall notify the planning department of any changes to the following information within one (1) business week after the change occurs: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the operator; 
(2)  The name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the city (which person must a resident of Texas that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail); and 
(3)  The operator's emergency action response plan (including "drive-to-maps" from public rights-of-way to each drill site). 
(b)  The operator shall notify the planning department of any change to the name, address, and twenty-four-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one business day. 
(c)  The operator shall provide a copy of any "incident reports" or written complaints submitted to the railroad commission within ten (10) days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints. 
(d)  Beginning on December 31st after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31st thereafter until the operator notifies the inspector that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the inspector if there are any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable gas and oil well permit that have not been previously reported to the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-61. - Insurance, bond and indemnity-Bond, letters of credit, indemnity, insurance. 
(a)  General requirements. The operator shall be required to: 
(1)  Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the gas and oil well permit issued hereunder. 
(2)  Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations. 
(3)  Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits and liability of every kind, including all expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person or for damage to any property arising out of or in connection with the work done by operator under a gas and oil well permit: 
a.  where such injuries, death or damages are caused by operator's sole negligence or the joint negligence of operator and any other person or entity; and 
b.  regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused in whole or in part by the negligence of operator. 
(4)  Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any terms of the gas and oil well permit. 
(5)  Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the gas or oil operation. 
(b)  Bond, irrevocable letter of credit. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a gas and oil well permit the operator shall provide the planning department with a security instrument in the form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit as follows: 
a.  Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the gas and oil well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the gas and oil well permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs first. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the city. The original bond shall be submitted to the planning department with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary. 
b.  Letter of credit. A letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in Texas and shall become effective on or before the date the gas and oil well permit is issued. The letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the gas and oil well permit term. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines or penalties assessed under this article. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the planning department by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking institution, with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary. 
(2)  The principal amount of any security instrument shall be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any single well. If, after completion of a well, the applicant/operator, who initially posted a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) bond, has complied with all of the provisions of this article and whose well is in the producing stage and all drilling operations have ceased, may submit a request to the planning department to reduce the existing bond to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond or letter of credit shall be maintained at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
If at any time after no less than a fifteen-day written notice to the operator and a public hearing, the city council shall deem any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, it may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter of credit up to a maximum of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per well. 
An operator who permits numerous wells within the city may elect to provide a blanket bond or letter of credit in the principal amount of two-hundred fifty thousand ($250,000.00) dollars. The blanket bond shall be deemed to be sufficient for all operations, including drilling, completion, re-working, and production. 
(3)  Whenever the Inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than thirty (30) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. 
The city shall be authorized to draw against any irrevocable letter of credit or bond to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, such additional money may be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(4)  In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter of credit or bond the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both such methods. 
(5)  When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled. 
(c)  Insurance. In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in Texas. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the gas and oil well permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such gas and oil well permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(1)  General requirements applicable to all policies. 
a.  The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an "additional insured" to all policies except employers liability coverage under the operator's workers compensation policy. 
b.  All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a claims-made basis. 
c.  All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most current version of the A.M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the city. 
d.  Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a "per occurrence" basis unless otherwise stipulated herein. 
e.  Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City of Decatur, Development Department, 210 E. Walnut, Decatur, Texas 76234, evidencing all the required coverages, including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a gas and oil well permit. 
f.  All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the city. 
g.  Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein. 
h.  Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum thirty-day notice of cancellation, non-renewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten (10) days notice shall be acceptable in the event of non-payment of premium. 
i.  During the term of the gas and oil well permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the Inspector any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss. 
j.  Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city. 
(2)  Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage, independent contractors protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
(3)  Excess or umbrella liability. 
$5,000,000.00 Excess, if the operator has a stand-alone environmental pollution liability (EPL) policy. $10,000,000.00 Excess, if the operator does not have a stand-alone EPL policy. Coverage must include an endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If seepage and pollution coverage is written on a "claims made" basis, the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary.  
(4)  Environmental pollution liability coverage. 
a.  Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the gas and oil well permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per loss, with an annual aggregate of at least ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00). 
b.  Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. 
c.  The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the city. 
(5)  Control of well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, redrilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of residents. 
$5,000,000.00 Per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of ten million dollars (10,000,000.00). $500,000.00 Sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control.  
(6)  Certificates of insurance. 
a.  The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the State of Texas, unless the coverage is written by a surplus lines insurer. 
b.  The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved by the Texas State Board of Insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage. 
c.  Sets forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained herein. 
d.  Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read "THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NON-RENEWED WITHOUT 30 DAYS ADVANCED WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE CITY OF DECATUR EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE 10 DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED". 
e.  Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the certificates of insurance. 
(d)  Indemnification and express negligence provisions. 
(1)  Each gas and oil well permit issued by the planning department shall include the following language: Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have, against the City of Decatur, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a gas and oil well permit. The operator shall fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Decatur, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against each and every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations, judgments, losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in defense of the City of Decatur, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a gas and oil well permit. The operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Decatur, Texas, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from any liabilities or damages suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs, or judgments against the city, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, or employees, created by, or arising out of the acts or omissions of the City of Decatur occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting the gas or oil wells including, but not limited to, claims and damages arising in whole or in part from the negligence of the City of Decatur occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting the gas or oil wells. It is understood and agreed that the indemnity provided for in this section is an indemnity extended by the operator to indemnify and protect the City of Decatur, Texas and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees from the consequences of the negligence of the City of Decatur, Texas and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, whether that negligence is the sole or contributing cause of the resultant injury, death, and/or damage. 
(e)  Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of Texas upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator shall within ten (10) days notify the planning department in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued and abandonment is complete. 
(f)  Acceptance and indemnity agreement. The operator who has a net worth of not less than twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00), as shown in such owner's or operator's most recent audited financial statements, may substitute an acceptance and indemnity agreement in lieu of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit and insurance requirements set forth in this article, provided that such acceptance and indemnity agreement shall be in a form acceptable to, and approved by, the city attorney and the director of risk management of the city. The planning department may request an annual review of the operator's most recent audited financial statements to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-62. - Appeals. 
(a)  The city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the issuance of a gas and oil well permit or the revocation or suspension of any gas and oil well permit issued hereunder as provided by this article. Any person or entity whose application is denied by the planning department (other than for distance requirements set out in this article) or whose gas and oil well permit is suspended or revoked or whose well or equipment is deemed by the inspector to be abandoned may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the planning department file an appeal to the city council in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with the city secretary. The grounds for appeal must be set forth specifically, and the error described, by the appellant. 
(2)  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the records, the city secretary shall transmit all papers involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city council agenda for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. No other notice need be given. 
(b)  Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-63. - Penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following: 
(1)  Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a gas and oil well permit issued under this article. 
(2)  Fail to comply with any condition set forth in a gas and oil well permit issued under this article; or, 
(3)  Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Secs. 7-64-7-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GAS AND OIL WELL PERMITS 

Sec. 7-71. - Gas and oil well permit required. 
(a)  A person wanting to engage in and operate in gas and oil production activities shall apply for and obtain a gas and oil well permit under this article and shall indicate what type of gas and oil well permit is requested. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, re-drilling, fracturing or operation of any such well or to conduct any activity related to the production of gas and oil without first obtaining a gas and oil well permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to re-drilling, initial site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing. A permit shall not be required for seismic surveys. 
(b)  Operator must apply for and obtain a gas and oil well permit prior to drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting each well including any previously abandoned well. The issued gas and oil well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, re-working, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well. 
(c)  Any person who intends to re-work a permitted well to fracture stimulate the well after initial completion or to conduct seismic surveys or other exploration activities shall give written notice by certified mail to the planning department no less than ten (10) days before the activities begin. The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail, including whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be conducted. The notice must also provide the address and twenty-four-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. If requested by the inspector, the person conducting the activities will post a sign on the property giving the public notice of the activities, including the name, address and twenty-four-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. If the inspector determines that an inspection is necessary, the operator will pay the city for the inspection. 
The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation operations performed on a well within three hundred (300) feet of an occupied residence: 
(1)  At least forty-eight (48) hours before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign at the entrance of the well site advising the public of the date the operations will commence; 
(2)  "Flowback" operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be performed during daylight hours only unless the inspector approves such operations during non-daylight hours; 
(3)  A watchman shall be required at all times during such operations; and 
(4)  At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank. 
(d)  A gas and oil well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the issuance of the gas and oil well permit. A gas and oil well permit may be extended by the planning department for an additional one hundred eighty (180) days upon request by the operator and proof that the classification of the requested gas well permit for such location has not changed. 
(e)  The gas and oil well permits required by this article are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit which may be required by any other provision of this Code or by any other governmental agency. 
(f)  No additional gas and oil well permit or filing fees shall be required for: 
(1)  Any wells, existing, previously permitted or approved by the city, within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date of this article; or 
(2)  Any wells which drilling has commenced on the effective date of this article; or 
(3)  Any wells in existence or any wells on which drilling has commenced on land prior to annexation into the city after the effective date of this article. 
A person shall have forty-five (45) days after the enactment of this article or annexation into the city to designate a gas and oil operation as a preexisting operation by filing a site plan drawn to scale that shows the location of the well with respect to survey lines and the associated production facilities, if any, with the planning department. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, all operations for drilling or mining for the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons or gold or other precious metals shall be expressly prohibited upon public parks within the city limits unless approved by the city council. The city council shall review the insurance and security requirements on an individual basis and may impose additional restrictions upon issuance of a gas and oil well permit. This provision shall not operate to prohibit the drilling of any water well that the city council shall deem reasonable or appropriate. 
(h)  No gas and oil well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any floodway. 
(i)  No gas and oil well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled on city owned property without the prior consent of the city council. The city council shall review the insurance and security requirements on an individual basis prior to issuing the permit. 
(j)  By acceptance of any gas and oil well permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in any gas and oil well permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was set forth verbatim in such gas and oil well permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-72. - Gas and oil well permit application and filing fees. 
(a)  Every application for a gas and oil well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the planning department. 
(b)  Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of three thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($3,250.00). 
(c)  The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date of the application, type of gas and oil well permit requested, intended drilling start date and proposed duration of the operation. 
(2)  An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the gas and oil operation, the parcel and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property recorded by plat should reference subdivision, block and lot numbers and include authorization for the proposed drilling. 
(3)  Map showing proposed transportation route and road for equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by the gas and oil operation. 
(4)  Proposed well name. 
(5)  Surface owner names(s) and address(es) of the lease property. 
(6)  Mineral lessee name and address. 
(7)  Operator/applicant name and address and if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners. 
(8)  Name and address of individual designated to receive notice. 
(9)  Name of representative with supervisory authority over all gas and oil operation site activities and a twenty-four-hour phone number. 
(10)  Location and description of all improvements and structures within six hundred (600) feet of the wellhead. 
(11)  Owner and address of each parcel of property within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed wellhead. 
(12)  A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all property lines and respective owners within proposed operation site, of all improvements and equipment, including the location and depth of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage sheds. 
(13)  The name, address and twenty-four-hour phone number of the person to be notified in case of an emergency. 
(14)  The exact and correct acreage and number of wells, if applicable, included in the gas and oil well permit application. 
(15)  Copies of all reports required by the commission. 
(16)  A signed road maintenance agreement supplied by the city that provides that the operator shall repair, at his own expense, any damage to roads, streets, or highways caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production, and operation of gas and oil wells. 
(17)  A description of public utilities required during drilling and operation. 
(18)  A description of the water source to be used during drilling. 
(19)  A copy of the approved commission permit to drill together with attachments and survey plats which are applicable to the drill and operation sites. 
(20)  A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan if required by the environmental protection agency. A copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the City of Decatur City Engineer and Planning Director three (3) days prior to the commencement of any onsite activity. 
(21)  A copy of the determination by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality of the depth of useable quality ground water. 
(22)  Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article. 
(23)  A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true and correct. 
(24)  All required application and gas and oil well permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-73. - Gas and oil well permit classifications. 
(a)  High impact gas and oil well permit. 
(1)  [Location.] High impact gas and oil well permit shall be required if the proposed well is to be located up to and including six hundred (600) feet of residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park. This provision applies to any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city. This provision applies to any public park as illustrated on the current land use plan adopted by the city on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city. 
For the purpose of a high impact gas and oil well permit the measurement of the six hundred-foot distance shall be made from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building. 
With written consent of any and all owners, trustees, and/or executors whose residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school, or public park is within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed well the gas and oil well permit classification may be changed from high impact to urban. 
The burden of proof of legitimate written consent shall be upon the applicant/operator. 
(2)  Application requirements. An application for a high impact gas and oil well permit shall include the following information: 
a.  All the requirements of section 7-72 of this article; 
b.  A detailed site plan that includes all the information required in section 7-72, but also includes specific details to the projected location of the major components of the drilling site, impacted vegetation, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent building and other structures and the measured distance from the well site to these buildings and structures, temporary and permanent fencing and landscaping. 
(3)  Permitting procedure. 
a.  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete application, the planning department shall place the matter on the city council agenda for a public hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to the applicant and any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. The forty-five-day period shall not begin to run until the applicant/operator has provided the planning department with a complete application package. 
b.  At least twenty (20) days, and no more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the city council for a high impact gas and oil well permit under this article, operator shall notify, at operator's expense, each surface owner of property, as shown by the current tax roll, within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed well not owned by or under lease to the operator and the hearing date and time. Such notice, as outlined below, shall be by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. The operator shall file an affidavit with the planning department showing the name and last known address, as identified by the current tax roll, of each owner of property to whom notice was mailed and the names of each owner of property to whom notice is required to be given, but whose address is unknown. Notice shall be sent to all registered neighborhood associations within one-half mile of the proposed wellhead. 
c.  At least fifteen (15) days, and no more than twenty (20) days prior to the dates of the public hearing before city council for a high impact gas and oil well permit* under this article, operator shall publish a copy of the notice as outlined below, at operator's expense, in one issue of a city newspaper for the equivalent of ten (10) consecutive days. An affidavit by the printer or publisher of the newspaper indicating publication of the notice shall be filed with the application and will be prima facie evidence of such publication. The notice shall read as follows: 
"Notice is hereby given that, acting under and pursuant to the Ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas, on the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , ____________ filed with the Planning Department of the City of Decatur, an application for a High Impact Gas and Oil Well Permit to drill, complete and operate a well for gas or oil* upon property located at ____________ , ____________ , Decatur, Texas, more particularly shown on the map of record in Volume ____________ , Page ____________ , Plat records of ____________ County, Texas or per Tax Tract Number ____________ , ____________ County, Texas. The City Council will conduct a public hearing on the request for said permit on the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ at ____________ o'clock ____________ .m. in the City Council Chambers located at 201 E. Walnut, Decatur, Texas 
*Specify whether the permit is for gas or oil drilling. 
d.  At least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing before city council for a high impact gas and oil well permit under this article the operator shall, at operator's expense, erect at least one (1) sign, no less than three (3) feet by three (3) feet, upon the premises upon which a high impact gas and oil well permit has been requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property. 
1.  The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a high impact gas and oil well permit to drill for gas or oil has been requested and state the date, time and place of the public hearing, and shall further set forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the applicant/operator at the number indicated on the sign. 
2.  The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other official action concerning this article. 
3.  Any sign(s) shall be removed subsequent to final action by the city council. 
All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance with this section. 
e.  After a high impact permit application is submitted, the planning department shall evaluate the public impact of the proposed activity. The planning department shall consider the proposed site and the proposed operations or drilling program and shall draft recommended restrictions or conditions, including minimum separation distance for drilling or other operations, special safety equipment and procedures, recommended noise reduction levels, screening and any other requirements the inspector deems appropriate. The recommendation shall be submitted to the city council for consideration prior to the public hearing. 
f.  At the public hearing and before the city council considers the merits of the application and the recommendations of the planning department, the applicant/operator shall provide evidence of a certificate of publication establishing timely publication of the notice of the hearing, that timely actual notice of the hearing was given to all persons as required by this article and that the applicant/operator has otherwise complied with or satisfied all other requirements of this article, including full and complete compliance with the insurance and security requirements. 
g.  The burden of proof on all matters considered in the hearing shall be upon the applicant/operator. 
h.  The city council shall review the application and any other related information. The city council shall consider the following in deciding whether to grant a high impact gas and oil well permit: 
1.  Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area considering the particular location and the character of the improvements located there; 
2.  Whether the drilling of such wells would conflict with the orderly growth and development of the city; 
3.  Whether there are other alternative well site locations; 
4.  Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the public when and if conducted in accordance with the high impact gas and oil well permit conditions to be imposed; 
5.  Whether there is adequate access for the city fire personnel and fire fighting equipment; 
6.  Whether the impact upon the adjacent property and the general public by operations conducted in compliance with the gas and oil well permit conditions are reasonable and justified, balancing the following factors: 
i.  The right of the owners(s) of the mineral estate to explore, develop, and produce the minerals; and 
ii.  The availability of alternative drill sites; and 
7.  The recommendations of the planning department. 
(4)  Wells setbacks for high impact gas and oil well permit. It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located within three hundred (300) feet from any public park (unless prior consent is obtained from the city council to drill in a public park pursuant to section 7-71(g) or from any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school for which a building permit has been issued on the date of the application for a drilling permit is filed with the planning department. The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building. 
This setback distance may be reduced by the city council to less than three hundred (300) feet from residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park only when there is the unanimous consent of the property owners within a three hundred-foot radius around said well and the affirmative vote of not less than three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city council. For protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the city council may impose additional requirements for a reduction of such distance. 
Tank batteries, well facilities and equipment shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any public park (unless prior consent is obtained from the city council to drill in a public park pursuant to section 7-71(g) or from any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school for which a building permit has been issued on the date of the application for a drilling permit is filed. The distance shall be calculated from the closest tank batteries, well facilities and/or equipment, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building. 
(5)  Fencing for high impact gas and oil well permit. 
a.  A chain link fence with three-and-one-half inch mesh interwoven with opaque slats, a minimum of eight (8) feet but not to exceed ten (10) feet in height, shall enclose all completed wells and tanks located within a high impact gas and oil well permit area. 
b.  Gates requirements and other fencing requirements as outlined in section 7-87 of this article shall also be required. 
(6)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required along all street frontages of the drill site with suitable screening shrubs that complement the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. Screening shrubs shall be installed completely around the well site and all fences and be sufficient to screen from view the structures sought to be screened. Screening shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet in height at planting, have the potential to grow to a mature height equal to or greater than the height of the tallest structure, including fencing, All plant materials should be drought tolerant. 
The vegetation or berms shall be kept in an attractive state and in good condition at all times by the applicant or operator. 
(7)  Vehicle routes for high impact gas and oil well permit. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three (3) tons shall be restricted to such streets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by the City Code wherever capable of being used. The vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof. 
(8)  Work hours for high impact gas and oil well permit. Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions and any other emergencies where the delivery of equipment is necessary to protect the public welfare. 
(9)  Noise restrictions for high impact gas and oil well permit. 
a.  No drilling producing or related drilling operations shall produce a sound level greater than 78 dB(a) when measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the production equipment in question. The noise level shall be the average of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four (4) or more diametrically opposite positions, four (4) feet above ground level, when measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the production equipment. A maximum sound level of 85 dB(a) shall apply to formation fracturing when measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the production equipment in question. 
b.  No person shall operate or permit to be operated in connection with the operation of a producing well any engine, compressor or motor-driven machinery of any type which creates a sound level greater than 65dB(a) when measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the well site. The noise level shall be the average of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four (4) or more diametrically opposite positions measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the well site. 
c.  Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming as a minimum, to the requirements of the American National Standards Institute and installed at operators expense in specified locations. 
d.  If sound levels exceed the dB(a) levels cited in a. and b. of this subsection, the inspector may require sound reducing mufflers. 
(10)  Tank specifications for high impact gas and oil well permit. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire marshall. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than eight (8) feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire Protection Association, but in all cases, shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(11)  [Other requirements.] All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required. 
(b)  Urban gas and oil well permit. 
(1)  [Location.] Urban gas and oil well permit shall be required if the proposed well is to be located up to and including one thousand (1,000) feet of residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park. This provision applies to any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city. This provision applies to any public park as illustrated on the current land use plan adopted by the city on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city. 
For the purpose of a urban gas and oil well permit the measurement of the one thousand-foot distance shall be made from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building. 
With written consent of any and all owners, trustees, and/or executors whose residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school, or public park is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed well the gas and oil well permit classification may be changed from high impact to urban. 
The burden of proof of legitimate written consent shall be upon the applicant/operator. 
(2)  Notice for urban gas and oil well permit. 
a.  At least ten (10) days prior to the date of filing of an application for an urban gas and oil well permit with the planning department under this article, operator shall notify, at the expense of the operator, each surface owner of property, as shown by the current tax roll, within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed well not owned by or under lease to the operator. Such notice, as outlined below, shall be by depositing the same, property addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. The operator shall file with the application an affidavit showing the name and last known address, as identified by the current tax roll, of each owner of property to whom notice was mailed and the names of each owner of property to whom notice is required to be given, but whose address is unknown. Notice shall be sent to all registered neighborhood associations within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed wellhead. 
b.  "Notice is hereby given that, acting under and pursuant to the Ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas, on the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , ____________ filed with the Planning Department of the City of Decatur, an application for a Urban Gas and Oil Well Permit to drill, complete and operate a well for gas or oil* upon property located at ____________ , ____________ , Decatur, Texas, more particularly shown on the map of record in Volume ____________ , Page ____________ , Plat records of ____________ County, Texas or per Tax Tract Number ____________ , ____________ County, Texas. The City Council will conduct a public hearing on the request for said permit on the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ at ____________ o'clock ____________ .m. in the City Council Chambers located at 201 E. Walnut, Decatur, Texas. 
*Specify whether the permit is for gas or oil drilling. 
c.  At least ten (10) days prior to the date of filing of an application for an urban gas and oil well permit under this article with the planning department, the operator, at operator's expense, shall erect at least one (1) sign, no less than three (3) feet by three (3) feet, upon the premises upon which an urban gas and oil well permit has been requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property. 
1.  The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that an urban gas and oil well permit to drill for gas and oil has been requested and shall further set forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the operator at the number indicated on the sign. 
2.  The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other official action concerning this article. 
3.  Any sign(s) shall be removed subsequent to final action by the inspector or the city council. 
All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance with this section. 
(3)  Fencing for urban gas and oil well permit. 
a.  A chain link fence with three and one-half-inch mesh interwoven with opaque slats, a minimum of eight (8) feet in height, shall enclose all completed wells and tanks located within an urban gas and oil well permit area. 
b.  Gate requirements and fencing requirements as outlined in section 7-87 of this article shall also be required. 
(4)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall not be required for urban gas and oil well permits until such time as the immediate area (within six hundred (600) feet of the wellhead) develops into an area of single or multi-family residences, commercial/retail establishments, religious institutions, public buildings, hospitals, or public parks then landscaping suitable to the surrounding area will be required. Landscaping plans shall be submitted to the planning director for approval. 
(5)  Vehicle routes for urban gas and oil well permit. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to such streets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by the City Code wherever capable of being used. The vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof. 
(6)  Noise restrictions for urban gas and oil well permit. 
a.  No drilling, producing or other operations shall produce a sound level greater than 85 dB(a) when measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the production equipment in question. The noise level shall be the average of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four (4) or more diametrically opposite positions, four (4) feet above ground level, measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the production equipment. A maximum sound level of 90 dB(a) shall apply to formation fracturing when measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the production equipment in question. 
b.  No person shall operate or permit to be operated in connection with the operation of a producing well any engine, compressor or motor-driven machinery of any type which creates a sound level greater than 78dB(a) when measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the well site. The noise level shall be the average of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four (4) or more diametrically opposite positions measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the well site. 
c.  Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming, as a minimum, to the requirements of the American National Standards Institute and installed at the operator's expense in specified locations. 
d.  If sound levels exceed the dB(a) levels cited in a. and b. of this subsection, the Inspector may require sound reducing mufflers. 
(7)  Tank specifications for urban gas and oil well permit. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the Fire Marshall. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than twelve (12) feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the Commission and the National Fire Protection Association, but in all cases, shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(8)  [Other requirements.] All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required. 
(c)  Rural gas and oil well permit. 
(1)  [Location.] A rural gas and oil well permit shall be required if the proposed well is located on an open space of not less than twenty-five (25) acres and no production equipment shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public park or any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school. This provision applies to any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city. This provision applies to any public park as illustrated on the current land use plan adopted by the city on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city. 
For the purpose of a rural gas and oil well permit the measurement of the one thousand-foot distance shall be made from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building. 
The burden of proof of legitimate written consent shall be upon the applicant/operator. 
(2)  Notice for rural gas and oil well permit. 
a.  "Notice is hereby given that, acting under and pursuant to the Ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas, on the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , ____________ filed with the Planning Department of the City of Decatur, an application for a Rural Gas and Oil Well Permit to drill, complete and operate a well for gas or oil* upon property located at ____________ , ____________ , Decatur, Texas, more particularly shown on the map of record in Volume ____________ , Page ____________ , Plat records of ____________ County, Texas or per Tax Tract Number ____________ , ____________ County, Texas. The City Council will conduct a public hearing on the request for said permit on the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ at ____________ o'clock ____________ .m. in the City Council Chambers located at 201 E. Walnut, Decatur, Texas 
*Specify whether the permit is for gas or oil drilling. 
b.  At least ten (10) days prior to the date of filing with the planning department an application for a rural gas and oil well permit under this article, the operator shall erect at least one sign, no less than three (3) feet by three (3) feet, upon the premises upon which a rural gas and oil well permit has been requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property. 
1.  The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a rural gas and oil well permit to drill for gas and oil has been requested and shall further set forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the operator at the number indicated on the sign. 
2.  The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other official action concerning this article. 
3.  Any sign(s) shall be removed subsequent to final action by the inspector or the city council. 
c.  All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance with this section. 
(3)  Fencing for rural gas and oil well permit. 
a.  A chain link fence with three and one-half-inch mesh interwoven with opaque slats, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall enclose all completed wells and tanks located within a rural gas and oil well permit area. 
b.  Gate requirements and other fencing requirements as outlined in section 7-87 of this article shall also be required. 
(4)  Vehicle routes for rural gas and oil well permit. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to such streets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by the City Code wherever capable of being used. The vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof. 
(5)  Noise restrictions for rural gas and oil well permit. 
a.  No drilling, facing, producing or other operations shall produce a sound level greater than 90 dB(a) when measured at a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the production equipment in question. The noise level shall be the average of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four (4) or more diametrically opposite positions, four (4) feet above ground level, at a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the production equipment. 
b.  No person shall operate or permit to be operated in connection with the operation of a producing well any engine, compressor or motor-driven machinery of any type which creates a sound level greater than 78dB(a) when measured at a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the well site. The noise level shall be the average of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four (4) or more diametrically opposite positions at a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the well site. 
c.  Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming as a minimum, to the requirements of the American National Standards Institute and installed at the operator's expense in specified locations. 
d.  If sound levels exceed the dB(a) levels cited in a. and b. of this subsection, the inspector may require sound reducing mufflers. 
(6)  Tank specifications for rural gas and oil well permit. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire chief. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than fifteen (15) feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire Protection Association, but in all cases, shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(7)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall not be required for rural gas and oil well permits until such time as the immediate area (within six hundred (600) feet of the wellhead) develops into an area of single or multi-family residences, commercial/retail establishments, religious institutions, public buildings, hospitals, or public parks then landscaping suitable to the surrounding area will be required. Landscaping plans shall be submitted to the planning director for approval. 
(8)  [Other requirements.] All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-74. - Issuance of rural and urban gas and oil well permits. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the planning department to review and approve or disapprove all applications for gas and oil well drilling permits based on the criteria established by this article. The planning department, within thirty (30) days after the filing of a completed application and remittance of all fees, insurance and security per the requirements of this article for a gas and oil well permit, shall determine whether or not the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article and determine if the proposed well to be drilled or the facility to be installed is in compliance with the distance requirements for the requested gas and oil well permit on the date the completed application is received by the planning department. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any dwellings or buildings for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on the date the application for a gas and oil well permit is filed with the planning department. 
(c)  If all the requirements of this article are met, the planning department shall issue a gas and oil well permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities applied for. 
(d)  If the planning department denies an urban or rural gas and oil well permit application for reasons other than lack of required distance as set out in this article for the requested gas and oil well permit, the department shall notify the operator in writing of such denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the planning department to deny the gas and oil well permit, the operator may: 1) cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the planning department for approval and issuance of the gas and oil well permit; or 2) file an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 7-62, "appeals" of this article. 
(e)  If the planning department determines that all of the provisions of this article have been complied with by the operator but that the proposed drill site does not comply with the distance requirements of this article under the requested urban or rural gas and oil well permit, the department shall notify the operator. The operator may revise the permit to comply with either an urban gas and oil well permit or rural gas and oil well permit or the planning department shall notify the city manager and the city manager shall place the request for a gas and oil well permit and variance to this article on the city council agenda for public hearing within the next forty-five (45) days. 
Variance request for gas and oil well permits. 
(1)  Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the hearing by the city council the operator, at the expense of the operator, shall: 
a.  Notify all owners of real property as the ownership appears on the last certified tax roll of the applicable city or county appraisal district within the applicable distance of the proposed well location and hearing per the requested gas and oil well permit. Such notice shall be served by depositing the same, postage paid, in the United States mail; 
b.  Publish notice of the hearing at least one time in an official newspaper; and 
c.  Post a sign no less than three (3) feet by three (3) feet on the drill site premises or the nearest public street, road or right-of-way to the drill site that shall substantially indicate that a gas and oil well permit to drill for gas or oil has been requested and shall further set forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the number of the operator as indicated thereon. 
d.  The erection and/or continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other official action concerning this article. 
(2)  The city council shall review the request for variance, application, and any other related information. 
(3)  The city council shall consider the following in deciding whether to grant a rural or urban gas and oil well permit: 
a)  Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area considering the particular location and the character of the improvements located there; 
b)  Whether the drilling of such wells would conflict with the orderly growth and development of the city; 
c)  Whether there are other alternative well site locations; 
d)  Whether conditions should be imposed when and if conducted in accordance with the high impact gas and oil well permit; 
e)  Whether there is adequate access for the city fire personnel and fire fighting equipment; 
f)  Whether the impact upon the adjacent property and the general public by operations conducted in compliance with the gas and oil well permit conditions are reasonable and justified, balancing the following factors: 
i.  The right of the owners(s) of the mineral estate to explore, develop, and produce the minerals; 
ii.  The availability of alternative drill sites; and 
g)  The recommendations of the planning department. 
(f)  Following the public hearing, the city council may grant such gas and oil well permit upon such terms and conditions as it determines to be necessary to protect the public health and safety. The city council may require changes in the operations, plan, design, layout, fencing, screening, lighting, or other matters reasonably required in the interest of the public. 
(g)  In making its decision, the city council shall have the power and authority to refuse any gas and oil well permit to drill any well at any particular location within the city, when by reason of such particular location and other characteristics, the drilling of such wells at such particular location would be injurious to the health, safety, welfare, or the orderly growth and development of the inhabitants within, and in the immediate area of, the city. 
(h)  If the operator elects not to accept the gas and oil well permit under the terms and conditions imposed by the city council and wishes to withdraw his application, the operator must notify the planning department in writing of his decision and the city shall retain all applicable processing and filing fees. 
All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-75. - Blanket permits. 
    Operators are encouraged to provide a master plan for proposed gas and oil wells within a unit if multiple wells are located on the same tract of land. The blanket permit would provide all information necessary for individual permitting, however duplicity may be eliminated. Each blanket permit shall also include: 
(1)  Graphic illustration of all proposed wells within the unit, enumerated for reference, on a scaled drawing (1?=1000' max or alternate scale as approved by the planning department) to fit standard 24  36 paper. 
(2)  Location of proposed transmission pipelines. If transmission lines are not shown on the application for drilling permit, a separate application for the transmission lines will be required when their proposed location becomes defined and prior to any stage of construction of those lines. 
(3)  Required information for each individual well. 
(4)  Summary of insurance information (section 7-61). 
(5)  Permit fee equal to the cost of each individual drilling permit, minus ten (10) percent. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-76. - Amended gas and oil well permits. 
(a)  An operator may submit an application to the planning department to amend an existing gas and oil well permit to commence drilling from a new drill site that is not shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing gas and oil well permit, to relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing gas and oil well permit, or to otherwise amend the existing gas and oil well permit. 
(b)  Applications for amended gas and oil well permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The application fee as set by this article; 
(2)  A description of the proposed amendments; 
(3)  Any changes to the information submitted with the application for the existing gas and oil well permit (if such information has not previously been provided to the city); 
(4)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the planning department to demonstrate compliance with the applicable gas and oil well permit; and 
(5)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the inspector to prevent imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. 
(c)  All applications for amended gas and oil well permits shall be filed with the planning department for review. Incomplete applications may be returned to the applicant, in which case the city shall provide a written explanation of the deficiencies; however, the city shall retain the application fee. The city may return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the railroad commission regarding the determination of the operator. 
(d)  If the activities proposed by the amendment are not materially different from the activities covered by the existing gas and oil well permit, and if the proposed activities are in conformance with the applicable gas and oil well permit, then the planning department shall approve the amendment within fifteen (15) days after the application is filed. 
(e)  If the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different from the activities covered by the existing gas and oil well permit, and if the proposed activities are in conformance with the applicable gas and oil well permit, then the planning department shall approve the amendment within thirty (30) days after the application is filed. If, however, the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different and, in the judgment of the planning department, might create a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons that was not associated with the activities covered by the existing gas and oil well permit or that was not otherwise taken into consideration by the existing gas and oil well permit, the planning department may require the amendment to be processed as new gas and oil well permit application. 
(f)  The failure of the planning department to review and issue an amended gas and oil well permit within the time limits specified above shall not cause the application for the amended gas and oil well permit to be deemed approved. 
(g)  The decision of the planning department to deny an amendment to a gas and oil well permit shall be provided to the operator in writing within ten (10) days after the decision, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. The operator may appeal any such denial to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-77. - Suspension or revocation of gas and oil well permit; effect. 
(a)  If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of a gas and oil well permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the gas and oil well permit), the inspector shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than ten (10) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. 
(b)  If, the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, the inspector may suspend or revoke the gas and oil well permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the gas and oil well permit issued under this article during any period of any gas and oil well permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of the city in suspending or revoking the gas and oil well permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the gas and oil well permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the commission. 
(d)  If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the planning department, upon written notice to the operator, may notify the commission and request that the commission take any appropriate action. 
(e)  Operator may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision of the inspector in writing to suspend or revoke a gas and oil well permit, file an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 7-62, "appeals" of this article. 
(f)  If an application for a gas and oil well permit is denied by the planning department, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new permit application from being submitted to the planning department for the same well. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Secs. 7-78-7-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ON SITE AND TECHNICAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 7-86. - Technical regulations. 
(a)  On site requirements. 
(1)  Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission; however, all well casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least three (3) feet below the surface unless the surface owner submits a written agreement otherwise. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well. 
(2)  Blowout prevention. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas and oil operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventors, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the commission. 
(3)  Compliance. Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements. 
(4)  Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any gas or oil operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any gas or oil operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or any body of water or any private property in the city. 
(5)  Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(6)  Dust, vibration, odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of gas, oil and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that, vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor. 
(7)  Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision. 
(8)  Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the city ordinances and the appropriate national codes. 
(9)  Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of any gas, oil or other hydrocarbons production activities, operator shall submit to the planning department an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of gas and oil wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission, Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, department of transportation and/or the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(10)  Equipment painted. All production equipment on the site shall be painted (in conformance with section 7-88) and maintained at all times, including pumping units, storage tanks, buildings and structures. 
(11)  Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and completion operations. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line. 
(12)  Fresh water wells. It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located within two hundred (200) feet to any fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. The operator of a gas or oil well shall provide the Inspector with a "pre-drilling" and "post-drilling" water analysis from any fresh water well within five hundred (500) feet of the gas or oil well. Within one hundred eighty (180) days of its completion date, each gas or oil well shall be equipped with a cathodic protection system to protect the production casing from external corrosion. The inspector may approve an alternative method of protecting the production casing from external corrosion. 
(13)  Gas emission or burning restricted. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or as permitted by the commission, then such vent or open flame shall not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from any building not used in operations on the drilling site and such vent or open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners. 
(14)  Grass, weeds, trash. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and combustible trash within a radius of one hundred (100) feet around any gas or oil tank or tanks or producing wells. 
(15)  Hazardous plan. Hazardous materials management plan shall be on file with the fire marshal and the inspector. 
(16)  Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the operation site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within three hundred (300) feet. 
(17)  Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the operator has notified the inspector that facing will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements. 
(18)  Pits. Earthen mud or circulating pits shall be used. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within sixty (60) days after completion of the well. 
(19)  Private roads and drill sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the operation site itself shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, have an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet and shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or ore and maintained to prevent dust and mud. In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the planning department and the city director of transportation and public works after consideration of all circumstances including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation; the purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind. 
(20)  Salt water wells. No disposal wells, including but not limited to salt water disposal wells, shall be located within the City of Decatur. 
(21)  Signs. 
a.  A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to section 7-87 of this article. Such sign shall be durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two (2) square feet nor more than four (4) square feet and shall be lettered with the following: 
1.  Well name and number; 
2.  Name of operator; 
3.  The emergency 911 number; and 
4.  Telephone numbers of two (2) persons responsible for the well who may be contacted in case of emergency. 
b.  Permanent weatherproof signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED" shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other location approved or designated by the fire chief of the city. Sign lettering shall be four (4) inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the fire department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the commission. 
(22)  Storage of equipment. On-site storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being conducted on the site. 
No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any driveway, alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment which is necessary for drilling or production operations on the site. The fire department shall be the entity that determines whether any equipment on the site shall constitute a fire hazard. No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. 
(23)  Storage tanks. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire chief. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondary containment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height and one and one-half (11/2) times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the Fire Code, and buried at least one (1) foot below the surface. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to contain the liquids from the storage tank. 
All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire Protection Association, but in all cases, shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any public right-of-way or property line. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank. 
(24)  Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system. 
Tanks must be at least two hundred (200) feet from any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park. 
(25)  Surface casing. Surface casing must be new and shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the commission. 
(26)  Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall have access to the well site to enable it to close the shut-off the valve in an emergency. 
(27)  Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the following: 
Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet the American Petroleum Institute standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit classification. 
Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling, re-working or deepening of any well shall be discharged into an earthen pit. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency. 
Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the site and transported to an off-site disposal facility not less often than every thirty (30) days. Water stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary. 
All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city. 
(28)  Watchman. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on site during the drilling or re-working of a well when other workmen are not on the premises. 
(b)  Well setbacks. It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located: 
(1)  Within twenty-five (25) feet from any outer boundary line; or 
(2)  Within twenty-five (25) feet from any storage tank, or source of ignition; or 
(3)  Within seventy-five (75) feet of any public street, road, highway or future street, right-of-way or property line; or 
(4)  Within three hundred (300) feet from any building used, or designed and intended to be used, for human occupancy or 
(5)  Within one hundred (100) feet of any building accessory to, but not necessary to the operation of the well; or 
(6)  Within two hundred (200) feet to any fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. 
The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any object listed in subsections (b)(1) through (6) above. 
The distances set out in subsection (b)(1), (3), (4), or (6) of this section may be reduced at the discretion of the city council, but never less than two hundred (200) feet from any dwelling or any other building used, or designed and intended to be used, for human occupancy without the unanimous consent of the property owners within a two hundred (200) foot radius around said well and the affirmative vote of not less than three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city council. For protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the city council may impose additional requirements for a reduction of such distance. 
(c)  Installation of pipelines on, under or across public property. The operator shall apply to the city for a franchise agreement on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city property for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines so long as production or operations may be continued under any gas and oil well permit issued pursuant to this article. Operator shall: 
(1)  Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities located on, under or across the course of such rights-of-way. 
(2)  Furnish to the director of development of the city a plat showing the location of such pipelines. 
(3)  Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations properly cased and vented if under a street. 
(4)  Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced. 
No gas and oil well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of the city and/or projected streets or alleys shown by the current comprehensive plan of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless prior consent is obtained from the planning department. Any consent from the planning department shall be temporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or days that any street or alley may be blocked, encumbered or closed. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-87. - Gate specifications. 
    All chain link fences and masonry walls shall be equipped with at least one (1) gate. The gate shall meet the following specifications: 
(1)  The gates shall be of chain link construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of other approved material that, for safety reasons, shall be at least as secure as a chain link fence; 
(2)  The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site; and 
(3)  Operator must provide the city fire chief with a "Knox Padlock" or "Knox Box with a key" to access the well site to be used only in case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-88. - Cleanup and maintenance. 
(a)  Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations within sixty (60) days. 
(b)  Clean-up after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the city fire chief and the Inspector all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Clean-up operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site clean-up within twenty-four (24) hours, the city shall have the right to contact the commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. 
(c)  Free from debris. The property on which a well site is located shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material within a radius of one hundred (100) feet around any separators, tanks and producing wells. 
(d)  Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the inspector shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the inspector. 
(e)  Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the inspector as soon as practicable. The inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the planning department and the city manager. If the inspector, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the inspector may then employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the inspector deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the Inspector in gaining control of said well. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-89. - Plugged and abandoned wells. 
(a)  Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(b)  [Approval.] Abandonment shall be approved by the inspector after restoration of the drill site has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the inspector: 
(1)  The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from drill site; 
(2)  All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site; 
(3)  All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the commission; 
(4)  All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil; 
(5)  All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site; and 
(6)  During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article. 
(c)  Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following at the discretion of the inspector: 
(1)  A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under the state law; and 
(2)  A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated. 
(d)  Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 7-90. - Technical advisor. 
    The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the gas and oil industry or the law as it pertains to gas and oil matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the city on such matters relating to gas and oil operations within the city as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the city. In the event such technical advisor(s) is employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article, then the cost for such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed against and paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article. Prior to the employment of a technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-09-13,  1, 1-26-04) 
Secs. 7-91-7-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICABS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13. 

Sec. 7-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Conduct a taxicab business shall mean the use of one (1) or more taxicabs within the city by the owner thereof for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, either by driving the same himself or having the same driven by some other person, provided that this definition shall not apply to any licensed chauffeur hired as a driver by any person holding a permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city. 
    Taxicab shall mean any and all vehicles carrying passengers for hire, except motor buses or motor coaches operated by bus lines over designated routes in and through the city. 
(Code 1975,  17-1, 17-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 7-162. - Permit required, application. 
    Before any person shall conduct a taxicab business in the city, he shall file with the city secretary an application to the city council for a permit to conduct such business in the city. The application shall state the name and address of such applicant, whether the applicant is an individual, firm or corporation, and if a firm, the name and address of each member, and if a corporation, the names of the officers thereof, and in all cases the number of vehicles to be operated under such permit. 
(Code 1975,  17-3) 
Sec. 7-163. - Consideration of application by council. 
    It shall be the duty of the city secretary, when an application for a permit is filed with him, at the next regular meeting of the city council following the filing of the application, to call the attention of the council thereto; and upon consideration of such application, the council may grant or refuse such permit, as in its discretion may seem to the best interest of the citizens of the city and to the public in general. 
(Code 1975,  17-4) 
Sec. 7-164. - Issuance of permit. 
    A permit for the conduct of a taxicab business in the city shall be issued and signed by the city secretary and sealed with the official seal of the city. It shall be dated on the day of its issuance, shall bear a serial number, shall show the name and address of the permittee, shall state that the permittee has been authorized by the city council to conduct a taxicab business in the city until April 30 next following the date of issuance, and that the permit is subject to cancellation at any time by the city council. 
(Code 1975,  17-5) 
Sec. 7-165. - Permit fee; vehicle information; report of gross receipts. 
(a)  At the time of issuance of a permit under this article, the permittee shall pay to the city secretary a sum which is on file in the office of the city secretary for each taxicab to be operated in the city for a twelve-month period ending April 30; provided, that, if such permit is granted for less than the full year, the permittee shall pay to the city an amount prorated according to the number of months for which the permit is issued. Each permittee shall file with the city secretary a statement in writing under oath signed by him, showing the make, model, motor number and state license number of each vehicle to be operated by him as a taxicab. If at any time the holder of the permit shall desire to use any additional vehicles under such permit, he may do so only after he has made application to the city council for a permit to operate such additional vehicles and has had his application for such permit granted; and he shall furnish to the city secretary the same information regarding such additional vehicles as is required in this section regarding those covered by the original permit, and shall pay to the city secretary the amount provided in this article. 
(b)  Each operator of a taxicab business holding a permit shall make and file an affidavit on or before the tenth day of each month, stating under oath the gross receipts received during the preceding month from the operation of each such taxicab. At the expiration of the thirtieth day of April following the date of issuance of each permit, all such affidavits will be reviewed, and an adjustment will be made by and between the city and the operator of such taxicab, so that such operator shall pay to the city a total sum which is on file in the city secretary's office to include the initial permit fee as required by this section. 
(Code 1975,  17-6) 
Sec. 7-166. - Insurance required. 
    The holder of any permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city shall at all times during the life of such permit keep each and every vehicle operated by him under his permit insured with a company authorized to do business in the state, in an amount of not less than that required by state law for bodily injury to or death of persons in any accident, or destruction of property of others. The policies of insurance shall be filed with the city secretary, and shall not be cancelled or surrendered except upon written notice to the city secretary. Failure of any permittee to procure and file such policies of insurance as required by this section shall immediately forfeit and make null and void such permit, and all rights thereunder shall at once cease. 
(Code 1975,  17-7) 
Sec. 7-167. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be cancelable, and may be revoked by the city council at any time it shall appear to the city council that the permittee has violated any provision of this article or failed to comply with any requirement hereof, or has committed any offense against the traffic laws of this city or of the state, or has done or failed to do any act in violation of the Code or ordinances of the city which in the judgment of the city council would justify such revocation. 
(Code 1975,  17-8) 
Sec. 7-168. - Parking and standing of taxicabs. 
    It shall be unlawful for the holder of any permit issued under the terms of this article, or the agent, servant or employee of any such permittee, to park or leave standing any taxicab on the streets of the city in any area other than that specifically designated as a taxicab stand, except while loading and unloading passengers into and from such taxicab. 
(Code 1975,  17-9) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 7-169. - Permittee to use only vehicles belonging to him. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a taxicab business in the city to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, as a taxicab, any vehicle not owned by him. 
(Code 1975,  17-10) 
Sec. 7-170. - Violations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to conduct a taxicab business in the city without a valid permit as required by this article, or to park or stand a taxicab on the streets of the city except in a taxi stand or except when unloading or loading passengers or to violate any provision of this article. 
(Code 1975,  17-12) 
Secs. 7-171-7-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 13-92, adopted Nov. 24, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of  1-20 as Ch. 7, Art. V,  7-181-7-200 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 7-181. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations on the operation of the same without imposing a limitation or restriction on the contents of any communicative materials, included sexually oriented materials. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  1, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-182. - Definitions. 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as one (1) of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
    City secretary means the city secretary of the City of Decatur or his/her designated agent. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts, as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Massage establishment means any building, room, place, or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital, where manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or a doctor whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish bathhouses. This term shall not include, however, duly licensed beauty parlors or barber shops or a place wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician's direction. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
    Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple family, or mobile home zoning district as defined in the Decatur Zoning Ordinance. 
    Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multiple family, or "mobile home park, mobile home subdivision" as defined in the Decatur Zoning Ordinance. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps of devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Sexual activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. 
    Sexually oriented business means adult arcade, adult bookstore, or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater or nude model studio. 
    Specified anatomical areas means less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public regions, buttocks, anus, or female breasts. 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy. 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above. 
    Transfer of ownership or control includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  2, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-183. - Classification of sexually oriented businesses. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Massage establishments; 
(9)  Nude model studios; 
(10)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  3, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-184. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of: 
(1)  A church, convent, monastery, synagogue, or other similar place of religious worship; 
(2)  A public, private, or parochial elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district as defined in this article; 
(4)  A day care center; 
(5)  A library; 
(6)  A public park, playground, or other recreational facility adjacent to a residential facility adjacent to a residential district as defined in this article; or 
(7)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership of control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance or more than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structure or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating in conformance with this section is not rendered nonconforming by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within one thousand feet (1,000) of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  4, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-185. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he/she operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must fully execute the application for a license. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license. Each applicant must be qualified under Section 6 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  5, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-186. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The city secretary shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless he/she finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or any applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this section, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The license fee required has not be paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated that he/she is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with Sections 7-184, 7-188 or 7-193 through 7-199 hereof. 
(8)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code; 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code; 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; 
(iii)  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less that five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(8)a. may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(8)b. has elapsed. 
(d)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  6, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-187. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is set at five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  7, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-188. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, and building inspection division to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his/her agent or employee commits an offense if he/she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  8, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-189. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 7-185. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date. Applications made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date will have no effect on the expiration of the license. 
(b)  When the city secretary denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city secretary finds that the basis for the denial of the renewal has been corrected, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  9, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-190. - Suspension. 
    The city secretary shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 7-184, 7-188 or 7-193 through 7-199 of this section. 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this section. 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  10, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-191. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city secretary shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 7-190 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The city secretary shall remove a license if he/she determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city secretary during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 7-186 (a)(8)a. for which the time period required in section 7-186(a)(8)b. has not elapsed. 
(6)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person [accused] of a crime listed in section 7-186(a)(8)a., for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the meaning as it is defined in Section 21.01, Texas Penal Code; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(9)  A licensee has refused to permit an inspection of the premises by the city secretary or his/her designee. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the city secretary revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city secretary finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 7-186 (a)(8)a. has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  11, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-192. - Appeal; exemption from locational requirements. 
(a)  If the city secretary denies the issuance of a license or the renewal of a license, he or she shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his or her action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the city secretary to the city council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the city. 
(b)  The applicant may, not later than ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for a hearing before the city council. 
(c)  A hearing by the city council may proceed if a quorum is present. The city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. 
(d)  The city council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of this section if the following is found: 
(1)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this section of the city Code; 
(3)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  That all other applicable provisions of this section will be observed. 
(e)  The city council shall grant or deny the exemption by majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city council regarding the permit appeal is final. 
(f)  If the city council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the council's action. Upon expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the city council denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the council's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this section other than the locational restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  12, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-193. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  13, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-194. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  11, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-195. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he/she knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he/she knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) or (b) above if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  15, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-196. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this section. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he/she rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he/she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) above, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  16, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-197. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The city secretary may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certified that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city secretary or his/her designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in paragraph (5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to paragraph (1) above. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under paragraphs (1) through (8) of subsection (a) above commits an offense if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  17, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-198. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
    The display of sexually explicit material to minors is unlawful and punishable in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Penal Code, 43.24. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  18, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-199. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) below, any person violating section 7-184, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio, then violation of section 7-184 is a punishable as a Class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by subsection (b) above, a violation of any provision of this section other than section 7-184, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecuting under Section 4 or section 7-194 (d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4 or section 7-185 (a) that each item of descriptive, printed, or film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  19, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 7-200. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 7-185 herein, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 13-92,  20, 11-24-92) 
Secs 7-201-7-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 06-02-12,  1-9, adopted February 28, 2006, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as  7-211-7-219 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 7-211. - Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(a)  The City of Decatur adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules, any future version or amended rules by the Texas Board of Health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
    City or the city means the City of Decatur, Texas. 
    Food establishment means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
    Regulatory authority means the City of Decatur Inspections Department. 
    Re-inspection means any inspection, other than a routine inspection, conducted at permitted food establishment, after notice has been given to correct a violation, to ensure that the violation has been corrected. 
    Routine inspection means an unannounced inspection conducted of a permitted food establishment for the purpose of determining the compliance of the establishment with the rules of this department. 
    The words "state rules" mean the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-212. - Permits and exemptions. 
(a)  A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article. 
(b)  A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permitting requirements of this article, but is not exempt from compliance with state rules. The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is nonprofit for purpose of this exemption. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  2, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-213. - Application for permit and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(c)  The following fee schedule applies to permits issued under this article: 
City of Decatur Fee Schedule 
Food Establishment Permits 
Gross Annual Volume of Food Sales Permit Fee Amount $0.00-$49,999.99 $100.00 annual fee $50,000.00-$149,999.99 $200.00 annual fee $150,000.00 or more $325.00 annual fee Late fee $50.00 Re-inspection fee $50.00 Temporary event $20.00 per event  
Registration of Certified Food Manager 
Certified Food Manager Certification $10.00 for five years  
Food Establishment Plan Review Fee Schedule 
Square Footage of Propose Establishment Fee Amount 0-500 square feet $50.00 501-1,000 square feet $100.00 1,001-5,000 square feet $150.00 5,001-10,000 square feet $200.00 10,001 or more $250.00  
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  3, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-214. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that twenty (20) percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(c)  See the plan review fee schedule that applies for new construction, remodeling, or conversion of a structure for a food establishment facility. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  4, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-215. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten (10) days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  5, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-216. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing if filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  6, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-217. - Certified food manager. 
(a)  One (1) certified food manager must be employed by each permitted food establishment. Certification must be obtained by passing an examination approved by the Texas Department of Health and meeting all requirements in HSC, Chapter 438, Subchapter G, and 25 TAC  229.176 (relating to Certification of Food Managers). 
(b)  The regulatory authority shall require that the certified food manager register his or her certification with the city and pay the required registration fee that applies. 
(c)  Exemptions. Food establishments that serve, sell or distribute only prepackaged foods, and/or open foods that are not potentially hazardous, may be exempted from these requirements by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority may waive or modify the requirements for temporary food establishments, special facilities and/or special events. Owners, operators, managers, and persons-in-charge of exempted food establishments may be required by the regulatory authority to comply with the certified food manager's registration requirements if critical food safety violations are observed, or if, in the judgment of the regulatory authority, the nature of the operation requires such registration. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  7, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-218. - Administrative process. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  8, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-219. - Remedies and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation. 
(b)  The regulatory authority is hereby granted the authority to issue citations for violations of these rules that are committed in their presence. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-12,  9, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 7-220-7-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PREPAYMENT FOR GASOLINE AND DIESEL FUEL AT RETAIL FUEL BUSINESSES 

Sec. 7-231. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means the person(s), other than the owner or manager/supervisor, employed to perform services on the premises of a retail fuel business and who have no supervisory responsibilities. 
    Manager/supervisor means the person(s) granted authority or responsibility by the owner for the operations of the retail fuel business. 
    Owner means the individual, group, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group or entity that owns a retail fuel business. 
    Payment means payment by any legal means, including cash, credit card, debit card, check or otherwise. Presenting a form of payment to be finalized at the conclusion of the transaction shall be considered payment in full. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10-07,  1, 10-8-12) 
Sec. 7-232. - Offenses. 
    It shall be an offense for a retail fuel business owner, manager/supervisor, or employee to: 
(1)  Activate any gasoline or diesel fuel pumping device prior to receiving payment in full for the gasoline or diesel fuel; or 
(2)  Allow or permit any person to dispense gasoline or diesel fuel from a pumping device at a retail fuel business unless the person has first made payment in full. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10-07,  1, 10-8-12) 
Sec. 7-233. - Defense. 
    It shall be a defense if the owner, manager/supervisor or employee of a retail fuel business allows the dispensing of gasoline or diesel fuel for repair and/or testing of the dispensing devices used by the retail fuel business. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10-07,  1, 10-8-12) 
Sec. 7-234. - Exception. 
    It is an exception to the application of this article if a merchant enters into a civil agreement with customers, pursuant to which customers may activate a fuel pump prior to payment through the use of a card or similar device, issued by the merchant that activates the pump. Such an agreement shall include identifying information of the customer that may be used by the merchant for seeking compensation in the appropriate civil court should the customer fail to pay for fuel after activating the pump with such a card. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10-07,  1, 10-8-12) 
Chapter 8 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Sale, possession, discharge of fireworks prohibited,  6-66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Trespassing. 
(a)  Trespasses prohibited. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to commit a trespass within this city upon either public or private property. 
(b)  Specific trespasses enumerated. Any of the following acts by any person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed a violation of this article of the City of Decatur Municipal Code: 
(1)  An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, by any person in violation of a notice exhibited thereon prohibiting entry at specified times; 
(2)  An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, by any person in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof; 
(3)  An entry upon any public property, including parks or parking areas, in violation of a notice exhibited thereat prohibiting entry at specified times; 
(4)  An entry upon any public property in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any city official; 
(5)  If on the property or another, or upon public property lawfully, a failure or refusal to depart when requested to so depart by any owner or occupant, or by a city official; 
(6)  An entry upon any portion of a public park, during regular hours, where such entry is specifically prohibited or where the entry involves the use of any vehicle, equipment or device where such use is specifically prohibited, or where the entry otherwise involves any act or conduct which is specifically prohibited. 
(c)  Content of notice to be exhibited. For purposes of constituting a violation of this article, the exhibited notice required under any sections of this article shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The notice shall be plainly posted in a place or places conspicuous to those who would enter the property. 
(2)  The notice shall be legible so as to afford reasonable warning prior to the commission of a trespass. 
(3)  If upon property to which the public is invited at least some part of the day, the notice shall clearly specify the days and times of day entry is prohibited, and further specify that entry at such times constitutes a punishable offense under this article. 
(d)  Exceptions. This article shall not apply to agents, servants or employees of property owners or occupants where such agents, servants or employees have been duly authorized entry upon posted property. 
(e)  Violations, penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every violation. 
(f)  Vehicular trespass prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall park, leave or place any vehicle upon any public or private property without the owner's consent, except where such property is provided for public parking and the use for such parking is not restricted by property notice. 
(g)  Penalties for vehicular trespass. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of subsection (f), above, shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every violation and day the violation is allowed to continue. 
(2)  Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of subsection (f), above, shall have the vehicle so parked, left or placed subject to impoundment upon complaint of the property owner or occupant, and shall be wholly responsible for payment of towage and/or storage charges. 
(Ord. No. 15-99,  1-7, 12-13-99) 
Secs. 8-2-8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK RULES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-94,  2, 3, set out provisions repealing  8-1- which pertained to regulations for occupancy of Melba Doyle Park and derived from Ord. No. 1-89,  1, 2, adopted Jan. 9, 1989- and adopted new park provisions codified, at the editor's discretion, as Art. II of Ch. 8. 

Sec. 8-51. - Use of public parks; concessions. 
(a)  Public use. All parks and playgrounds acquired and maintained by the city shall be open to the use of the public under such reasonable rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe upon the recommendation of the city staff. 
(b)  Concessions. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer anything for barter or sale, exhibit anything for pay, conduct any place of amusement for which an admission fee is charged or render personal service or transportation for hire in any public park in the city without first obtaining the privilege of so doing by contract with or permit from the city under such terms and conditions as may be provided by the city council after receiving the recommendation of the city staff. The public works director and the city secretary, and such other city employees as either such official may deputize for this purpose, are authorized to execute such permits in accordance with guidelines as may from time to time be established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 13-94,  3(1), 11-14-94) 
Sec. 8-52. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Melba Doyle Park shall be closed to the public from thirty (30) minutes after the official sunset time until the official sunrise time of the following day, and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be found in Melba Doyle Park between such hours, except for events approved or scheduled by the public works director or the city secretary or the city council. 
(b)  Harmon Park shall be closed to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be found in Harmon Park between such hours, except for events approved or scheduled by the public works director or the city secretary or the city council. 
(c)  Kenny Renshaw SouthPark shall be closed to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be found in Kenny Renshaw SouthPark between such hours, except for events approved or scheduled by the public works director or the city secretary or the city council. 
(d)  The public works director, the chief of police, the city secretary, and the mayor shall each be empowered to close any public park or parks for any reasonable period of time, when there has occurred any incident, condition or circumstance in which it is determined, in the best judgment and discretion of such official, that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public that such park or parks be closed. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to remain, stay or loiter in any public park during any period or time during which such park is closed, except by special permit issued by the public works director or the city secretary or the city council. 
(f)  Special permission may be granted by the public works director or the city secretary, or any designee of either of them, for organized sports or special events which last past the designated hours of operation for any park or parks; and in such event, any park containing the permitted activity shall remain open until the activity shall cease, at which time the park shall be closed. 
(Ord. No. 13-94,  3(2), 11-14-94) 
Sec. 8-53. - Facility and program fees. 
(a)  The city staff shall charge and collect fees for the use of the city park facilities, and for the sale of concessions upon such park premises, in such amounts as may be from time to time established by the city council and as may be shown by the fee schedule maintained in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  The public works director or the city secretary may set, charge and collect fees for the use of equipment, or police or supervisory services, or for other services, programs, events and merchandise provided or offered by the city where no fee or charge is established by act of the city council. Any such fee or charge shall be based upon the costs of providing the services, event, equipment or goods. 
(Ord. No. 13-94,  3(3), 11-14-94) 
Sec. 8-54. - Signs and other advertising devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any structure, sign, bulletin board, post, pole or advertising device of any kind in any park or playground, or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rope or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or other structure in any park or playground in the city without specific permission from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 13-94,  3(4), 11-14-94) 
Sec. 8-55. - Vehicles and animals. 
(a)  Commercial vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any heavily-laden vehicle or any vehicle engaged in business or commercial transportation or activity of any kind over any street, drive, parkway, boulevard or parking lot in any public park in the city, except under authority expressly granted by the public works director or the city secretary or the city council. 
(b)  Vehicles and animals limited to certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle, or to lead, drive or ride any animal over or through any park, except along and upon park streets, drives, parkways, boulevards or parking lot. This subsection shall not be deemed to apply to guide dogs or other dogs on leash. 
(c)  Hitching, tethering or pasturing animals prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to tether or pasture any animal in or upon any park or playground, or to hitch any horse or other animal to any tree, shrub, fence, railing or other structure in any park or playground. 
(d)  Parking restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a park, except in places designated by the city for such purposes, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to remain parked any vehicle owned by or under such person's control on park property after 11:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m., unless participating in an activity which is scheduled by or with the approval of the city. 
(e)  Exemptions. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to any vehicle operated by the city, county, or any state or federal agency, or any utility company, when such vehicle is operated for the purpose of maintenance or improvements to such parks. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to any police of fire vehicle or to any ambulance when any such vehicle is being operated under emergency circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 13-94,  3(5), 11-14-94) 
Sec. 8-56. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards (whether temporary or permanent), monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markets, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any stream, creek or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters. 
(3)  Bring in the park to dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rock, rubbish, waste, wood, garbage, refuse or other household or commercial trash, containers, equipment or appliances. All refuse, trash or other material created through the use of the parks shall not be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where provided, and if not provided all such rubbish, trash or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(4)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations as may be set forth in this chapter or may be hereafter adopted. 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any noxious, hazardous or flammable materials or substances, either solid or liquid, on park property. 
(6)  Start or maintain a fire in a park except in a fireplace or grill at a site designated by the parks and recreation department; to leave the park without extinguishing a fire started or maintained by that person; to burn wood found in the park or to deposit hot coals in trash receptacles. 
(7)  Camp overnight in a park. 
(8)  Possess, bring into to discharge in a park any firearm, air- or gas-operated gun, bow, crossbow or other missile-throwing device. 
(9)  Move or carry away any sod, sand, earth, tree, wood, shrub, flower or other landscaping in a park or to trample, injure or destroy plant material and park fixtures or facilities. 
(10)  Hit a golf ball in a park, except in any area designated for such purposes. 
(11)  For any person over the age of six (6) years to use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 13-94,  3(6), 11-14-94) 
Sec. 8-57. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage while on the premises of any city park. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "alcoholic beverage" is as defined in the V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code  1.04. 
(Ord. No. 13-94,  3(7), 11-14-94; Ord. No. 05-10-18, 10-24-05) 
Sec. 8-58. - Violations, penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every violation and day the violation is allowed to continue. 
(Ord. No. 13-94,  3(8), 11-14-94) 
Secs. 8-59-8-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 06-06-18,  1, 2, adopted June 12, 2006, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as  8-71-8-73 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 8-71. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, and the derivations thereof shall have the meanings given herein. 
    Minor. A minor is a person younger than seventeen (17) years of age. 
    Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
    Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 06-06-18,  1, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 8-72. - Offenses. 
(a)  [Location of residence.] For each person required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the "database") because of a violation involving a victim who was less than sixteen (16) years of age, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, licensed day care facility, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in Article 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas. 
(b)  Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(1)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than sixteen (16) years of age. 
(2)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein above, or, in the case of multiple residences on one (1) property, measuring from the nearest wall of the building or structure occupied of the parking lot or driveway, whichever is closer to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. 
(3)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the Decatur Police Department. The city shall review the map at least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the Decatur Police Department. 
(c)  Culpable mental state not required. Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. 
(d)  Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this article. 
(2)  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person required to register on the database is a minor. 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
(5)  The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
(Ord. No. 06-06-18,  1, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 8-73. - Violation; fine. 
    It is an offense to violate any part of this article, punishable upon conviction in accordance with a Class C misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 06-06-18,  2, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 8-74-8-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS 

Sec. 8-81. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Decatur. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-12,  1, 9-13-10) 
Sec. 8-82. - Definitions. 
    Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
    Illegal smoking product shall mean any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following chemicals: 
(a)  Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(b)  2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl}-5-(2-methylocatan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and homologues; 
(c)  (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo [c] chormen-1-o1) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(d)  1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or 
(e)  Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073). 
    Ingestion device shall mean equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including: 
(a)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured metal bowl; 
(b)  A water pipe; 
(c)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(d)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(e)  A chamber pipe; 
(f)  A carburetor pipe; 
(g)  An electric pipe; 
(h)  An air-driven pipe; 
(i)  A chillum; 
(j)  A bong; or 
(k)  An ice pipe of chiller. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-12,  1, 9-13-10) 
Sec. 8-83. - Sell, offer, gift, display or possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-12,  1, 9-13-10) 
Sec. 8-84. - Use or possession of ingestion devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-12,  1, 9-13-10) 
Chapter 9 - MOBILE HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; fire prevention code adopted,  6-56 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 12; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 14; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Mobile homes and manufactured housing, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 

Sec. 9-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home shall mean any structure used for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, or skirting which is, or has been, or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place, whether by motor power or other means. The term "mobile home" shall include trailer, camp car, or house car. 
    Mobile home lot shall mean a plot of ground designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home. 
    Mobile home park shall mean any plat of ground upon which two (2) or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Natural or artificial barrier shall mean any stream, pond, railroad, levee, embankment, fence, or hedge. 
(Code 1975,  13-201) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 9-27. - Location of mobile homes restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any mobile home on any street, alley, highway, or other public place in the city. 
(b)  Mobile homes are prohibited within the city except in those areas designated as MHD manufactured home districts in the zoning ordinance. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to mobile homes located in a prohibited area on April 14, 1970. Such existing mobile homes shall be treated as a nonconforming use insofar as this section is concerned, but must obtain a permit in accordance with section 9-31. 
(Code 1975,  13-202) 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. B. 
Sec. 9-28. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any mobile home park within the city unless such person shall first obtain a permit in the manner herein specified. 
(b)  The permit for a mobile home park shall be obtained from the city secretary. The fee for each mobile home lot in the mobile home park is on file in the city secretary's office. Each permit shall expire on the last day of December of each year in which issued. The cost of any permit secured having less than a year to run before the expiration period, as herein provided shall be prorated, but no permit shall be issued for less than a minimum fee which is on file in the city secretary's office. Application for renewal of permits shall be made within thirty (30) days prior to expiration, and a renewal fee shall be paid for a full twelve-month period thereafter. 
(c)  The application for a permit shall be filed with the city secretary. Any changes in the number of lots in any mobile home park after permit is granted shall be reported to the city secretary within seven (7) days from date of change. 
(Code 1975,  13-203(a)-(c)) 
Sec. 9-29. - Permit application. 
(a)  Application for a permit required by this article must include name and address of the applicant, legal description of park property and a park plan setting out the following information: 
(1)  The extent and area to be used for park purposes. 
(2)  Location of sites for mobile homes. 
(3)  Plan of water supply. 
(4)  Plan of sewage disposal. 
(5)  Plan of garbage removal. 
(Code 1975,  13-203(d)) 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 9-30. - Physical requirements. 
(a)  The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(b)  Each person owning or operating a mobile home park shall maintain such park and any facilities, fixtures, and permanent equipment in connection therewith, in a clean and sanitary condition and shall maintain such equipment in a good state of repair. 
(c)  Mobile home parks may be located only in conformity with the zoning ordinance of the city, and in addition each boundary of the park must be at least two hundred (200) feet from any permanent residential building located outside the park unless separated therefrom by a natural or artificial barrier. The provisions of this section shall not apply to mobile home parks already in existence and operating at the time of passage of this article, and such existing and operating parks shall be treated as nonconforming insofar as this section is concerned. 
(Code 1975,  13-204) 
Sec. 9-31. - Mobile homes outside parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain or cause to be located or maintained, any mobile home in any place of the city outside a duly authorized mobile home park, unless such person shall first secure a permit for parking outside of a mobile home park. Such parking may only be authorized in a commercial or industrial zoned area. 
(b)  Permit for parking outside a mobile home park shall be obtained by the mobile home owner or occupant from the city secretary. The permit shall be for a period of one (1) year or fraction thereof at a fee of one dollar ($1.00). All permits issued will expire on the last day of December of each year and renewal will be made during the month of January of each year. 
(c)  Permits shall be granted only upon the written consent of the owner, legal agent of the owner, or the lessee of the location for which issued. In addition, application must also include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner. 
(2)  Description of the mobile home sufficient to identify it, including width, height, length, dimensions, weight, and manufacturer's serial number, if any, and date of manufacture. 
(3)  The current year's registration or license number, if any. 
(4)  Address where mobile home is located. 
(5)  Purpose for which used. 
(6)  Plan for water supply, sewage disposal, and garbage removal. 
The city secretary shall maintain a permanent record containing the above-described information and such other information as he may require from time to time. 
(d)  Within one (1) month after the effective date of this ordinance all persons owning mobile homes located within the city, except those that are located in mobile home parks, shall secure a permit for parking from the city secretary. The permit will be for the remainder of the calendar year and shall be renewed during the month of January each year in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1975,  13-205) 
Sec. 9-32. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit storage of a mobile home for any length of time when the mobile home is not used for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes. 
(Code 1975,  13-206) 
Sec. 9-33. - Conflict with zoning ordinance. 
    In case of conflict of this article with the zoning ordinance of the city, the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall supersede and prevail over this article. 
(Code 1975,  13-208) 
Chapter 10 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; solid waste, Ch. 12; utilities, Ch. 14; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Nuisances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436; Texas litter law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Placing certain refuse, trash on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, leave, or cause to be thrown, left, or deposited, any putrid or unsound flesh, dead fowl, animals of any kind, fish, hides, offal, or filth of any kind, decayed vegetable matter, or other vegetable matter, barrels, boxes, crates, or other trash or waste, in or on the public square, streets, alleys, sidewalks, or vacant lots of the city. 
(Code 1975,  10-9) 
State Law reference- Penalty, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  2.011. 
Secs. 10-2-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS AND WILD GROWTH OF VEGETATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 10, Article II,  10-26, 10-27, was deleted as being superseded by Ord. No. 4-91, adopted July 8, 1991,  1-8 of which were included as a new Art. II at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1975,  8-2(e), 10-10. 
Cross reference- Collection of solid wastes,  12-26 et seq.; zoning, App. B. 

Sec. 10-26. - Unlawful accumulation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to permit the existence of uncultivated grass, weeds, and brush; the accumulation of trash or rubbish; the existence of stagnant water or other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter upon private properties; and all premises in the city are subject to inspection by health and safety officers or other code enforcement officers to determine the presence or existence of such materials. 
(Ord. No. 4-91,  1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 10-27. - Notice of violation-To be served to owner. 
    Upon the discovery of any of the following public nuisances upon any property in the corporate city limits of the city, written notice shall be given the owner of said premises that they are in violation of this article through the existence of one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  The growth of grass, weeds or other uncultivated plants to a height greater than twelve (12) inches (1 foot) on any property. 
(2)  The accumulation of garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse or other matter or objects of an unsightly or unsanitary nature. 
(3)  The accumulation of stagnant water. 
    Separate notice of any such violation may be given the tenant, lessee or other occupant of said premises. 
(Ord. No. 4-91,  2, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 10-28. - Same-Description of property and violations included. 
    Such notice given the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of said premises shall identify by address or legal description the property upon which any violation has occurred, and shall specify one (1) or more violations of the above listed provisions set forth in section 10-27(1)-(3). 
(Ord. No. 4-91,  3, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 10-29. - Same-Method of service. 
(a)  Owner given ten (10) days to correct violation. Each notice shall give the party in question ten (10) days from the notice to cause correction of the violation. Notice must be made in writing and must be served: 
(1)  Through personal delivery to the party; or 
(2)  by letter addressed to the party at the party's post office address; or 
(3)  By publication at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Decatur, Texas, if personal service cannot be obtained and if the party's post office address is unknown. 
(b)  Failure to correct violation in ten (10) days. Such notice shall advise that failure to cause correction of the violation within ten (10) days of notice of such violation may subject the parties to all penalties authorized or permitted under this article. 
(c)  The city in the notice of a violation may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature, that poses a danger to the public health and safety, on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year time period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by sections 10-30 and 10-31, and may assess its expenses as provided by section 10-32. 
(Ord. No. 4-91,  4, 5, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 14-93, 10-11-93) 
Sec. 10-30. - Penalty; fine. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent, occupant or any one having supervision or control over any lot, tract, a parcel of land or portion thereof, failing to comply and correct any violation under this article within ten (10) days of notice as hereinabove provided, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each and every violation and day the violation is allowed to continue. 
(Ord. No. 4-91,  6, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 10-31. - City to make improvements if owner fails; owner charged. 
    If the owner of the property fails to comply and correct any violation under this article within ten (10) days of notice as hereinabove provided, the city council, the mayor or the city secretary may direct employees or agents of the city to do the work or make the improvements required to correct the violation, and may pay for the work done or improvements made and charge to the owner of the property the expenses so incurred. A notice that such charges haves been made and a statement setting forth the amount of such expenses charges shall be given to the owner within ninety (90) days of the time such expenses are incurred. Such notice and statement may be delivered in any manner set forth in section 10-29, above. However, failure of the city to timely forward such notice and statement of expenses shall not waive or reduce the remedies to the city except for the charging of interest upon any such statement amount. 
(Ord. No. 4-91,  7, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 10-32. - Policy adopted. 
    The city council hereby adopts a policy that all expenses incurred under section 10-31, above, shall be assessed against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made, in accordance with Section 342.007 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. Accordingly, after such expenses have been incurred, the mayor, municipal health authority, or other municipal official designated by the mayor shall file a statement of expenses with the county clerk of Wise County. The lien statement must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The filing of such statement shall establish a lien upon the real property therein described and upon which such work was performed or improvements made. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk of Wise County. Such lien shall secure the City of Decatur for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten (10) percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the City of Decatur. The lien established under this section shall be inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The city council may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the City of Decatur to recover the expenses and interest due. The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement shall constitute prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements. The remedy provided in this section is in addition to the remedy provided under section 10-30 above. 
(Ord. No. 4-91,  8, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 14-93, 10-11-93) 
Secs. 10-33-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED, WRECKED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-41-10-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERSONAL PROPERTY OTHER THAN VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. B. 

Sec. 10-56. - Certain property declared nuisance. 
    Any property or obstruction except junked vehicles as defined in section 10-81 placed, left, erected, or lying in violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city or left unattended for more than seventy-two (72) continuous hours in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place of the city is declared to be a nuisance. Any such property when so found shall be removed summarily by any police officer of the city and impounded, and shall be kept until redeemed or sold as herein provided. This division shall not apply to junked vehicles as defined in section 10-81. 
(Code 1975,  10-21) 
Sec. 10-57. - Lien on impounded property. 
    The city shall have a lien on personal property impounded under this division for all costs incurred in impounding, storing, and advertising such property; and such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes. The city may retain possession thereof until all costs are paid and may sell the same as provided in this division. 
(Code 1975,  10-22) 
Sec. 10-58. - Redemption. 
    The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of such impounded property may redeem the same as follows: 
(1)  Before sale. By paying the impounding fee and any other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding and keeping the impounded property. 
(2)  After sale. By paying to the buyer of the auction sale double the amount paid by him for such personal property and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping same; provided that the property must be redeemed from the auction buyer within thirty (30) days after the date of the auction sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise, title to the property shall become absolute in the auction buyer. 
(Code 1975,  10-23) 
Sec. 10-59. - Property to be sold. 
    When any personal property impounded under this division is not redeemed within sixty (60) days after being impounded, the chief of police shall sell the same at public auction to satisfy the lien of the city. 
(Code 1975,  10-24) 
Sec. 10-60. - Notice of sale. 
    Before selling personal property impounded under this division, the chief of police shall post two (2) notices thereof, one (1) at the county courthouse and one (1) at the city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in a weekly newspaper the date of the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the day of the auction sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold at public auction, designate the place of sale, and state a time and date of sale which shall not be less than fourteen (14) days from the date of posting such notices as herein required. 
(Code 1975,  10-25) 
Sec. 10-61. - Sale of property. 
    When any property impounded under this division is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the chief of police shall sell such property at public auction, and, as city auctioneer, shall execute bill of sale of such property to the purchaser thereof; provided, he shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill of sale unless and until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an expiration of thirty (30) days in time, exclusive of the day of sale, without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property. 
(Code 1975,  10-26) 
Sec. 10-62. - Disposal of proceeds of sale. 
    After deducting the impounding fee and all other actual expenses incurred by the city in the impounding, storing, and selling property under this division, as determined by the chief of police (which shall not exceed a reasonable amount for each impounded article), he shall pay the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to the owner of the property. If the owner fails to call for such proceeds they shall be paid into the city treasury. Within six (6) months after such auction sale, the owner may apply in writing to the chief of police, and upon satisfactory proof of ownership, shall be entitled to receive the amount of the proceeds delivered to the city treasury. 
(Code 1975,  10-27) 
Sec. 10-63. - Junk. 
    Impounded property which is offered for sale at public auction in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this division and upon which no person bids, shall thereafter be sold or otherwise disposed of as junk. Money received for junk property shall be disposed of in the same manner as proceeds from an auction sale under this division. 
(Code 1975,  10-28) 
Sec. 10-64. - Records and fees. 
(a)  The chief of police shall keep a record book which shall contain: A description of all property impounded under this division, the date and time of such impounding, the date notices of sale were posted and advertised and mailed to owners and lienholders, the return of receipts of registered notices, the date of sale at auction, the amount realized for each article at such sale, the name and address of the owner and lienholders, if known, the name and address of the auction buyer, and any other information as he may deem necessary. 
(b)  The following fees shall be charged under this article and shall be paid into the city treasury: 
(1)  For taking and impounding any personal property, three dollars ($3.00). 
(2)  For preparing advertisement of sale for each article, one dollar ($1.00). 
(3)  For selling each article, one dollar ($1.00). 
(4)  For posting notices of sale relating to any one (1) article, one dollar ($1.00). 
(Code 1975,  10-29) 
Sec. 10-65. - Exception. 
    Nothing in this division shall apply to, alter, or affect the provisions of ordinances regulating the impounding and sale of dogs. 
(Code 1975,  10-30) 
Secs. 10-66-10-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.08 et seq. 

Sec. 10-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique auto shall mean passenger cars or trucks that were manufactured in 1925 or before, or which become thirty-five (35) or more years old. 
    Collector shall mean the owner of one (1) or more antique or special-interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special-interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for his own use in order to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special-interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Demolisher shall mean any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles. 
    Junked vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-11,  1, as amended, which is inoperative and which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate and which is either wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded or remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than forty-five (45) days. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act. 
    Special-interest vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Code 1975,  10-42) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 10-82. - Exception. 
    This division shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard. 
(3)  An unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique and special-interest vehicle stored by a collector on his property, provided that the vehicles and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means. 
(Code 1975,  10-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.09(g). 
Sec. 10-83. - Administration. 
    This division shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. Without intending to limit the above, the chief of police, specifically, may delegate any of the duties imposed upon him hereunder to any employee described above. 
(Code 1975,  10-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.09(h). 
Sec. 10-84. - Entry upon private property; orders. 
    Any person duly authorized to administer the provisions of this division may enter upon private property or parts thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this division. The municipal court shall have authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1975,  10-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.11. 
Sec. 10-85. - Unlawful acts declared. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Leave, or permit to remain, upon public or private property within the city any junked vehicle, or part thereof, for a period of time in excess of ten (10) days, subject to the provisions of section 10-82. 
(2)  Fail or refuse to comply with any order to remove and abate a nuisance issued under sections 10-87 to 10-88, subject to the right to hearing specified in section 10-88. 
(3)  Leave, or permit to remain, upon public or private property within the city any junked vehicle, or part or parts thereof, for a period of one (1) day or more, after such vehicle has been once removed and abated as a nuisance, subject to the provisions of section 10-82. 
(4)  Reconstruct or make operable a junked vehicle after same has been removed pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1975,  10-52) 
Sec. 10-86. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    The city council hereby finds that junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city. Any such vehicle is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1975,  10-43) 
Sec. 10-87. - Issuance of notice. 
(a)  The chief of police upon noticing or having brought to his attention that a nuisance exists within the city, either upon private property or public property or on a public right-of-way, shall give or cause to be given to the owner or occupant of such private or public property or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon such public nuisance exists, a written notice stating the nature of the public nuisance and that same must be removed and abated within ten (10) days. 
(b)  All notices sent under this section shall be mailed by certified mail with a five-day return requested to the owner or occupant of the private or public premises to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, to any lienholder of record, or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way upon which such public nuisance exists as the case may be. If the notice is returned undelivered by the post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return. 
(Code 1975,  10-44) 
State Law reference- Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.09(b), (c). 
Sec. 10-88. - Public hearing; order of removal. 
(a)  Prior to the removal of any vehicle alleged to be a junked vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance, a public hearing shall be held before the judge of the municipal court to determine if good cause exists why such vehicle should not be removed and abated as a nuisance, provided such hearing has been requested by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, within ten (10) days after service of the notice to abate the nuisance. 
(b)  If such owner or occupant fails to present good cause showing why the vehicle should not be removed and abated as a nuisance, the municipal court judge shall order such owner or occupant to remove the junked vehicle within ten (10) days from the date of such order, provided same is mailed to such owner or occupant, in the manner specified in section 10-87, upon the date the order is made or within one (1) business day thereafter. 
(Code 1975,  10-45) 
Sec. 10-89. - Removal of vehicle; sale. 
(a)  Upon the expiration of the ten-day notice period given under section 10-87, provided no proper request for hearing has been made, or upon the expiration of the ten-day notice period given after public hearing pursuant to section 10-88, if the junked vehicle involved has not been removed, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or those acting under his authority to remove such vehicle to a suitable city storage area or to a demolisher. Such vehicle shall there remain for a period of ten (10) days during which time any party owning or claiming any right, title or interest therein may redeem the same by paying to the city the costs incurred by it in abating the nuisance. 
(b)  When such ten-day redemption period has expired, the chief of police may dispose of the junked vehicles by sale to a demolisher for the highest amount bid or offered under competitive bidding, or remove the vehicles to a scrapyard, demolisher, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing and sale as scrap or salvage. 
(c)  Upon the sale of any such vehicle, the city shall apply the proceeds first to the costs incurred by it in abating and storing the nuisance, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to any person showing proper entitlement thereto. 
(Code 1975,  10-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.09. 
Sec. 10-90. - Notice to state highway department. 
    Within five (5) days after the removal of any junked vehicle, notice thereof shall be given to the state department of highways and public transportation identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. 
(Code 1975,  10-48) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.09(f). 
Sec. 10-91. - Reconstruction. 
    A junked vehicle, once removed in accordance with this division, shall never be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Code 1975,  10-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.09(d). 
Secs. 10-92-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNSAFE, DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. No. 4-93,  1-10, adopted May 10, 1993, has been codified as Art. IV of Chapter 10,  10-101-10-110, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 10-101. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the provisions of this article to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby buildings or structures which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, or are a menace to the life, limb, health, morale, property, safety and general welfare of the people of the city, or which tend to constitute a fire hazard, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  1, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-102. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    Board of appeals shall mean the city council, meeting to hear and determine appeals from a decision or order of the code enforcement officer, the fire marshal or the health officer rendered pursuant to this article, or pursuant to the fire code of the city. 
    Normal wind speed shall mean the same as "basic wind speed" as defined in the Uniform Building Code as periodically adopted by the city. 
    Code enforcement officer shall mean the code enforcement officer of the City of Decatur and shall be the chief of police of the city, or his designee or other authorized agent, deputy or representative. Further, the city council shall be entitled to designate any other properly certified city employee to also serve as a code enforcement officer. 
    Fire marshal shall mean the fire marshal of the city, or his authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
    Health officer shall mean the duly appointed health officer of the city, or his authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  2, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-103. - Declared public nuisance. 
    All buildings or structures, irrespective of material from which the buildings or structures were built and regardless of the date of their construction, which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, as specified by the fire prevention code of the city or any other provisions of law, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, neglect, decay, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment as specified in the building code of the city or any other provision of law, are for the purpose of this article declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished, as hereinafter provided. For the purpose of this article, any building or structure which has any or all of the following conditions or defects shall be deemed a dangerous building: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit, in case of fire or panic, for all persons housed or assembled therein who would be required to, or might, use such door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit; 
(2)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof may reasonably be expected to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse, and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
(3)  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member or appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place as to be capable of resisting a normal wind pressure; 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that the walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of new construction; 
(5)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or some other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way; 
(6)  Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used; 
(7)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle third of the base; 
(8)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration to the member or members, or fifty (50) percent of damage or deterioration of a nonsupporting enclosing or outside wall or covering; 
(9)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to have become dangerous to the life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the general population, or to have become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants or criminals, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful act or acts; 
(10)  Whenever a building or structure has improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or overloaded floors or roofs; 
(11)  Whenever a building or structure, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than fifty (50) percent, or in any supporting member less than sixty-six (66) percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or characteristics or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law or ordinance in the case of a newly constructed building or like area, height and occupancy in the same location; 
(12)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within; 
(13)  Whenever any building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, has light, air or sanitation facilities inadequate to protect the health, safety or general welfare of persons who occupy or live or may live therein; 
(14)  Whenever any building or structure by reason of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, electric wiring, gas connections, heating apparatus, or other cause, is in such condition to be a fire hazard and is so situated as to provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread and intensity of fire arising from any cause; 
(15)  Whenever any building or structure is likely to provide breeding places and habitat for snakes, rats, mice or other vermin which are detrimental to the public health, or which because of their condition are otherwise unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of this city; 
(16)  Whenever any building or structure is maintained in violation of any specific statutory, fire code or health code requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  3, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-104. - Notice to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish. 
(a)  Generally. If the fire marshal or health officer or any building inspector or code enforcement officer finds that any building or structure or any portion thereof, is a fire hazard or is dangerous and unsafe, he shall report the same to the code enforcement officer, who shall prepare a notice in writing stating in detail the conditions which render the building or structure, or portion thereof, a nuisance as defined in section 10-103, above. Such notice shall further order the repair, vacation and repair, or demolition thereof within thirty (30) days from the date of personal service or mailing of the notice. The code enforcement officer may, when it is determined that additional time will be necessary to complete the work ordered, extend such time for additional thirty-day periods, not to exceed a total extension of one hundred twenty (120) days, upon the application of the owner or person charged with the duty of complying with such order. 
(b)  Property identification. The notice shall set forth the street address and a description sufficient for identification of the building or structure, and the premises upon which the building or structure is located. 
(c)  Service and posting; parties The code enforcement officer shall cause copies of the notice to be served upon each of the following: 
(1)  The person, if any, in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved; 
(2)  The owner of record title to the real property involved; 
(3)  The holder of any mortgage, trust deed, or other lien or encumbrance of record; 
(4)  The owner or holder of any lease of record; 
(5)  The record holder of any other estate of interest in or to the building or structure or the land upon which it is located. 
(d)  Service and posting; manner of service. The notice shall be served personally upon any person entitled thereto if he can be found within the city limits. If any person entitled thereto is not found within the city limits, service shall be made by depositing a copy of such notice in the United States Post Office, properly enclosed in a sealed envelope, and with the postage thereon fully prepaid. Such mail shall be registered or certified, return receipt requested, and addressed to the person entitled thereto at the address of such person as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the code enforcement officer. If no address so appears or is known to the code enforcement officer, then a copy shall be addressed to such person at the address of the building or structure involved. Service by registered or certified mail shall be complete on the day of mailing. The failure of any owner or other persons to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder. 
(e)  Service and posting; posting upon the premises. One (1) copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted on the building or structure involved. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  4, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-105. - Appeals. 
(a)  Generally. In the event any person shall fail to act upon any such order of the code enforcement officer, the code enforcement officer or the city secretary shall set the matter for hearing before the city council. Further, any person aggrieved by any order of the code enforcement officer hereunder to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure, or portion thereof, may appeal such order by requesting that a hearing upon such order be held by the city council, sitting as a board of appeals. In either such case, the city council shall sit in review of all matters, facts and findings pertaining to violation or alleged violation of this article. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the date, hour and place of the hearing shall be posted and served at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing in the manner and upon the parties specified in subsections 10-104(c)-(e), above. The notice shall order all interested parties who desire to be heard to appear and show cause, if any they have, why the building or structure, or portion thereof, involved in the proceedings should not be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished. 
(c)  Hearing. At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hold a public hearing, and hear and consider any relevant evidence offered by the code enforcement officer, as well as the owner, occupant or person in charge and control, mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust, lessee, or any other person having any estate or interest in such building or structure, pertaining to the matters set forth in the notice to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall make written findings of fact as to whether or not the building or structure or portion thereof is unsafe and a public nuisance, and shall render its decision and issue all appropriate orders. 
(d)  Conduct of hearing. The city council may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigation and hearings. In the course of conduct of any such hearing or hearings, the council may request additional information from any agency charged by law with enforcement of health or safety requirements of local or state law, including the city fire department, police department, water and sewer department and health department. All decisions and findings of the city council shall be made in writing to the code enforcement officer, with duplicate copy of such decisions and findings being sent to all of the parties specified in section 10-104(c), above, who may appear at such hearing or who may otherwise request same in writing. 
(e)  Standards. The following standards, where applicable, shall be followed in substance by the city council in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any building or structure. Any order to demolish, rendered pursuant to this section, shall not indicate an alternative permission to repair; however, an order to repair may be satisfied by demolition. 
(1)  If the unsafe building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the unsafe building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated and repaired. 
(3)  If the unsafe building is fifty (50) percent damaged or decayed or deteriorated, it shall be demolished. 
(4)  In all cases where an unsafe building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be vacated and demolished. 
(5)  In cases where an unsafe building is a fire hazard, as specified by the fire code of the city, existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or any other ordinance of this city or statute of the state, it shall be repaired, except where the cost of such repairs would exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of such unsafe building, in which case it shall be demolished. 
(f)  Entry of orders. 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days after the final conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision, either closing the proceedings or, if it finds that the building or structure or portion thereof is unsafe and a nuisance, ordering that it be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished. 
(2)  If, from a full and fair consideration of the evidence and testimony received at the hearing, the city council shall determine that the building or structure or any portion thereof is unsafe and a public nuisance, then it shall issue an order certified by the city secretary ordering that: 
a.  The building or structure must be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished; 
b.  The occupant, lessee or other person in possession must vacate such building or structure, or that he or she may remain in possession while repairs are being made; and that 
c.  Any mortgagee, beneficiary under a deed of trust, or any other person having an interest or estate in such building or structure may, at his own risk, repair, vacate and repair, or demolish it. 
(3)  The order shall: 
a.  Set forth the information required in subsection 10-104(b), above; 
b.  Contain a statement of the particulars which render the building or structure unsafe and a public nuisance; 
c.  Contain a statement of the things required to be done; 
d.  Specify the time within which the work required must be commenced, which shall be not less than ten (10) days after the issuance of the order; and 
e.  Specify a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed. 
(4)  The code enforcement officer shall cause copies of the order to be posted on the building or structure involved and served in the manner and upon the parties specified in subsections 10-104(c)-(e), above. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  5, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-106. - Sale, repair or demolition by the city. 
(a)  Whenever an order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure, or any portion thereof, has not been complied with within the time set by the city council, the city council shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, to cause the building or structure ordered to be repaired to be vacated until such time as the necessary repairs have been made. No person shall thereafter occupy or permit to be occupied any such building until and unless the necessary repairs have been made and the code enforcement officer has approved same and issued a permit to reoccupy such building or structure. 
(b)  Further, whenever an order to demolish any building or structure, or any portion thereof, has not been complied with within the time set by the city council, the city council shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, to cause the building or structure to be demolished, and the land restored to a reasonably clear and level condition, including the filling of any excavation to the finished grade of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  6, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-107. - Assessment of costs against property creating a lien. 
(a)  Generally. The amount of the cost or expenses of abating such nuisance or removing or demolishing dangerous structures upon the various lots or parcels of land, including incidental expenses, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute special assessments against the respective lots or parcels of land, and as thus made and confirmed shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such assessments, respectively, until paid. Such lien shall, for all purposes, take priority over all other liens except tax liens or paving assessments liens. 
(b)  Validity of assessment. The validity of any assessment levied under the provisions of this article shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the same is commenced within thirty (30) days after the assessment is confirmed. 
(c)  Extinguishment of lien. The lien may be extinguished by the owner reimbursing the city for all removal expenses. 
(d)  Enforcement of lien. The lien may be enforced and expenses recovered by forced sale if authorized under appropriate state law. 
(e)  Notice. Notice of assessment of expenses shall be given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner and any lienholder. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  7, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-108. - Liability of officers, agents, or employees. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be personally liable for damage incurred or alleged to be incurred as a result of any act required, permitted or authorized to be done or performed in the discharge of his duties pursuant to this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required, permitted or authorized in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be deemed an action against the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  8, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-109. - Fire and building codes unaffected by article; exception. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to repeal by implication any other provisions of the fire code of the city, the building code of the city or any other ordinance of the city, and the adoption hereof shall not be deemed to affect or diminish the power or authority of any officer or employee of the city to condemn any building or structure erected or maintained in violation of any other provision of the fire code of the city, the building code of the city, or any other ordinance of the city. However, any repairs made, or to be made, to any structure under this article shall be made in accordance with the building code of the city and this article is cumulative of such code for the purposes set out herein, except that the time allowed for compliance with either of such ordinances shall run concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  9, 5-10-93) 
Sec. 10-110. - Violations, penalty. 
(a)  The owner or other person having charge and control over any building structure determined by the code enforcement officer or the city council to be unsafe and a public nuisance, who shall fail to comply with any order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish a building or structure, or any portion thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any order to vacate such building or structure, or any portion thereof, in accordance with any order given as provided for in this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each and every violation and day the violation is allowed to continue. 
(Ord. No. 4-93,  10, 5-10-93) 
Secs. 10-111-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 10-121. - Incorporation of premises/purpose. 
    The above and foregoing premises are true and correct and are incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
    The purpose of this article is to make it unlawful for any person or entity to make, cause to be made or allow any loud or unreasonably loud or disturbing noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental or offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of the inhabitants of the city, and/or which renders the enjoyment of life, health or property uncomfortable or interfere with public peace and comfort. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-04,  1, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 10-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Decatur, employees or any authorized representative of the city. 
    City manager means the City Manager of the City of Decatur or his designee. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action (excluding demolition) of public or private right-of-way surfaces, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal or public or private right-of-way surfaces, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Device means any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually produces, noise when operated or handled. 
    Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle used in the response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure or danger. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled by mechanical power, such as, but not limited to, any passenger car, truck, truck-trailer, semi-trailer, camper, motorcycle, minibike, go-cart, dune buggy or racing vehicle. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which annoys or disturbs, or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect upon the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent, person; and unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort. 
    Nonresidential district means any district that is not designated by the city's zoning ordinance for residential uses as those uses are defined by the city's zoning ordinance and all amendments thereto. 
    Owner means any person having supervision or control of any property. 
    Power equipment means any motorized electric or fuel powered equipment, including, but not limited to, tractors, lawnmowers, and other similar devices or equipments. 
    Power model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or land borne plane vessel, or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to model airplanes, boats, car or rocket. 
    Property means any lot, tract, parcel of land or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, public or private within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Quiet zone means property on which a school, hospital, clinic, library or other public facility which may be reasonably considered to be sensitive to noise disturbance. 
    Refuse means all animal or vegetable matter, food containers, ashes, paper, small hedges and lawn trimmings, rubbish trash, waste material, refuse including solid, liquid, semisolid, or containing gaseous material, resulting from residential, municipal, commercial, community and institutional activities. 
    Residential district means any district by the zoning ordinance as containing residential homes, apartments, condominiums or town homes. 
    All terminology used in this article and not specifically defined above shall retain its meaning in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institutes (ANSI) or its successor body and/or the latest volume of Webster's Collegiate Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-04,  2, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 10-123. - Specific noise disturbance prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall allow, make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise that is offensive to the sensibilities of a reasonable prudent person, renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable, interferes with public peace and comfort, or causes a noise disturbance as defined. 
(b)  Activities which create unreasonably loud or disturbing noises which are presumed to constitute noise disturbance violations under this article (unless expressly exempted or occurring under a permit of variance obtained as provided herein) are specifically identified as follows: 
(1)  Animals: Owning, keeping, possession, or harboring any animal or fowl which frequent or habitual noise making, unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or reposes of citizens, or causes a noise disturbance as defined herein. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, loud speaking amplifiers and similar devices. 
a.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device that produces or reproduces sound within a residential district or quiet zone, or within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance is prohibited. Any such activity shall create a presumption that a noise disturbance exists if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday. 
b.  Notwithstanding the subsection a. sounds emanating from an M-1 or P-D industrial district which meet the decibel limitations as specified in appendix B zoning, part VII, appendices to ordinance, appendix 3, use performance standards of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Decatur, Texas do not constitute a noise disturbance violation under this article, except that notwithstanding that such noise is emanating from an M-1 or P-D industrial district any such activity shall create a presumption that a noise disturbance exists if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday. 
c.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeaker and sound amplifiers or other machines or devices for the producing or reproducing of sound within a nonresidential area in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
d.  The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeaker and sound amplifiers or other machines or devices that produces or reproduces sound for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise so as to attract attention to such cause, demonstration or premises when such is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance. 
e.  The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeaker and sound amplifiers or other machines or device on trucks or other moving vehicles for the purpose of attracting attention to such cause, demonstration or premises when such is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance. 
(3)  Vehicular sound amplification systems. Operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the city and operating any sound device which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device in the motor vehicle in such a manner that when operated, it is audible at a distance of thirty (30) feet, or when operated causes a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the source, and when such operation is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. The yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or peddlers, hawkers or any other person in such a manner to cause a noise disturbance. 
(5)  Loading operations. The loading or unloading of any vehicle in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(6)  Construction/maintenance work between sundown and sunup, the operating or permitting to be operated any equipment used in construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or demolition work on building, structures, streets, alley, lawns, golf courses or appurtenances thereto and/or the erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building within a residential district or quiet zone, or within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. The regulations contained in this section shall not apply to oil and gas activities and operations. Oil and gas construction and maintenance work is regulated by Ordinance No. 2003-09-13. 
(7)  Power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment (as defined herein and excluding construction equipment specifically regulated above) within a residential district or quiet zone, or within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a presumption that a noise disturbance exists if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(8)  Motor vehicles-Repairs or testing. The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle (including off-road vehicles) or watercraft within a residential district or quiet zone, or within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a presumption that a noise disturbance exists if conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(9)  Motor vehicles-Running loud or out of repair. 
a.  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the excessive spinning of tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessary within a residential district or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a presumption that a noise disturbance exists if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the excessive spinning of tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessary within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(10)  Motor vehicles-Exhaust. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the excessive spinning of tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessary within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(11)  Explosive devices. Sound sources including, but not limited to, the use of fireworks, explosives, the firing of guns or other explosive devices in such a manner to cause a noise disturbance; provided, however, no such noise disturbance shall be deemed to exist when the activity is conducted in strict accordance with an applicable ordinance regulating such activities, other statutory authority regulating such activities, or in conjunction with an event sponsored, approved or otherwise expressly authorized by the city. 
(12)  Power model mechanical devices. 
a.  The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices, within a residential district or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a presumption that a noise disturbance exists if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices, within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(13)  Refuse-compacting vehicles. Operating or permitting to be operated any refuse compacting, processing or collection vehicles in any residential district or quiet zone, or within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or quiet zone in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a presumption that a noise disturbance exists if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. No noise disturbance shall be deemed to occur when the noise is created in the regular course of the activity for which the equipment is designed, the noise occurs for no longer than reasonably necessary to conduct the activity, and the hours of operation occur between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(14)  Quiet zone. Creating a noise disturbance on any street adjacent to a quiet zone. 
(15)  Stationary nonemergency signal devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronic activated or amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than five (5) minutes during any consecutive sixty-minute period and when such activity causes a noise disturbance. Such signaling device is allowed if used as a danger signal, residential alarm, and/or as required by law if a vehicle is backing, starting or turning in such a way as to likely cause a collision. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-04,  3, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 10-124. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from the regulations of this article: 
(a)  Safety signals, storm warning sirens or horns and the testing of such equipment, emergency vehicle sirens or horns used when responding to an emergency, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(b)  Sound caused in performance of emergency or public service work, including police, fire and public utility operations, acting in the performance of lawful duties to protect the health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(c)  Sounds caused by natural phenomena. 
(d)  Activities conducted on public parks and playgrounds which are approved, sponsored or permitted by the city. Activities conducted on public or private school grounds including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events which are approved, sponsored or authorized by the school. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-04,  4, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 10-125. - Permits of variance. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his designated representative, is authorized to grant permits for relief of any provision in this article on the basis of undue hardship in cases where: 
(1)  The sound source will be short duration and activity cannot be conducted in a manner as to comply with this article; 
(2)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify their activity or operation to comply with this article; or 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
(b)  A special event noise variance permit allowing specific deviations from this article may be issued by the chief of police, or his designated representative, without a demonstration of undue hardship, for events of limited duration (not to exceed seven (7) days) which, in the opinion of the chief of police, promote identifiable historical, cultural, artistic, economic development, or community goals, including conditions for the variance specific to the use; provided that any noise disturbance created by such activity will be abated when such request is made by the chief of police, or his designated representative. 
(c)  The chief of police, or his designated representative, may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects and may suspend or revoke any permit issued for one (1) or more violations of any provisions prescribed in the permit of variance. 
A fee as determined from time to time by the city council shall be charged to each applicant for processing permit applications. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-04,  5, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 10-126. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any applicant who has been denied a permit of variance or any permittee, whose permit has been suspended or revoked, shall have the right to a review by the city manager and a hearing before the city council. 
(b)  Request for a review shall be made in writing and received by the chief of police, or his/her designated representative within (10) calendar days of the date of the denial or the date of the notice of the suspension or revocation. The city manager may review the appeal at the staff level and has the authority to uphold or reject the action of his/her designated representative and order that a permit be granted or to reinstate a suspended or revoked permit. Should the city manager approve the variance or uphold the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit he shall notify the applicant of the approval or denial. Should the city manager uphold the denial the applicant may further appeal such decision in writing to request a hearing before the city council. The city manager shall schedule a hearing before the city council within thirty (30) calendar days, or at the next regularly scheduled council meeting, excluding city holidays, of receipt of the initial request of applicant or permittee. 
(c)  At a hearing scheduled pursuant to this section, the city council shall have the authority to review all pertinent files and information regarding the applicant/permittee in the custody of the chief of police, or his/her designated representative. Additionally, the city council shall have the authority to accept written and verbal testimony from the chief of police, his/her designated representative, city manager, any other designated city staff member, applicant/permittee and interested citizens. The mayor shall also have the authority to place time restrictions on the testimony to be given at that hearing. 
(d)  The city council shall have the authority to assess whether the chief of police or his/her designated representative, acted properly within the powers granted under this Ordinance in the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit. The city council's decision to uphold the action of the chief of police, or his/her designated representative, shall affirm the denial, suspension, or revocation and such action shall become final. The city council's rejection of the action of chief of police, or his/her designated representatives in denying, suspending, or revoking a permit shall result in the issuance of a permit or the reinstatement of a suspended or revoked permit, as applicable, in that circumstance, the permit shall be issued or reinstated immediately upon the issuance of a final decision by the city council. 
(e)  No person whose permit has been denied, suspended, or revoked shall create or allow the creation or continuation of the activity or the noise disturbance in dispute prior to the final determination by the city council made in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-04,  6, 2-22-10) 
Chapter 11 - SALES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TEMPORARY SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant shall mean a person who applies for a permit under this article, and includes all persons residing at the address of the location where the temporary sale is to be held. 
    Garage sale shall mean a temporary sale. 
    Location shall mean the place where the temporary sale is to be conducted. 
    Other sales shall mean any offering of goods, wares and/or merchandise for sale to the public, under any name conducted by a resident from such resident's home or by a nonresident at any location within the city. 
    Temporary sale shall mean an offering of goods, wares and merchandise, for sale to the general public, by a nonresident or resident of the city, as an intermittent activity, when such sale is not the usual and customary source of that nonresident's or resident's livelihood at the location where the sale is to be held. 
    Yard sale shall mean a temporary sale. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  1, 8-8-88) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Secs. 11-27-11-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 11-41. - Required. 
    All temporary sales, including garage sales, yard sales or other sales, shall require a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  2(1), 8-8-88) 
Sec. 11-42. - Application. 
    Any person who desires a permit to conduct a temporary sale shall make an application, in writing, to the city hall. All applications shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and residence address of the applicant. 
(2)  The beginning and ending dates of the temporary sale. 
(3)  The general type of goods, wares and/or merchandise to be offered for sale (furniture, used clothing, etc.). 
(4)  The hours that such temporary sale shall be conducted each day. 
(5)  Location of the sale (this location must be the same as the residence address of the applicant if it is a garage sale or a yard sale). 
(6)  What traffic hazards, or other problems, that the applicant believes may arise. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  2(2), 8-8-88) 
Sec. 11-43. - Duration. 
    All permits issued under this division shall be valid for no more than three (3) days, and shall be for the same days shown on the application. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  2(3), 8-8-88) 
Sec. 11-44. - Issuance, fee. 
    All permits issued under this division shall be issued upon application and the fee shall be recommended by the city staff and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  2(1), 8-8-88) 
Sec. 11-45. - Display. 
    All permits issued under this division must be posted in a conspicuous place, and must be able to be seen from the street. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  2(4), 8-8-88) 
Sec. 11-46. - Frequency restricted. 
    No more than two (2) permits shall be issued for a temporary sale to be conducted at any one (1) location, or address, during a twelve-month period. The twelve-month period shall be computed from the issuance of the first permit to such location. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  2(5), 8-8-88) 
Sec. 11-47. - Additional participants. 
    More than one (1) person may contribute goods, wares and/or merchandise to be offered for sale, whether or not those persons reside at the address of the applicant and sale location. Such contributions of goods, or participation in a temporary sale by persons other than the applicant, shall not be considered as requiring a permit by those persons to conduct a temporary sale. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  2(6), 8-8-88) 
Sec. 11-48. - Removal of signs. 
    All signs advertising the temporary sale must be taken down within twenty-four (24) hours after termination date of the sale as shown on permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-88,  2(7), 8-8-88) 
Chapter 12 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; needs and wild growth of vegetation,  10-26 et seq.; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 14; rates, charges and billing procedure,  14-96 et seq.; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Solid waste, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 4477-1,  4, 4477-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage shall mean all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including but not limited to all meat, fruit and vegetable refuse, kitchen wastes, and like substances. 
    Health officer shall mean the health officer of the city, or his duly authorized agent or representative. 
    Premises shall mean business houses, offices, theaters, hotels, motels, restaurants, apartments, hospitals and convalescent homes, private residences, vacant lots, acreage, and all other places within the city where garbage, refuse, or rubbish accumulates. 
    Refuse shall mean all solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish. 
    Rubbish shall mean tin cans, metal scraps, bottles, paper, cardboard, wood scraps, grass, weeds, tree limbs, rocks, glass, leaves and like substances. 
(Code 1975,  8-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 12-2. - Fees. 
(a)  There shall be charged, assessed, and collected from each residential premises and business premises within the city an amount which is on file in the city secretary's office as a reasonable fee for the services rendered in collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish under the provisions of this chapter. There shall be charged, assessed and collected from each business premises an amount in addition to the minimum charge for additional services based upon the actual cost of furnishing such services to each business. The additional amount, if any, is to be determined from time to time by the city council or its designated representative and is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  The fees shall be collected by the city secretary through the water and sewer department as a separate item on each monthly statement or by such other means as may be deemed practical. In the event of failure of any person to pay such fees within twenty (20) days from the date of rendition, the city may, at its option, discontinue collection service to the premises in default; and it shall thereafter be the duty of the owner or occupant of the premises to dispose of garbage, rubbish and refuse accumulating on such premises in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  There shall be a fee charged to residents for using the city sanitary landfill. The amount of the fee for using the city sanitary landfill shall be established by the city staff and approved by the city council and is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  8-5; Ord. No. 7-88, 7-11-88) 
Cross reference- Rates, charges and billing procedure for utilities,  14-96 et seq. 
Sec. 12-3. - Commercial user charges. 
(a)  The rate charged by the city for furnishing garbage containers to commercial inhabitants of the city is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  The rate charged by the city for furnishing garbage pickups for commercial users not using containers or dumpsters of the city is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 5-85,  2, 3, 8, 8-12-85) 
Sec. 12-4. - Meddling, etc., containers prohibited. 
    The meddling with or pilfering of refuse containers or scattering contents thereof, in any street or alley or public way in the city, and the collection of garbage, refuse, or rubbish of any kind, except as herein provided, is expressly prohibited. 
(Code 1975,  8-4(d); Ord. No. 7-88, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 12-5. - Deposits in streets prohibited. 
    The placing of garbage, rubbish, or refuse in any street, alley, or public way within the city, except in containers as herein provided for collection, is expressly prohibited. 
(Code 1975,  8-4(b); Ord. No. 7-88, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 12-6. - Unauthorized use of containers prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall cast, place or deposit any trash, garbage, rubbish, refuse, kitchen garbage, dry kitchen refuse or ashes into any residential or commercial refuse container without the effective consent of the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises upon which such container is located. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall for each violation be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each violation shall be construed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3-90,  I, II, 2-12-90) 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. No. 3-90,  I, II, adopted Feb. 2, 1990, has been codified herein by the editor as  12-6. 
Secs. 12-7-12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 12-26. - Bagging of garbage, rubbish, and refuse. 
    It shall be the duty of every person owning, operating, managing, renting, or using any premises within the city, where garbage, refuse, or rubbish accumulates, to place all garbage in plastic bags available from the city. 
(Code 1975,  8-2(a); Mo. of 11-13-73) 
Sec. 12-27. - Placement of bagged garbage, refuse. 
    The container required in section 12-26 shall be placed by the owner or occupant of the premises at the curbline of the premises, and at the edge of the alley adjoining such premises, if an alley is accessible, and at a location designated by the city health officer or his representatives to facilitate collection. If there is no alley adjoining the premises, such container shall be placed at a location designated by the city health officer or his representatives where the same may be reached by collection agents with a minimum of difficulty. It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of premises where garbage or refuse accumulates to place the daily accumulation in the container for collection. 
(Code 1975,  8-2(b); Mo. of 11-13-73) 
Sec. 12-28. - Preparation of rubbish. 
    All ordinary accumulations of rubbish, such as tree limbs, scrap lumber, grass or weeds, or similar items which cannot be conveniently placed in the containers required by this article shall be securely tied or sacked in compact bundles. No one (1) tree limb, piece of scrap lumber, or individual piece of rubbish shall be collected if over four (4) feet in length or over three (3) inches in diameter. Such bundles shall be placed at or near the location of the container above required for collection. Rubbish not tied or sacked as herein provided may be stored in boxes for collection, provided that the gross weight of any one (1) such box or bundle of rubbish may not exceed fifty (50) pounds. 
(Code 1975,  8-2(c)) 
Sec. 12-29. - Accumulation restricted; burning prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of premises in the city to allow garbage, refuse, or rubbish to accumulate on such premises for a period of more than four (4) days without removing it. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite and burn, or cause to be ignited and burned, any garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, or other combustible material upon any premises within the city without the prior written consent of the fire marshal. If such written consent is obtained, such burning shall be in strict compliance with the instructions and procedures prescribed by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1975,  8-2(d), (f)) 
Sec. 12-30. - Residential collection; certain items prohibited. 
(a)  The city shall collect from the residential areas of the city all garbage, refuse, and rubbish not less than two (2) times weekly, and shall collect from the business areas of the city all garbage, refuse and rubbish not less than six (6) times weekly, if so requested. Provided, however, it shall be the duty of each owner or occupant of premises to place the containers herein required at the locations herein prescribed, so as to make the same reasonably accessible to the collectors, and to pay all charges assessed for such collection service when the same are due. 
(b)  The city shall prescribe specified routes for collection, and shall publish a schedule setting forth the days when collection shall be made within the various residential sections of the city. Ordinary collections shall be made in accordance with such schedule as the same are published from time to time. 
(c)  The following items shall be excluded from the service of collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, and rubbish by the city: 
(1)  All places of excessive or extraordinary accumulations of garbage, refuse, and rubbish, such as killing and dressing plants for fowl, junkyards, or other places where daily accumulations are more than ordinary in quantity. 
(2)  Waste oils or greases from service stations or automobile repair shops. 
(3)  Heavy dead animals, such as cows, horses, or mules, and manure from cow lots, stables, poultry yards, or other animal or fowl pens. 
(4)  Heavy accumulations such as brush, concrete, ashes, sand, gravel, heavy metal objects, dead trees, or other bulky, heavy material not collectible in a packer-type garbage truck. 
(5)  Accumulations of garbage, refuse, or rubbish on premises owned or occupied by any person wilfully refusing to comply with any provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975,  8-3) 
Secs. 12-31-12-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY LANDFILL 

Sec. 12-46. - Establishment; permit. 
    The city shall establish and maintain a sanitary landfill at a location to be selected by the city council by appropriate resolution, and will construct an access road and gate or cattle guard at the entrance, and which shall be available to the residents of the city for the disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish upon due application and permit from the city. No person shall be permitted upon the premises of the city sanitary landfill except agents, servants, or employees of the city without having in his possession a written permit to enter upon such premises from the city. Permits to enter upon and deposit garbage, trash, rubbish, or refuse on the city sanitary landfill may be issued at the city hall upon application setting forth the use to be made of the permit, which permit shall be nontransferable. Any such permit may be revoked by the city staff when deemed necessary to the public welfare. 
(Code 1975,  8-4(a); Ord. No. 7-88, 7-11-88) 
Sec. 12-47. - Ownership of deposited materials. 
    All garbage, refuse, or rubbish, or other material placed upon the city sanitary landfill shall become the property of the city. No person shall be allowed to collect, carry off, or dispose of the same except under direction of the city health officer or his authorized agents. 
(Code 1975,  8-4(c); Ord. No. 7-88, 7-11-88) 
Chapter 13 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parking and standing of taxicabs,  7-168; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; solid waste, Ch. 12; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Uniform traffic control law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Rates for impounding, storage of vehicles. 
(a)  The rate charged by the city for towing of impounded vehicles shall be the total reimbursement of actual costs of wrecker service. 
(b)  The rate charged by the city for storing impounded vehicles shall be as follows: 
(1)  First ten (10) days, seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per day. 
(2)  All days in excess of ten (10) days, ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
(c)  The city police department may, after complying with the state department of public highways and transportation rules, auction unclaimed vehicles at a public auction. 
(Ord. No. 6-88,  1-3, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 13-2. - Traffic-control devices. 
(a)  The city council shall direct that the public works superintendent shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along, or beside any highway, street, or alley signs, signals and markings, or cause the same to be erected, installed or placed in accordance with ordinance and consistent with the manual. Such traffic-control devices shall be installed immediately, or as soon as such specific device, sign or signal can be procured. 
(b)  Whenever the public works superintendent has erected and installed any official traffic-control device, signal or sign at any location in the city, or has caused the same to be done under his direction, in obedience to this section and the manual, he shall thereafter file a report with the city secretary in writing and signed officially by the superintendent, stating the type of traffic-control device, sign or signal and when and where the same was erected and installed. The city secretary shall file and maintain such report of the superintendent among the official papers of the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1-76,  6, 2-9-76) 
Sec. 13-3. - Unauthorized devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the superintendent to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this chapter or any traffic ordinance of the city. That any traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the superintendent pursuant to the authority of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1-76,  7, 2-9-76) 
Sec. 13-4. - Driver's safety course fee. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be authorized to collect a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to cover the cost of administering those persons who qualify for and elect to take a driving safety course under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,  143A (Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways). 
(b)  All fees collected under this section shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7-87,  1, 2, 8-14-87) 
Sec. 13-5. - Engine retarding braking devices (jake braking). 
(a)  No person shall operate an engine of any motor vehicle so as to "brake" or slow the same through the use of gears (commonly known as "jake braking") or by any other method which produces any noise in addition to the normal operating engine noise. 
(b)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each and every violation or day such violation shall continue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-11,  1, 2, 5-10-04) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2004-04-11,  1, 2, adopted May 10, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 13-5 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 13-6. - Exhibition of sudden speed or acceleration. 
(a)  It is an offense for a person to operate a motor vehicle upon a city street or alley exhibiting sudden vehicle speed or acceleration which produces noise, smoking tires, or causes one (1) or more tires to lose contact with the surface of the street or alley. 
(b)  If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or the application of same to any person or set circumstances for any reason is held to be unconstitutional, void or invalid or any reason unenforceable, the validity of the remaining portions of this section or the application thereby shall remain in effect, it being the intent of the City Council of the City of Decatur, Texas in adopting this section, that no portion thereof or provision contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by any reason of unconstitutionality of any other portion or provision. 
(c)  It is an offense to violate any part of this section, punishable upon conviction in accordance with a Class C misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 06-06-17,  1, 2, 4, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 13-7-13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parking enforcement,  13-61 et seq. 

Sec. 13-26. - General speed limit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor or other vehicle within the corporate limits and jurisdiction of the city at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, except as otherwise provided by ordinance, state law or regulation. 
(b)  All ordinances regulating speed of vehicles on specific streets and public ways within the city are hereby on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  16-1, 16-2) 
Sec. 13-27. - Stop intersections. 
    All ordinances and the list of streets where vehicles are required to stop at designated intersections within the city shall be on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  16-11) 
Sec. 13-28. - One-way streets. 
    The list of streets establishing one-way traffic and all official signs indicating one-way traffic on specific streets and parts of streets within the city is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  16-21) 
Sec. 13-29. - Stopping, standing, parking generally. 
    All regulations regarding the method, place, and time limits for parking vehicles on the streets and other public ways of the city and all official signs and markings indicating such methods, places, and time limits, are on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1975,  16-31) 
Sec. 13-30. - Parking in various zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to park any vehicle in any loading zone, passenger zone, police reserved zone, or fire reserved zone established, designated and marked as such by the city. 
(Code 1975,  16-32) 
Sec. 13-31. - U-turn prohibited in certain places. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction, making a one-hundred-eighty-degree, or U-turn, upon any street between street intersections, upon the public square or at any place upon a through street. 
(Code 1975,  16-51) 
Sec. 13-32. - Observance of stop signs, yield signs, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who operates or drives any motor or other vehicle to fail to observe any stop sign, yield sign or other traffic regulatory signs within the city. 
(Code 1975,  16-52) 
Sec. 13-33. - Violation of two-hour parking zones. 
    Any person found guilty of violating the two-hour parking zones in the city shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 11-90,  1, 9-10-90) 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. No. 11-90,  1, adopted Sept. 10, 1990, has been codified herein by the editor as  13-33. 
Sec. 13-34. - Prohibited bicycling, skateboarding, roller skating, roller blading in designated areas. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, or other similar device at any time on any sidewalk running adjacent to the streets listed below: 
(1)  Walnut Street at the intersection of Lane Street to the intersection of Miller Street. 
(2)  Main Street at the intersection of Lane Street to the intersection of Miller Street. 
(3)  Trinity Street at the intersection of Pecan Street to the intersection of Mill Street. 
(4)  State Street at the intersection of Pecan Street to the intersection of Mill Street. 
(b)  That no person on a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, and other similar devices shall go on any parking lot and/or sidewalk that has been posted by the private property owners and/or on any public property that has been posted by the city as an area prohibiting use of bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, roller blades or other similar device. 
(c)  That any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-11-21,  1-3, 11-28-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-11-21,  1-3, adopted Nov. 28, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as  13-34 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 13-35. - Emerging from private road or drive. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private road or alley shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk area extending across a private road, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on that roadway. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-08, 4-8-10) 
Secs. 13-36-13-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUCKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7. 

Sec. 13-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public street shall mean any area within the city which is open to the public for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
    Residential shall mean any area within the city which has been zoned as residential by the appropriate municipal authorities. 
    Truck shall mean a motor vehicle, truck-tractor or semi-trailer with dual rear wheels or more than two (2) axles. 
(Code 1975,  16-41) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 13-47. - Parking in residential area restricted. 
    It is unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any truck on a public street within any residential area except when actually in the process of loading or unloading merchandise or cargo. 
(Code 1975,  16-42, 16-43) 
Sec. 13-48. - Impoundment. 
    It shall be lawful for any police officer having jurisdiction within the city to tow away and impound any truck found to be parked upon a public street in any residential area within the city in violation of this article. 
(Code 1975,  16-44) 
Sec. 13-49. - Prohibited on certain streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial motor vehicle, truck, truck-tractor, trailer or semitrailer having a gross weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more upon the following named streets or portions of streets within the city: 
Arthur Street 
Ash Street, East and West 
Brady Street, East and West 
Brookhollow Street 
Brown Street 
Carpenter Street, East and West 
Cates Street, North, from Highway 380 
Cates Street, South 
Charles Street, East and West 
Chico Street 
Church Street, North and South 
Circle Drive 
Cliff Street, South 
College Street, from Hale North to Carpenter Street 
Collins Street, East and West 
Collom Street, East and West 
Colorado Street 
Cowan Street, North and South 
David Street 
Deer Park Drive from Thompson Street to Highway 380 
Deveraux Street 
Eagle Drive 
Elm Street, East and West 
Embry Street, East and West 
Ford Street, East and West 
Gardner Street 
Garland Street 
Hale Street, East from College Street 
Hale Street, West from F.M. 51 to South Trinity Street 
Halsell Street, East and West 
Harris Street 
Hatcher Street 
Henry Street 
Hill Street, South 
Holman Street, South 
Houston Street 
James Street 
John Street 
Lane Street, North and South 
Lipsey Street 
Main Street, West, to intersection of Main and Washburn Streets 
Main Street, West, from Route 81-287 to Workman Road 
Main Street, East and West 
Market Street 
McDonald Street 
Mill Street, East and West 
Miller Street, North and South 
Mulberry Street 
Mulberry Street, East and West 
Munger Street 
Newark Street 
Oak Street, East and West 
Park Street, East and West 
Pecan Street, East 
Perrin Street 
Perry Street 
Prince Street, East and West 
Saunder Street, East and West 
Sendero Drive 
Shoemaker Street, East and West 
State Street, North and South 
Thompson Street, East and West 
Trenchard Street, North and South 
Trinity Street, South from Hale Street 
Valcik Street 
Vernon Street 
Vick Street 
Walker Street 
Walker Street, East and West 
Walnut Street 
Walnut Street, from Washburn Street to Highway 287 
Ward Street, West 
Washburn Street, from North Mulberry Street 
Wichita Street 
Workman Road 
(Ord. No. 6-83,  1, 8-8-83) 
Sec. 13-50. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Through commercial vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a through commercial vehicle upon any street, boulevard, avenue or alley within the limits of the city, except that such commercial vehicle may travel or be operated upon any street, boulevard, or avenue designated as a U.S. or state highway or as a truck route. 
(b)  Established. Every U.S. and state highway within the city is hereby designated as a truck route under the terms of this section, and the following streets, roads and highways are hereby designated truck routes by name as follows: 
(1)  U.S. 81 and 287 
(2)  Business 81 and 287 North and South 
(3)  F.M. 51 North and South 
(4)  U.S. 380 East and West 
(5)  F.M. 730 (Trinity, Hale and College) 
(6)  Cemetery Road 
(7)  Old Denton Road 
(c)  Local commercial vehicles. A local commercial vehicle may leave any designated U.S. or state highway or designated truck route and travel on any street, boulevard, avenue or alley within the city for the purpose of delivering or picking up goods, wares, materials and/or merchandise, or returning to its established place of business. When a local commercial vehicle enters a street, boulevard, avenue or alley at the intersection nearest the point of pickup or delivery or its established place of business or home and return to the truck route by the nearest route. When more than one (1) pickup or delivery may be made the vehicle shall not be required to return to the truck route after each individual pickup or delivery, but shall return to the truck route upon the completion of all pickups or deliveries. 
(Ord. No. 6-83,  2, 8-8-83) 
Secs. 13-51-13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 13-61. - Parking in marked space. 
    No person shall stand or park any vehicle in marked parking area, except by standing parking the entire vehicle completely within those marked spaces. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-62. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-63. - Parking vehicles for sale prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a public road, alley or any public right-of-way within the city any vehicle displayed for sale or for the purpose of displaying advertising. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-64. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in a manner or under those conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No person shall park any vehicle upon a street adjacent to a driveway in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than three feet of roadway between the vehicle and the point where the curve return of the driveway connects with the curb. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-65. - Parking for more than 48 hours prohibited. 
    A person commits an offense by leaving an unattended vehicle or other private property standing or parked in a public street, alley or other public place for a continuous period of time longer than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-66. - Parking of certain vehicles prohibited on certain streets. 
(a)  Parking of any of the following upon any residential street, alley, parkway or boulevard is prohibited, except as authorized in subsection (b). 
(1)  A vehicle with a rated capacity of more than three-quarter ton according to the manufacturer's classification; 
(2)  A boat; 
(3)  A trailer; 
(4)  Any combination of connected vehicles, including trailers; 
(5)  Recreational vehicles (motor homes); 
(6)  Campers on pick-up trucks, if the camper is wider than the bed of the pick-up; 
(7)  Construction vehicles and equipment, unless working; 
(8)  Camper trailers; and 
(9)  Farm implements or animal husbandry implements. 
(b)  Motor homes, camper trailers and boats may be parked upon a residential street, alley, parkway or boulevard for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours for the purpose of loading or unloading supplies and equipment, so long as they are in compliance with other parking laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-67. - Inoperable vehicles parking restriction. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any motor vehicle, trailer or other wheeled vehicle of any kind to park or store the same upon a public road, alley or public right-of-way within the city, for a greater length of time than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, when such vehicle is mechanically inoperable for any reason. It shall be unlawful to park any of the forbidden vehicles listed for any length of time on a residential street, regardless of the condition of the prohibited vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-68. - Valid license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any motor vehicle or trailer to park or store the same at any time, for any length of time, upon a public road, alley, or any public right-of-way within the city unless there is displayed on the motor vehicle or trailer a valid state license for the motor vehicle or trailer, or other license valid under state law. It shall be unlawful to park any of the forbidden vehicles listed for any length of time on a residential street, regardless of the condition of the prohibited vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-69. - Owner responsible for certain parking violations. 
    If any vehicle is found upon any public road, alley or public right-of-way in violation of any of the provisions of this article, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-70. - Nuisances removed. 
    Any motor vehicle, trailer or other wheeled vehicle found standing or parked in or upon any public road, alley or public right-of-way within the city in violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a nuisance. Such vehicle shall be removed by any police officer of the city and taken to an impoundment yard designated for such purpose of storing vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-71. - Signs. 
    The chief of police is hereby vested with authority to erect and place signs, markings and directions for the orderly parking of motor vehicles in public parks and upon public grounds surrounding public buildings of the city in order to eliminate traffic hazards and provide for the safe and orderly use of such facilities. Such authority shall include the right to forbid parking in particular areas and to erect signs informing the public that there is no parking in particular pubic areas. Such authority shall also include the right to erect permanent or semi-permanent signs and directions, or temporary signs and directions when particular crowds are anticipated for particular events. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-72. - Obedience to signs required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor vehicle in or upon any public park or public grounds surrounding any public buildings of the city within the city, in manner which violates the plain meaning of any signs, directions or marking installed by authority of the chief of police forbidding or otherwise regulating parking of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-73. - Parking in spaces designated for disabled person unlawful. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, as operator of a motor vehicle that does not have displayed on the dashboard a disabled parking identification card issued by the Texas Department of Transportation or its agents or does not display a specially designed license plate, symbol, tab or other device issued to disabled veterans or disabled person by the Texas Department of Transportation or by another state, or by a state or province of a foreign country, he/she stops, stands or parks the motor vehicle in a parking space designated for use by vehicles transporting disabled persons. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a parking space designated for use by vehicles transporting disabled person shall be sufficiently marked if it gives notice to a reasonable person that the parking space is intended for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting permanently or temporary disabled person or handicapped persons regardless of whether the means of designating the parking space comply with this chapter, or with state or federal law. A disabled parking space includes striped or otherwise designated space adjacent to the actual parking area which is intended for use as an access aisle. 
(c)  When any person is charged with a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle involved in the violation, as to the date of the offense alleged, is registered to the person charged with the offense is prima facie evidence that constitutes a presumption that the vehicle was parked by the person charged. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-74. - Removal of authorized vehicle. 
(a)  If the operator of a motor vehicle does not prominently display the disabled parking identification card issued by the Texas Department of Transportation or its agent such that the card is visible from outside the vehicle or does not display a specially designed license plate, symbol, tab or other device issued to disabled person by the Texas Department of Transportation, stops, stands or parks the motor vehicle in a parking space designated for a vehicle transporting a disabled person, that vehicle is an unauthorized vehicle for the purposes of V.T.C.A. Transportation Code  681. 
(b)  An unauthorized vehicle, whether on public or private property, may be removed from a parking space designated for a vehicle transporting a disabled person, and stored at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-75. - Responsibility of vehicle owner for violation of provisions. 
(a)  No person shall, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any street in the city in violation of any provision of this chapter regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(b)  If a vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street, highway, alley or other public place in violation of any provision of this chapter regulating stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, the same is hereby declared a nuisance per se, and the fact that the vehicle is unattended or unoccupied by any person shall be prima facie evidence that the owner unlawfully stopped, placed or parked that vehicle. Proof of the ownership may be made by a copy of the registration of the vehicle with the Texas Department of Transportation or county motor vehicle license department showing the name of the person to whom the state license plates were issued. This proof shall constitute prima facie evidence of the ownership of the motor vehicle by the person to whom the certificate of registration was issued. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-09, 4-8-10) 
Secs. 13-76-13-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Specific street regulations,  13-26 et seq. 

Sec. 13-81. - Issuance of citation for illegal parking; information noted by officer. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or other parking regulations of the city or by state law, the police officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously attach to such vehicle or hand-deliver to the driver of the vehicle, a citation in writing on a form to be provided by the police department, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within ten (10) days within the hours and at a place specified in the citation. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-82. - Issuance of citation for overtime parking; information noted by officer. 
    A police officer issuing a citation for overtime parking shall take the location at which the vehicle is illegally parked, the state vehicle license number of such vehicle, the make of the vehicle, and the time and date of the illegal parking and shall issue in writing, on a form provided by the city, notice to answer the charge of overtime parking within ten (10) days, during the hours and at the place specified in the notice. Such notice shall be placed in a conspicuous place upon such vehicle or hand-delivered to the driver of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  II, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-83. - Failure to comply with citation. 
    If a violator of the restrictions of stopping, standing or parking under the terms of this chapter does not appear in response to a notice affixed to such vehicle within a period of ten (10) days of receipt, the clerk of the municipal court shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the citation was affixed a notice to inform him of the violation and to require the owner to appear in the municipal court to answer the charge. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-84. - Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles. 
    In the event any vehicle shall be found standing or parked in or upon any regularly designated two-hour time limit parking space, limited or prohibited parking zone or in or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare and public place within the city limits, in violation of and contrary to any provision of this chapter, the same shall be a nuisance. Provided the requirements of section 13-65 are met, the vehicle may be removed by direction of any police officer and taken to a place of impoundment, and there kept until application for its redemption shall be made by the owner of the vehicle or his duly authorized agent. Such impoundment shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-85. - When citations may be issued and when impoundment may occur. 
    In connection with this article, the city council may from time to time designate certain areas as restricted parking areas. The city council may from time to time adopt or revise an official map of the city identifying the location of all such restricted parking areas. The city public works department shall place and maintain signs which give notice that violations of parking restrictions are subject to citations or impoundment of the violator's vehicle within designated areas. A list of these areas will be available for inspection at the office of the city secretary. This shall constitute notice to any parking regulation violator of the possible enforcement actions which may be utilized to enforce provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-86. - Right to redeem impounded vehicle. 
    When a vehicle is impounded pursuant to the provisions of sections 13-64 and 13-65, at any time prior to its sale as an abandoned vehicle, the owner or his duly authorized agent shall be entitled to the possession thereof upon the payment of all costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon, plus any fine or costs owed to the city for parking violations unless the owner posts a bond under the requirements of section 13-68. If the owner posts a bond in double the amount of the costs specified herein, the vehicle shall be released. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-87. - Notice of violation. 
    After the vehicle has been impounded under section 13-64 and 13-65, a notice shall be prepared and sent certified mail by the municipal court to the registered owner within twenty-four (24) hours of the impounding of the vehicle. The notice shall specify the procedures for redeeming an impounded vehicle, including the name, address and telephone number of the person to be contact, the bonding procedure and the right to a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-88. - Hearing on impounded vehicle. 
    After the impounding of a vehicle, the owner shall have the right to a hearing before the municipal court judge to contest the underlying parking violation, to contest the circumstances surrounding the impounding of the vehicle, or to present any other defense to the actions taken. In the absence of a municipal court judge, any magistrate within the county may preside over such hearing. An expedited hearing shall be held within forty-eight (48) hours of the impounding of the vehicle or the next municipal court working day after the impounding, whichever is the lesser time, if the owner requests such an expedited hearing in writing. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-89. - Bond for impounded vehicle. 
    The owner of a vehicle which is impounded may secure release of the vehicle pending the hearing by entering an appearance on the pending citation and posting a bond in double the amount of any fines, court costs, tow fees and storage fees which may be owed. If the municipal court is closed so that the owner cannot make an appearance, the owner may post the bond at the city's police department and obtain release of the vehicle without an appearance. If the owner cannot afford the bond, he shall be allowed a hearing within twenty-four (24) hours of his request for a hearing or the next municipal court working day after his request, whichever is the greater time. At this hearing, if the owner is found not guilty of the traffic offense, or the court otherwise finds that the vehicle should not be impounded, the court shall order the vehicle released without the payment of fees. Any funds posted by the owner for securing the release of the vehicle from impoundment shall be reimbursed to the owner. If the owner posts a bond and fails to appear at any hearing scheduled to contest the impounding of the vehicle or the underlying traffic violation, the bond shall be forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-90. - Impounded vehicles declared abandoned. 
    If an impounded vehicle is not redeemed within twenty (20) days from the date that notice is given to the vehicle's owner and any lienholder of record, such vehicle is declared abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-91. - Sale of abandoned vehicle. 
    In the event that any impounded vehicle shall be abandoned and shall not be redeemed by its owner, it shall be sold at public auction. Such sale shall take place after at least twenty-one (21) days have elapsed from the date that notice was provided to the owner and any lienholder of record, pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 4477-a and 6687-1. Proceeds from the sale shall be used to pay the penalties, charges and cost incurred in impounding the vehicle and administering this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  I, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 13-92. - Providing a penalty. 
    Upon a conviction of this article, the fine shall be not less than one dollar ($1.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 12-93,  II, 9-13-93) 
Secs. 13-93-13-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VEHICLE TOWING 

Sec. 13-101. - Purpose. 
    The proper and safe functioning of the towing companies having a critical impact on the safety and welfare of the public due to its involvement of the use of the public streets of the city, often in circumstances necessitating prompt removal of dangerous obstruction to traffic; it is therefore determined that the privilege of any person engaging in the performance of towing services within the city shall be subject to regulation in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-102. - Compliance with state law. 
    Any person operating a tow truck shall comply with all applicable state laws. A failure to comply with applicable state laws shall also be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-103. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases, shall have the meaning ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accident, crash or collision shall mean any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled. 
    Additional labor shall mean when a second tow truck is summoned by the police department for the same towing company in order to accomplish the original tow, but does not include winching or a second tow truck arriving when not requested. 
    Certificate holder shall mean any person possessing a current, valid certificate of registration to engage in the towing business in the City of Decatur, Texas. 
    Certificate of registration shall mean written authorization granted by the chief of police, under the provisions of this article, to a towing company having a place of business within the city operating a tow truck that performs nonconsent tows or incident management tows. 
    Chief of police shall mean the Chief of Police for the City of Decatur, Texas or the person designated by him/her to act in his/her stead for the purposes of this article. 
    The city shall include all areas that have been fully annexed by the City of Decatur, Texas. 
    Consent tow shall mean any tow of a motor vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term does not include an incident management tow or a private property tow. 
    Incident management tow shall mean any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned because of a traffic accident (crash) or to an incident. 
    Inspection sticker shall mean written authorization granted by the chief of police, under the provisions of this article and affixed to a tow truck used by a tow company on the rotation list, indicating that the tow truck has passed the required inspection. 
    Manufacturer's certificate shall mean a plate permanently affixed to either a truck, tow equipment or tow sling by the manufacturer of the equipment which states the vehicle's or equipment's gross poundage capacity. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is self-propelled. This does not include motor assisted bicycles as defined by the laws of the State of Texas. 
    Nonconsent tow shall mean any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow or incident management tow. 
    Owner shall mean a person: 
(a)  Named as the purchaser or transferee in the certificate of title issued for the vehicle under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code Ch. 501; 
(b)  In whose name the vehicle is registered under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code Ch. 502, or a member of the person's immediate family; 
(c)  Who holds the vehicle through a lease agreement; 
(d)  Who is an unrecorded lien holder entitled to possess the vehicle under the terms of a chattel mortgage; or 
(e)  Who is a lien holder holding an affidavit of repossession and entitled to repossess the vehicle. 
    Person shall mean an individual, a corporation, a partnership, joint venture, or association. 
    Repossession shall mean a tow made by, or on behalf of a lien holder taking possession of collateral. 
    Rotation list shall mean the list prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Article, of tow companies which have applied and qualified to appear thereon, and which maintain inspected tow trucks of a capacity required to be on said list. 
    Standby shall mean the amount of time a tow truck must wait to perform the towing service not including the first hour from the time of arrival. 
    Tow truck shall mean a motor vehicle equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move another motor vehicle. 
    Towing company or business means an individual, association, corporation, or other legal entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation of one (1) or more tow trucks over a public roadway in this state but does not include a political subdivision of the state. 1t does not include towing a vehicle to a point outside the city when the owner requests that it be towed to a point outside the city, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
    Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported on a public roadway. The term includes an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or trailer but does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail or track. 
    Winching shall mean the use of a winching device to move a vehicle from ditches, fields, culverts, ravines, and vehicles that have rolled or have come to rest on top of another vehicle or person, but does not include the normal loading of a vehicle for tow. 
    Wrecker shall have the same definition as "tow truck." 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-104. - Requirements to perform nonconsent towing. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a tow truck that performs nonconsent or incident management towing in the city unless the person has a certificate of registration issued by the chief of police, except as provided in subsection (2)(i), below. 
(2)  An applicant for a certificate of registration to perform nonconsent or incident management towing shall submit, on a form provided by the chief of police, a verified application containing or accompanied by the following: 
(a)  The true name, the trade name, principal business address, and telephone number that is answered twenty-four (24) hours a day, of the towing company. 
(b)  The list of tow trucks proposed to be operated by the towing company, including but not limited to the motor vehicle identification number, make, and unit number from the tow company applying for the certificate of registration. 
(c)  The name of the owner(s) of the tow company, partners and/or corporation officers. 
(d)  A certificate of public liability and property damage insurance, for each tow truck to be registered issued by a casualty company authorized to do business in the State of Texas, in the standard form approved by the chief of police, containing a provision that at least ten (10) days' prior notice of cancellation of said insurance shall be given to the chief of police by the insurance company, and with the insured provision of such policy including the city as an additional insured and the coverage provision insuring members of the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a certificate holder's business and providing that the combined single limit liability insurance coverage amount for bodily injury to or death of an individual per occurrence, loss or damage to property shall be not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for tow trucks, whose gross vehicle weight is less than twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for tow trucks, whose gross vehicle weight is twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or more. 
(e)  A certificate of on-hook cargo insurance to cover damage to a towed vehicle during hookup and/or towing in the minimum amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(f)  A copy of a vehicle storage facility license issued by the Texas Department of Transportation, pursuant to the vehicle storage facilities, V.T.C.A. Occupations Code Ch. 2303, as now enacted or as hereafter amended. 
(g)  A copy of the motor carrier certificate of registration issued by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(h)  A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) (or such other amount as may be from time to time hereafter established by amendment to the schedule of fees ordinance maintained on file by the city secretary). 
(i)  This section does not apply to nor prohibit a tow company which obtained a motor carrier certificate of registration from the Texas Department of Transportation and having a place of business outside the incorporated city limits, from making a "consent tow" within the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-105. - Certificate of registration for nonconsent towing, issuance, and expiration. 
(1)  The chief of police or authorized designee shall register a tow company and issue a certificate of registration under this article which is determined to be in compliance with the requirements under section 13-104. However, the chief of police may deny an application for a certificate of registration, if the applicant: 
(a)  Has had a registration revoked under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code  643.252, as now enacted or as hereafter amended; 
(b)  Operates a tow truck after the state registration has been revoked; 
(c)  Causes or allows the operation of a tow truck by an unlicensed driver on the public roadways; 
(d)  Operates a tow truck performing nonconsent or incident management tows without a certificate of registration on the public roadways; 
(e)  Submits false information on a registration application; 
(f)  Fails to maintain insurance required by state law for the operation of a tow company or its equipment; or 
(g)  Other legal grounds exist for denying such certificate of registration. 
(2)  Each Certificate of Registration issued shall expire at midnight one calendar year from the date of issuance, and will be renewable only upon compliance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations which shall be in effect at the time of the renewal application. 
(3)  Each tow company which has received a certificate of registration under this article shall at all times carry a copy of its certificate of registration in each tow truck it operates. 
(4)  Each tow company which has received a certificate of registration shall be responsible for updating the information provided in the application by submitting supplemental information on forms provided by the chief of police. Failure to provide updated information, such as, but not limited to, replacement or additions of tow trucks, drivers' license suspensions or revocations, change in insurance company, or expiration of storage facility license, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a Certificate of Registration. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-106. - Suspension and revocation of certificate of registration for nonconsent towing. 
    The chief of police may suspend or revoke a certificate of registration issued under this article, or place a tow company on probation, if the tow company or any of its tow trucks fail to comply with state law or the requirements set out in this article, or for any other lawful reason. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-107. - Rotation list established for nonconsent or incident management towing. 
    The chief of police shall establish and maintain a rotation list, from which tow trucks shall be picked to answer calls for nonconsent or incident management towing. Each tow company who applies and meets the requirements herein shall be entitled to one (1) place on said list. The names of the towing companies on the list shall be listed in numerical order, beginning with the date the application is approved. It shall be unlawful for any tow company to operate tow trucks under a different company name for purposes of gaining additional towing on the established rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-108. - Rotation list qualifications. 
(1)  A tow company may participate on the rotation list if the tow company meets the following requirements: 
(a)  It has registered and received a certificate of registration and inspection sticker for each tow truck it owns or will use while on the rotation list under this Article 4.07; 
(b)  It owns, leases, or otherwise lawfully possesses and operates a storage facility located within the full or limited purposes annexation areas of the city where all motor vehicles towed on behalf of the city shall be stored at all times and which: 
(i)  Are enclosed by a permanent eight-foot privacy fence that is constructed according to city building regulations as now enacted or as hereafter amended; and 
(ii)  Has a gate which is locked, when there is no attendant on duty or after normal business hours; 
(c)  It maintains at least one (1) tow truck; 
(d)  It maintains twenty-four-hour tow service and a local telephone number which is answered twenty-four (24) hours a day; 
(e)  It is able to respond to any location in the city within thirty (30) minutes of being notified by telephone. Tow trucks two and one-half (21/2) tons or more in size must be able to respond within forty-five (45) minutes after notification. 
(f)  It has someone available twenty-four (24) hours a day to release any vehicle impounded within thirty (30) minutes of a request by the owner or the police department. 
(g)  It or the owner of the leased storage facility holds a license issued by the Texas Department of Transportation, pursuant to the vehicle storage facilities, V.T.C.A. Occupations Code Ch. 2303, Texas Occupations Code, as now enacted or as hereafter amended. 
(h)  It submits an application for placement on the rotation list. 
(2)  A tow company shall submit a verified application for placement on the rotation list, on a form provided by the chief of police, containing or accompanied by the following: 
(a)  A copy of a vehicle storage facility license issued by the Texas Department of Transportation for a storage facility within the city. 
(b)  A list of all drivers and drivers driving records, obtained from the Texas Department of Public Safety, said list shall be updated as new drivers are added or when a drivers' license is suspended or revoked. 
(c)  A city certificate of insurance form indicating general liability in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), in addition to the insurance requirements under section 13-104(2)(d). 
(d)  A certificate from the appropriate tax assessor-collector agency that certifies that all city taxes on all properties, real and personal, to be used in connection with the applicant's towing company are current. The certificate shall list the name of the towing company, its subsidiaries or assumed names. 
(3)  The following maximum fees may be charged by tow companies under this article for the use of tow trucks on the rotation list for nonconsent and incident management tows: 
(a)  One hundred dollars ($100.00) regular or flat bed tow; 
(b)  Sixty dollars ($60.00) additional labor; 
(c)  Five hundred sixty dollars ($560.00) heavy duty tow (over twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds); 
(d)  Fifty-five dollars ($55.00) standby (after first hour); and 
(e)  Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) winching; 
or such other amounts as may be from time to time hereafter established by amendment to the schedule of fees ordinance maintained on file by the city secretary. 
(4)  A tow company will automatically be removed from the rotation list on the expiration date of its certificate of registration, as provided in section 13-105 and will be placed back on the list only upon compliance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations which shall be in effect at the time of the renewal request application. 
(5)  Each tow company having a place on the rotation list shall be responsible for updating the information provided in the application by submitting supplemental information on forms provided by the chief of police. Failure to provide updated information, such as, but not limited to, replacement or additions of tow trucks, drivers' license suspensions or revocations, change in insurance company, change in storage facility, or expiration of storage facility license, shall be grounds for suspension or removal from the rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-109. - Suspension and removal from the nonconsent rotation list. 
    The chief of police may suspend or remove a tow company from a place on the rotation list pursuant to this article, if a tow company or any of its tow trucks fails to comply with any of the requirements in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-110. - Inspection sticker. 
(1)  In order to receive an inspection sticker, each tow truck shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Shall have a capacity of not less than one (1) ton. 
(b)  Shall display in a permanent manner the name and twenty-four-hour phone number of the holder of the certificate of registration on both sides of each tow truck. 
(c)  Shall display in a permanent manner the names of the tow companies listed on the certificate of registration as affiliates. 
(d)  Shall be in a condition such that it can be safely and reliably used as a tow truck. 
(e)  Shall include the manufacturer's certificate and be equipped with a power operated winch, winch line and boom, with a rated or tested lifting capacity of not less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds single line capacity. 
(f)  Shall carry at all times the following standard equipment: 
(i)  Slings and/or tow bars along with "J" hooks and chains. 
(ii)  Safety chain. 
(iii)  Ten-pound fire extinguisher (or the equivalent). 
(iv)  Shovel. 
(v)  Wrecker bar. 
(vi)  Broom. 
(vii)  Dolly (except for slide bed tow trucks). 
(viii)  Ropes or other device for securing steering wheel. 
(ix)  Overhead visa-bar or beacon type light visible from front and rear. 
(x)  Tow lights. 
(g)  Any other information the chief of police may determine is necessary for the safe operation of a tow truck under this article. 
(2)  An inspection sticker shall be denied if the safety requirements provided for in this section are not met. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-111. - Inspection sticker-Issuance and expiration. 
(1)  The chief of police or authorized designee shall issue an inspection sticker for a tow truck if in compliance with the requirements under section 13-110. An inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) (or such other amount as may be from time to time hereafter established by amendment to the schedule of fees ordinance maintained on file by the city secretary) is required and shall be charged for each tow truck inspected. The inspection fee is nonrefundable and shall be paid whether or not the tow truck passes inspection. The chief of police may deny the issuance of an inspection sticker on the same grounds as provided for in subsections 13-105(1)(a)-(g). 
(2)  Each inspection sticker issued shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, and will be renewable only upon compliance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations which shall be in effect at the time of the renewal application. 
(3)  Each tow truck which has received an inspection sticker under this article shall prominently display it on the back windshield. 
(4)  Each tow company which has received an inspection sticker for a tow truck shall be responsible for keeping the tow truck in compliance with the safety requirements provided for in section 13-110, at all times. Failure to comply with the safety requirements provided for in section 13-110 shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of an inspection sticker. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-112. - Suspension and revocation of an inspection sticker. 
    The chief of police may suspend or revoke an inspection sticker issued under this article, or place a towing company on probation, if the tow company or any of its tow trucks fail to comply with state law or the requirements set out in this article, or for any other lawful reason. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-113. - inspection of wrecker equipment and storage facilities. 
    Any towing company, certificate holder, or applicant, by virtue of making an application with the city, agrees to allow during normal business hours, the inspection of tow trucks, tow equipment, and storage facilities for compliance under this article. This authority shall be cumulative of any other authority held by the chief of police, other law enforcement officials, or other legally authorized public officials. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-114. - Procedures for notifying towing services on nonconsent and incident management towing. 
(1)  When the police officer investigating a crash determines that: (i) any vehicle involved in a crash is unable to safely proceed under its own power; or (ii) the driver of any vehicle involved in a crash is physically unable to safely move the vehicle to a location where it will not create a traffic hazard, such officer shall request the owner to designate a tow company which he/she desires to remove the vehicle. 
(a)  Such designation by the owner will be indicated in writing on a form provided by the chief of police and signed by the owner. 
(b)  When the designation has been properly made, the police officer shall communicate the name of the designated towing company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer, or automobile club to the communications center. 
(c)  The communications center shall cause the designated towing company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer, or automobile club to be called and directed to send a tow truck capable of removing the vehicle. 
(d)  If the designated towing company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer, or automobile club does not have available a tow truck of the type required to move a vehicle, the owner will be requested to make another designation. 
(2)  If the owner of a vehicle is: (i) physically unable to designate the towing company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer, or automobile club he desires to remove the vehicle; (ii) fails or refuses to designate one; (iii) has no preference; or (iv) is not available, then the police officer shall communicate that fact to the police communications center, and advise as to the type of tow truck required. 
(a)  Such designation by the owner will be indicated in writing on a form provided by the chief of police and signed by the owner if he/she is physically able. If the owner is not able or is not available, the police officer shall so indicate by a notation on the form. 
(b)  The communications center shall call the tow company next in line on the rotation list after the last towing company so called, and request the towing company to tow the vehicle from the scene. 
(c)  On each succeeding communication or the inability or refusal of a towing company to send a tow truck, the next towing company on the rotation list shall be called. After the last towing company on said list has been called, the next such call shall go to the first towing company on said list. 
(d)  When no towing company on the rotation list is available or the type tow truck needed is not available, officers will notify the communications center and request the next available tow truck from the Wise County rotation list. 
(3)  If the towing company, after arrival at the scene, determines in conjunction with the police officer in charge, that assistance is needed, then the police officer shall communicate that fact to the communications center, which shall proceed under subsection (1) or (2)(d) of this section. 
(4)  Failure of any towing company selected under subsection (1) or subsection (2) of this section to deliver a tow truck to the scene within thirty (30) minutes of notification or forty-five (45) minutes for a tow truck two and one-half (21/2) tons or more in size without justification acceptable to the police officer on the scene shall cause the tow company to forfeit that call. Additionally, the chief of police shall have the discretion to suspend or revoke a tow company from a place on the rotation list for failure to timely respond. 
(5)  In any circumstance in which a vehicle or other object is so located on a public street as to constitute a hazard or obstacle, or to interfere with traffic, or in the event a stolen vehicle is found or in any other circumstance in which a police officer in the course of his duty directs the removal of a vehicle from or to any location, any police officer may require its removal at the owner's expense, by any practicable means, including but not limited to, use of a towing company selected by the owner, or failing that, selected by the use of the rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-115. - Unlawful for police to influence selection. 
    It shall be unlawful for a police officer to directly or indirectly recommend to any person the name of any towing company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer, or automobile club engaged in the towing business; nor shall any such police officer influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a towing company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer, or automobile club. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-116. - Parking of tow truck at the scene of a crash. 
    Whenever a tow truck arrives at the place where a motor vehicle has been disabled by a crash, the tow truck driver shall park his tow truck as close to the street curb as possible and otherwise dispose of it in such a manner as not to interfere with traffic. The tow truck driver shall not park the tow truck within a distance of fifty (50) feet from a wrecked or disabled vehicle, unless permitted to do so by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-117. - Tow truck drivers to obey orders of police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any tow truck arriving at the place where any crash has occurred or when a police officer has summoned a tow truck for a nonconsent or incident management tow and disobey any lawful order given them by any police officer of the city investigating such crash or to interfere in any manner with such officer in the performance of his/her duty. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-118. - Duty to remove debris. 
    It shall be the duty of each tow truck driver that removes a wrecked, damaged, or disabled vehicle from the place where a crash has occurred to clear and remove any and all debris, parts, fluids, or glass accumulated as a result of the crash from the street, right-of-way, or adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-119. - Solicitation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any tow company or its employees to solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city, for towing business involving any vehicle which is crashed or disabled on a public street. This prohibition applies regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, selling, or purchasing such vehicle. Proof of the presence of any person engaged in the towing business or of the presence of any tow truck, whether or not certified or identified under the provisions of this article, except a tow truck called pursuant to the provisions of this article, at or near the scene or site of a crash on any public street in the city after the crash occurs and prior to removal of all disabled or damaged vehicles shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-120. - Administrative disposition of violations. 
    In lieu of or in addition to any criminal prosecution or civil remedy for the violation of any provision of this article, the chief of police shall have, as to the holders of any certificate of registration or inspection sticker, or as to any applicant therefor, the duty and authority to enforce the provisions of this article by administrative action in accordance with the principles and procedures set forth hereinafter. 
(1)  The proper and safe functioning of towing companies has critical impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the public and involves use of the public streets of the City of Decatur often in circumstances necessitating prompt removal of dangerous obstructions to traffic on said streets. Accordingly, the privilege of any person to engage in the tow business in the City of Decatur shall be subject to strict regulation in order to protect the public. 
(2)  For purposes of invoking any administrative remedy against a certificate holder, the acts or omissions of any agent or employee of said holder shall be considered to be the acts or omissions of said holder. 
(3)  Administrative remedies which the chief of police may employ to enforce the provisions of this article include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Suspension or revocation of any certificate of registration or inspection sticker; or 
b.  Suspension, revocation or removal of a tow company from the rotation list. 
(4)  Grounds for suspension or revocation of a certificate of registration include: 
a.  Any conduct in the towing business which endangers the life or safety of any person; 
b.  Repeated violations of the provisions of this article; 
c.  Violation of the zoning ordinance or fire prevention code for one (1) week after notice of said violation has been given to said tow business by the building official, the fire marshal or other authorized official, respectively; 
d.  Failure to maintain in effect any insurance required by this article; and 
e.  Fraud or theft in the conduct of the towing business. 
(5)  Grounds for suspension or revocation of an inspection sticker include responding to a nonconsent tow call when said tow truck: 
a.  Is in such condition that it cannot safely tow a vehicle; 
b.  Is not then covered by insurance as required in this article; or 
c.  Does not then meet all requirements for an inspection sticker. 
(6)  Grounds for removal of a tow company from the rotation list include: 
a.  Failure to meet at all times the requirements for a place on the list; 
b.  Failure to, maintain at all times at least one (1) tow truck in a condition that meets the requirements for an inspection sticker and for eligibility to be on the rotation list; 
c.  Responding to a nonconsent tow call with a tow truck which does not then meet the requirements of the rotation list; 
d.  Driving a tow truck in response to a nonconsent tow call in a manner which endangers the life or safety of any person; 
e.  Driving a tow truck to a location to perform towing services in response to a call made by the communications center, when the towing company is not the next company on the list, the towing company owning that tow truck shall be subject to removal from the list for a period of at least thirty (30) days; 
f.  Collecting or charging any fees or charges in excess of those set out in this article; 
g.  Violation of the zoning ordinance or fire protection ordinance, as determined by the building official, the fire marshal, or other authorized official, respectively; 
h.  Failing to answer within the required time when called by the communications center; or 
i.  Declining to respond to a call from the communications center to perform towing services. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-121. - Certificate of registration, inspection sticker and rotation list appeals. 
(1)  Suspension or revocation of a certificate of registration may be ordered by the chief of police. The reasons for suspension or revocation of a certificate of registration shall be given in writing to the certificate holder whose certificate of registration is being suspended or revoked within ten (10) days of such suspension or revocation. The mailing of such notice to the last known business address provided on the application of said certificate holder shall constitute sufficient notice. The notice shall provide an opportunity for a hearing before the chief of police on the suspension or revocation by filing a request for a hearing within five (5) days from the receipt of the notice. Pending a ruling by the chief of police, a certificate of registration that has been suspended or revoked, shall be considered suspended or revoked. If a written request for a hearing is not filed within the required time, the suspension or revocation shall be final. 
(2)  Suspension or revocation of an inspection sticker may be ordered by the chief of police without notice. The reasons for suspension or revocation of an inspection sticker shall be given in writing to the towing company within five (5) days of such suspension or revocation. Faxing of such notice to the last known business fax number provided on the application of said towing company shall constitute sufficient notice. The notice shall provide an opportunity for a hearing before the chief of police on the suspension or revocation of the Inspection sticker by filing a request for a hearing within five (5) days from the receipt of the notice. Pending a ruling by the chief of police, an inspection sticker that has been suspended or revoked, shall be considered suspended or revoked. If a written request for a hearing is not filed within the required time, the suspension or revocation shall be final. 
(3)  Suspension or removal from the rotation list may be ordered by the chief of police without notice. The reasons for suspension or removal from the list shall be given in writing to the towing company within five (5) days of such suspension or removal. Faxing of such notice to the last known business fax number provided on the application of said towing company shall constitute sufficient notice. The notice shall provide an opportunity for a hearing before the chief of police on the suspension or removal by filing a request for a hearing within five (5) days from the receipt of the notice. Pending a ruling by the chief of police, the towing company shall be considered suspended or removed from the list. If a written request for a hearing is not filed within the required time, the suspension or removal shall be final. 
(4)  If after a certificate of registration has been suspended or revoked, the condition for which it was suspended or revoked has been corrected, and proof of such correction is made to the chief of police, then a new certificate of registration shall be issued upon proper application, fee payment, and proof of meeting all requirements therefor. 
(5)  Appeals from a ruling by the chief of police shall be made in writing to the city manager within twenty (20) days of such ruling. A hearing or personal appearance shall be at the discretion of the city manager. Written notice of the ruling of the city manager shall be given to the certificate holder within thirty (30) days of the date of the appeal. Pending a ruling by the city manager, a certificate of registration, inspection sticker that has been suspended or revoked or a towing company that has been suspended or removed from the rotation list shall be considered suspended, revoked or removed. If a written request to appeal is not filed within the required time, the suspension, revocation or removal shall be final. 
(6)  If an inspection sticker is revoked, a new inspection sticker shall not be issued for that tow truck for a period of at least six (6) months from the date of revocation, unless otherwise authorized by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-122. - General prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or cause to be driven, a tow truck to or near the scene of a crash on a street within the city unless such person has been called to the scene by the police department or by a party involved in the crash; provided, however, that the prohibition of this subsection shall not be applicable when such actions are necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in a crash. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in nonconsent tows in the city unless such person possesses a current, valid certificate of registration. The Police Department shall be authorized to summon tow trucks without certificate of registration in emergency situations or as an operational necessity. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tow truck in the city, unless it is equipped as required by state law; and section 13-110 herein, if the towing company is participating in the rotation list, as described herein. A tow truck and its required equipment shall be in safe operating condition at all times when the tow truck is operating on the public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-123. - Removal of motor vehicles from private property. 
    The driver of a tow truck who removes a vehicle from private property under this article shall notify the police department of the city within thirty (30) minutes of such removal and the registered owner within seventy-two (72) hours. The information to be provided in such notification shall include: 
(1)  The date, time and location of the removal; 
(2)  The physical description and license or registration number of the vehicle; 
(3)  The name of the certificate holder which performed the removal; and 
(4)  The storage location of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-124. - Repossession of vehicles 
    The driver of a tow truck who removes a vehicle for the purpose of repossessing the vehicle shall be required to do the following: 
(1)  Contact the police department prior to making such repossession; and 
(2)  Present a written notice from the lien holder requesting such repossession which shall include the following information: 
(a)  Name of owner of said vehicle; 
(b)  Date, time and location of the removal; 
(c)  The physical description and license or registration number of the vehicle; 
(d)  The name of the certificate holder which is to perform the removal; and 
(e)  The storage location of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-125. - Vehicle owner notification and documentation. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the towing company, who stores vehicles within the city, to comply with vehicle storage facilities, V.T.C.A. Occupations Code Ch. 2303, and as appropriate abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A. Transportation Code Ch. 683, as now enacted or as hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-126. - Prohibited charges. 
    A towing company may not charge or attempt to charge a fee related to nonconsent or incident management towing under this article: 
(1)  In excess of the fee established; 
(2)  For a service not performed or equipment not used; or 
(3)  That is not authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-127. - Severability clause. 
    The provisions of this article are severable, and if any sentence, section, or other parts of this article should be found to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect. All ordinances and resolutions and parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby expressly. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-128. - Repealing clause. 
    All ordinances and resolutions and parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed insofar as they conflict with this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 13-129. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of this section of this article shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute another violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-07, 4-8-10) 
Chapter 14 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; improper plumbing practices,  4-34; finance and taxation, Ch. 5; the services of the city tax collector available to the water supply district,  5-1; sales and use tax,  5-41 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; fire prevention code adopted,  6-56 et seq.; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; plan for sewage disposal, water supply and garbage removal required for mobile home park permit,  9-29; nuisances, Ch. 10; solid waste, Ch. 12; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - City to provide wye; connector to pay expense of connection. 
    The city shall provide a wye in the alley or street adjacent to the last or nearest corner of the connector's property, within ten (10) feet of the surface of the ground. The house connection from the city lateral shall be installed at the expense of the connector in accordance with the regulations of and subject to the inspection of the city. 
(Code 1975,  14-34) 
Sec. 14-2. - Depth of water and sewer lines. 
    All sewer and water lines constructed or laid within the corporate limits of the city shall be placed or replaced to a minimum depth as established by the city and on file in the city secretary's office, and before they are covered they shall be inspected by some authorized agent of the city. 
(Code 1975,  14-37) 
Secs. 14-3-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-26. - Notice of permit issuance. 
    It shall be the duty of the water and sewer superintendent, whenever any permit for sewer connections shall be granted, to file a statement of that fact with the collector of the water and sewer department. 
(Code 1975,  10-8) 
Sec. 14-27. - When water closet, sewer connection required. 
(a)  All owners or occupants of buildings, or agents for the owners, situated in any section of the city where a sanitary sewer exists, and where the property line of the land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within one hundred (100) feet of any such sewer, are hereby required to construct suitable water closets on their property, and connect the same with the city sewer, under the supervision of the water and sewer superintendent. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any property owner or occupant of such property to keep and maintain such water closet and connection thereof in perfect condition and free from any obstruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or use any privy vault above or below ground in the city on any lot or parcel of land the property line of which at any point extends to within a distance of one hundred (100) feet of any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1975,  10-1) 
Sec. 14-28. - Unlawful to fail to connect to sewer. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building situated on a lot extending within one hundred (100) feet of any sewer of the city any portion of which such house is used for any purpose during any portion of the day, to fail to have at least one (1) water closet connected with the city sewer within ninety (90) days after notice from the water and sewer superintendent to do so, and to fail to have such water closets suitably arranged for use as a urinal unless a separate urinal is provided. 
(Code 1975,  10-2) 
Sec. 14-29. - When sink, hopper required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building situated within one hundred (100) feet of any sanitary sewer in which food is cooked or clothing is washed to fail to have a suitable sink or hopper for the reception of wastewater; provided, however, that if a water closet is suitable to such use, it may receive the wastewater, and the sink and hopper may be dispensed with. 
(Code 1975,  10-3) 
Sec. 14-30. - Certain wastes prohibited on ground. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or to allow any person under his control, to throw or deposit on the surface of the ground or in any hole or vault on or under the surface of the ground on any lot reaching within one hundred (100) feet of any city sanitary sewer, except in the proper and necessary manuring of the solids, any water which has been used for domestic purposes and any liquid or solid filth, feces, or urine. 
(Code 1975,  10-4) 
Sec. 14-31. - Certain deposits prohibited in sewers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or to cause or permit anyone under his control to throw or deposit, in any city sewer or any vessel or receptacle connected with any city sewer any garbage, hair, ashes, fruits, or vegetable peelings, or refuse, rags, cotton, cinders, lubricating oil, or any other matter whatsoever except feces and urine, the necessary closet paper, and liquid slops. 
(Code 1975,  10-5) 
Sec. 14-32. - Wash stands, slop stands to be connected to sewer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to connect all wash stands or slop stands in his house or yard or place of business with the city sewer, or allow any slops, wash, or waste of any kind to flow over the pavement or into any open gutter or into any street. 
(Code 1975,  10-6) 
Sec. 14-33. - Penalty for violations. 
    Every person who omits or refuses to comply with or who resists or wilfully violates any provisions of this article shall be fined in any sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) upon conviction thereof. 
(Code 1975,  10-7) 
Secs. 14-34-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority shall mean the city secretary or his duly authorized representative. 
    B.O.D. (biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees Celsius. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
    C.O.D. (chemical oxygen demand) shall mean the measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Control manhole shall mean a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point shall mean a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Garbage shall mean animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Industrial waste shall mean waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
    Industrial waste charge shall mean the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) shall mean the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic wastewater shall mean wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than three hundred (300) mg/l and BOD is not more than three hundred (300) mg/l. 
    Overload shall mean the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    pH shall mean the reciprocal of the logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter. 
    Public sewer shall mean pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard methods shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer shall mean a public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater shall mean rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
    Superintendent shall mean the water superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    To discharge shall mean to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Trap shall mean a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
(Code 1975,  14-41) 
Sec. 14-52. - Sewer system usage required for certain discharges. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids; or 
(4)  Unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the state water quality board, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in (a) above on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; or 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 1975,  14-50) 
Sec. 14-53. - Restriction of certain discharges. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may: 
(1)  Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; 
(2)  Create a hazard to life or health; or 
(3)  Create a public nuisance; 
the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under (a) above. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under (a) above; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of (a) above. 
(Code 1975,  14-51) 
Sec. 14-54. - Review, approval of pretreatment, control facilities. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control of discharges into the sewer system is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Code 1975,  14-52) 
Sec. 14-55. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article. 
(Code 1975,  14-42) 
Sec. 14-56. - Chemical discharges restricted. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 14-55(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen, sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Code 1975,  14-43) 
Sec. 14-57. - Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in (b) below. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with standard methods are: 
 (1) Arsenic  0.05 mg/l.  (2) Barium   5.0 mg/l.  (3) Boron   1.0 mg/l.  (4) Cadmium  0.05 mg/l.  (5) Chromium (total)   5.0 mg/l.  (6) Copper   1.0 mg/l.  (7) Lead  0.10 mg/l.  (8) Manganese   1.0 mg/l.  (9) Mercury 0.005 mg/l. (10) Nickel   1.0 mg/l. (11) Selenium  0.02 mg/l. (12) Silver   0.1 mg/l. (13) Zinc   5.0 mg/l.  
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony. 
(2)  Beryllium. 
(3)  Bismuth. 
(4)  Cobalt. 
(5)  Molybdenum. 
(6)  Tin. 
(7)  Uranyl ion. 
(8)  Rhenium. 
(9)  Strontium. 
(10)  Tellurium. 
(11)  Herbicides. 
(12)  Fungicides. 
(13)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1975,  14-44) 
Sec. 14-58. - Garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1975,  14-45) 
Sec. 14-59. - Stormwater, other unpolluted drainage prohibited in sanitary sewers. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the state water quality act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in (a) above may be discharged. 
(Code 1975,  14-46) 
Sec. 14-60. - Temperature. 
    No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1975,  14-47) 
Sec. 14-61. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1975,  14-48) 
Sec. 14-62. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by (a) above include, but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l including but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth, 
b.  Lime slurries, and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than one hundred (100) mg/l including but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride, and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes, and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  B.O.D., C.O.D., or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate (a) above if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Code 1975,  14-49) 
Sec. 14-63. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges into the sewer system requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1975,  14-53) 
Sec. 14-64. - Requirements for building sewers. 
    Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1975,  14-54) 
Sec. 14-65. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling of discharges into the sewer system shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this division shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  B.O.D. and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling. 
(d)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, B.O.D., and suspended solids. 
(e)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Code 1975,  14-55) 
Sec. 14-66. - Payment and agreement required. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(Code 1975,  14-56) 
Sec. 14-67. - Industrial waste charge and added costs. 
(a)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does not cause overloading the sewage collection, treatment, or disposal facilities of the city, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the schedule of charges. 
(b)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires that wastewater collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste. 
(c)  The agreement entered into pursuant to (a) above shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste; and 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense. 
(d)  Amortization shall be completed in a five-year period and payment shall include all debt service costs. 
(Code 1975,  14-57) 
Sec. 14-68. - Schedule of charges. 
    Industrial waste charges shall be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1975,  14-58) 
Sec. 14-69. - Adjustment of charges. 
(a)  The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of sampling and testing. 
(b)  Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two (2) billing periods and shall continue for six (6) billing periods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased. 
(c)  The city shall review at least annually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience. 
(d)  The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer charges. 
(Code 1975,  14-59) 
Sec. 14-70. - Continuation of noncomplying discharges. 
    A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of this article may continue without penalty so long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge without permission of the approving authority; 
(2)  Has discharged the industrial waste at least twelve (12) months prior to the effective date of this article; and 
(3)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article. 
(Code 1975,  14-60) 
Sec. 14-71. - Conditions of permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a permit to discharge wastes under this division to persons meeting all requirements of section 14-70 provided that the person: 
(1)  Submits an application within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this division and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of (a) above; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Code 1975,  14-61) 
Sec. 14-72. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. 
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1975,  14-62) 
Sec. 14-73. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to (a)(2) above, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Code 1975,  14-63) 
Sec. 14-74. - Notice of violation. 
    The city shall serve persons discharging wastes in violation of this division with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Code 1975,  14-64) 
Sec. 14-75. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
    No person may continue discharging in violation of this division beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1975,  14-65) 
Sec. 14-76. - Penalty for violations. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of (a) above, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Code 1975,  14-66) 
Sec. 14-77. - Failure to pay. 
    In addition to sanctions provided for by this division, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1975,  14-67) 
Secs. 14-78-14-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, Ch. 12; solid waste fees,  12-2. 

Sec. 14-96. - Water rates. 
    The minimum monthly rate charged by the city for furnishing water service to inhabitants of the city is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  14-31) 
Sec. 14-97. - Sewer rates. 
    The monthly rates charged by the city for furnishing sewer service to inhabitants of the city are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  14-31) 
Sec. 14-98. - Water deposits. 
    The amount required for a water deposit charged by the city for water service is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 5-85,  4, 8-12-85) 
Sec. 14-99. - Water tap fee. 
    The fee charged by the city for a water tap is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  14-33) 
Sec. 14-100. - Sewer tap fee. 
    The fee charged by the city for a sewer tap is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1975,  14-33) 
Sec. 14-101. - Transfer of service fee. 
    The minimum fee charged by the city for transferring water service is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 5-85,  7, 8-12-85) 
Sec. 14-102. - Reconnection fees. 
    The fee charged by the city for restoration of service in the event of discontinuance of service for failure to pay bills owed to the city is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 5-85,  9, 8-12-85) 
Sec. 14-103. - Sewer rates for large customers, etc. 
    The normal commercial rate will not apply to commercial and industrial customers producing sewage in large quantities and characteristics that may require other than customary treatment. The rate for such customers will be negotiated in order for the city to be reimbursed for any extra expense relative to such service. 
(Code 1975,  14-35) 
Sec. 14-104. - Due date for bills; delinquency; reconnection. 
    All bills for services rendered by the water and sewer systems shall be paid monthly on the tenth day of each month after the billing date. If not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date, service shall be discontinued. In the event of discontinuance of service, an additional sum which is on file in the city secretary's office shall be charged for reconnection to the system. Water service shall be disconnected if bill for sewer service is not paid within thirty (30) days after due date of bill for sewer service, even though bill for water service shall have been paid. 
(Code 1975,  14-32) 
Secs. 14-105-14-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPACT FEES FOR A CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN 

Sec. 14-121. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall be applied in the enforcement of this article: 
    Purchase of a connection shall mean the physical connection to the City of Decatur water or sewer system for which a tap fee is required and paid. 
    Equivalent service unit shall mean that amount calculated in the Capital Improvements Plan for water and wastewater impact fees to be the average water use for a single family residence typically served by a 3/4-inch water meter, and assigned the value of one service unit. 
    Capital improvements plan shall mean a plan required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 395 that identifies capital improvements or facility expansions for which impact fees may be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  I, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-122. - Adoption of a capital improvements plan to be funded by impact fees. 
    The capital improvements plan, attached as Exhibit "A" to the ordinance from which this article derives, is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  II, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-123. - Authorization for the collection of impact fees. 
    From and after the effective date hereof, the collection of an impact fee shall be required at the time of the purchase of a connection to the city water or wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  III, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-124. - Use of funds. 
    A collected impact fee may be used only to pay the costs of constructing capital improvements or facility expansions, including and limited to the (1) construction contract price; (2) surveying and engineering fees; (3) land acquisition costs, including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees; and (4) fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the capital improvements plan who is not an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  IV, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-125. - Fee to be collected. 
    The base water system impact fee per equivalent service unit shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). The base wastewater system impact fee per equivalent service unit shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). The following tables are expressly adopted for purposes of quantifying and calculating the total impact fees to be assessed, based on meter size and type: 
WATER SYSTEM IMPACT FEE 
Meter Size/Type Equivalent 
Service Units Base Fee (Dollars) Total Impact 
Fee (Dollars) 3/4" displacement 1.0 300.00  300.00 1" displacement 1.7 300.00  510.00 1-1/2" displacement 3.3 300.00 990.00 2" displacement 5.3 300.00 1,590,00 2" compound 5.3 300.00 1,590.00 2" turbine 5.3 300.00 1,590.00 3" compound 10.7 300.00 3,210.00 3" turbine 11.7 300.00 3,510.00 4" compound 16.7 300.00 5,010.00 4" turbine 21.0 300.00 6,300.00 6" compound 33.3 300.00 9,990.00 6" turbine 46.6 300.00 1,3,980.00 8" compound 53.3 300.00 15,990.00 10" turbine 126.7 300.00 38,010.00  
WASTEWATER SYSTEM IMPACT FEE 
Meter Size/Type Equivalent 
Service Units Base Fee (Dollars) Total Impact 
Fee (Dollars) 3/4" displacement 1.0 400.00 400.00 1" displacement 1.7 400.00 680.00 1-1/2" displacement 3.3 400.00 1,320,00 2" displacement 5.3 400.00 2,120.00 2" compound 5.3 400.00 2,120.00 2" turbine 5.3 400.00 2,120.00 3" compound 10.7 400.00 4,280.00 3" turbine 11.7 400.00 4,680.00 4" compound 16.7 400.00 6,680.00 4" turbine 21.0 400.00 8,400.00 6" compound 33.3 400.00 13,320.00 6" turbine 46.6 400.00 18,640.00 8" compound 53.3 400.00 21,320.00 10" turbine 126.7 400.00 50,680.00  
(Ord. No. 15-98,  V, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-126. - Authority to spend funds to reduce fees. 
    The city reserves the right to spend funds from any lawful source to pay for all or part of the capital improvements or facility expansions to reduce the amount of impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  VI, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-127. - Authorization for political subdivisions and other governmental entities to pay impact fees. 
    Political subdivisions and other governmental entities may pay impact fees imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  VII, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-128. - Segregation of fees collected. 
    All funds collected through the adoption of this fee shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account clearly identifying the category of capital improvement or facility expansion within the service area for which the fee was adopted. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  VIII, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-129. - Refunds. 
    On the request of an owner of the property on which an impact fee has been paid, the city shall refund the impact fee if existing facilities are available and service is denied or the city has, after collecting the fee when service was not available, failed to commence construction within two (2) years or service is not available within a reasonable period considering the type of capital improvement of facility expansion to be constructed, but in no event later than five (5) years from the date of payment of the impact fee. 
    On completion of the capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the capital improvements plan, the city shall recalculate the impact fee using the actual costs of the capital improvements or facility expansion. If the impact fee calculated based on actual cost is less than the impact fee paid, the city shall refund the difference if the difference exceeds the impact the paid by more than ten (10) percent. 
    The city shall refund any impact fee or part of it that is not spent as authorized by this article within ten (10) years after the date of payment. 
    Any refund shall bear interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in Article 1.03, Title 79, Revised Statutes (Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 5069-1.03) or its successor statute. 
    All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid. However, if the impact fees were paid by another political subdivision or governmental entity, payment shall be made to the political subdivision or governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  IX, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-130. - Variances. 
    Variances to this article may be granted by city council. Any party seeking a variance shall apply to city council by written application or letter, and shall be prepared to demonstrate why the terms of this article should not be applied. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  X, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-131. - Periodic update of land use assumptions and capital improvements plan. 
    No later than three (3) years from the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives, city council shall either (1) make a determination that no update of the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan, or impact fees is needed or (2) update the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fees. In either case, the procedural requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  395.052 for such determination or update shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  XI, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 14-132. - Capital improvements advisory committee 
    The planning and zoning commission of the city is appointed and shall serve as the capital improvements advisory committee and serve in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 395. 
(Ord. No. 15-98,  XII, 8-10-98) 
Secs. 14-133-14-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY WATER RATIONING 

Sec. 14-151. - Declaration of emergency. 
(a)  The mayor, or acting mayor or other designated representative in the mayor's absence, or the city council by majority vote, shall have the authority, without delay to declare the existence of an "emergency," or of an "extreme emergency," arising from a water supply shortage or water pressure deficit, whereupon immediately after such declaration of emergency or extreme emergency provisions of this article shall take full force and effect. Said declaration of emergency or extreme emergency shall be put in written form and posted on the official bulletin board in the city hall for so long as said declaration of emergency or extreme emergency shall remain in force and effect. Notice of the declaration of emergency or of extreme emergency shall also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  The declaration of emergency or extreme emergency as provided in this article shall continue in full force and effect until declared terminated by majority vote the city council at any regular or called meeting, upon determining that no such emergency or extreme emergency continues to exist. Provided, if such emergency or extreme emergency was declared only by action of the mayor or any other authorized individual, the mayor shall have authority to declare such emergency or extreme emergency terminated. Once so terminated, the posted notice on the official bulletin board in the city hall shall be removed, and a notice of the termination of such emergency or extreme emergency shall be placed once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-98,  1, 7-27-98) 
Sec. 14-152. - Wasteful use of water prohibited during emergency or extreme emergency. 
    During the pendency of any emergency or extreme emergency declared in accordance with the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person or resident to knowingly permit or allow the wasteful use of water from the municipal water system. 
(Ord. No. 14-98,  2, 7-27-98) 
Sec. 14-153. - Lawn watering and vehicle washing restricted during emergency or extreme emergency. 
(a)  During the pendency of any emergency declared in accordance with the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person or resident to use water from the municipal water system for purposes of lawn watering or private vehicle washing except under the following schedule, to-wit: 
(1)  Customers with odd-numbered street addresses may water lawns and privately wash vehicles on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, if necessary. 
(2)  Customers with even-numbered street addresses may water lawns and privately wash vehicles on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, if necessary. 
(3)  No houses and businesses situated in any portion of the city shall be permitted to water lawns or privately wash vehicles on Sundays. 
(b)  During the pendency of any extreme emergency declared in accordance with the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person or resident to use water from the municipal water system for purposes of lawn watering or private vehicle washing at any time whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 14-98,  3, 7-27-98) 
Sec. 14-154. - Further powers of the mayor to restrict use of municipal water during emergency or extreme emergency. 
(a)  It shall be within the discretion of the mayor to determine whether or not to apply the above emergency and extreme emergency provisions to prohibit the operation of commercial car washes, generally and specifically. In exercising this discretion, the mayor shall consider such factors as (a) the conditions giving rise to the need for declaration of such emergency or extreme emergency, (b) the improvement of conditions arising from imposition of the emergency or extreme emergency while such commercial car washes are exempted, (c) the use of water recycling operations by certain commercial car washes, and (d) such other factors as may reasonably impact upon such decision. 
(b)  It shall further be within the discretion of the mayor to determine whether or not to apply the above emergency and extreme emergency provisions to regulate, limit or wholly prohibit the operation of any other commercial or private use of municipal water. In exercising this discretion, the mayor shall consider such all such factors regarding such municipal water use as may reasonably impact upon such decision, and upon the reasonable alleviation of such emergency or extreme emergency conditions. Such other commercial or private uses of municipal water hereby made subject to this regulatory authority expressly include, but are not limited to, the filling of swimming pools, street washing, athletic field watering, water hydrant flushing, window washing, and pavement washing. 
(c)  It shall further be within the discretion of the mayor to regulate the times of day in which lawn watering may be permitted during the pendency of any water emergency declared under the provisions of this article. 
(d)  During the pendency of any water emergency declared under the provisions of this article, it shall further be within the discretion of the mayor to alter the lawn watering schedule set forth in subsection 14-153(a), above, to provide for division of the city into an approximate "North half" and "South half," rather than by odd-numbered and even-numbered addresses, and to allocate permitted watering days between such "North half" and "South half." 
(e)  During the pendency of any water emergency declared under the provisions of this article, it shall further be within the discretion of the mayor to reduce the number of permitted lawn watering days from three days per week to two days per week, in accordance with such schedule as he may determine. 
(f)  During the pendency of any extreme water emergency declared under the provisions of this article, it shall further be within the discretion of the mayor to regulate and establish maximum water use limits for commercial and residential users. 
(Ord. No. 14-98,  4, 7-27-98) 
Sec. 14-155. - Truck load sales of water prohibited during extreme emergency. 
    During the pendency of any extreme emergency declared in accordance with the provisions of this article, all sales of water in truck load quantities shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 14-98,  5, 7-27-98) 
Sec. 14-156. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every violation and day the violation is allowed to continue. 
(Ord. No. 14-98,  6, 7-27-98) 
Secs. 14-157-14-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2001-10-09,  1, adopted October 8, 2001, added a new title V, chapter 55. For purposes of classification, such ordinance was added as a new article VI at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 14-166. - Cross-connection standards. 
    Every source of contamination or possible contamination from contaminant which originates from or is located at a residential or commercial establishment, which is connected to any public water supply or which provides water to the public shall be equipped with the protection required under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-167. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the most recent adopted edition of the City of Decatur Plumbing Code and/or Manual of Cross Connection Control published be the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California: 
    Air gap shall mean a physical separation between free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device in no case less than one (1) inch. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention device or atmospheric vacuum breaker or AVB shall mean a device used to prevent backsiphonage in non-health hazard conditions. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent backpressure backflow. 
    Auxiliary supply shall mean any water source or system other than the public water system, that may be available in the building or on the property, including ground water or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation or any other purpose. 
    Backflow prevention assembly or assembly shall mean an assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage. 
    Backflow shall mean flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the city's water. 
    Backpressure shall mean any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures, or substances from any source other than the intended source. 
    Backsiphonage shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixture, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Boresight or boresight to daylight shall mean providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drainpipe. 
    City or the City shall mean the City of Decatur through the city administrator or any representative, inspector, or employee designated by the city administrator. 
    Commercial establishment shall mean property or location which is used primarily for manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling, or retailing of services which is or may be placed in the flow of commerce or any property or location which is used primarily for the provision of any service. 
    Commission shall mean the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC). 
    Contaminants shall mean any foreign material, solid or liquid, not common to the potable water supply, which makes the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption. 
    Contamination means the admission of contaminants into the portable water supply system. 
    Cross-connection shall mean any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it is possible for any nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
    Customer service inspection shall mean the low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross-connection hazards and/or exceed the lead action level in solder or flux, pipe or pipe fittings. 
    Degree of hazard shall mean the low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross-connections as follows: 
(1)  Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
(2)  High hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply. 
(3)  Low hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connections that potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to backflow into the potable water supply. 
(4)  Pollution hazard means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. Maximum degree of intensity of pollution, by which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition, would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
(5)  System hazard means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Director shall mean the city administrator, the city administrator's designated water operations superintendent, or his designee who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
    Double check detector backflow prevention assembly or double check detector or DCDA shall mean an assembly composed of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and a approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
    Fireline tester shall mean a tester who is employed by a state approved fireline contractor and is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on firelines only. 
    General tester shall mean a tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial, or irrigation service except firelines. 
    Mobile unit shall mean any operation which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system from a mobile source. These include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and pest-control vehicles. 
    Non-residential use shall mean water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and include all uses not specifically included in "residential uses" as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, associations, corporations, firms, clubs, trustees, receivers, and bodies politic and corporate. 
    Point-of-use isolation shall mean the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross-connection exists. 
    Potable water supply shall mean any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use. 
    Promises shall mean any piece of property to which is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it. 
    Premise isolation shall mean the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or pressure vacuum breaker or PVB shall mean an assembly which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against back pressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate valves and resilient seated test cocks, which allow the full testing of the assembly. 
    Public water system or system shall mean any public or privately owned water system, which supplies water for domestic use in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RP assembly or RP shall mean an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve the end of the assembly. 
    Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure detector or RPDA shall mean an assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle back/low prevention assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
    Representative of the water system shall mean a person designated by the City of Decatur to perform cross-connection control duties that shall include, but are not limited to, cross-connection inspections and water use surveys. 
    Residential use shall mean water used by any residential customer of the water supply and include single family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex, housing and apartments where individual units are each on a separate meter; or, in cases where two or more units are served by one meter, the units are full-time wellings. 
    Service connection shall mean the point of delivery which the water purveyor loses control of the water. 
    Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker of SVB shall mean an assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded check valve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. 
    Tester shall mean a person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the city and the TNRCC. 
    Thermal expansion shall mean heated water that does not have the space to expand. 
    TNRCC shall mean the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. 
    Used water shall mean water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water use survey shall mean a survey conducted or caused to be conducted by the local authority designed to identify any possible sources of contamination to the potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-168. - Right-of-way encroachment. 
    No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way except as provided for in this section. 
(1)  A backflow prevention assembly required by the city may be installed upon or within the city right-of-way only if the owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities, and he obtains a permit from the city. The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to installation. 
(2)  All permits and inspections required by the City Code to perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained. 
(3)  The assembly shall be installed below or flush with the surrounding grade except when it is not practicable to install it in this manner. Any assembly or portion of an assembly, which extends aboveground, shall be located no closer than eighteen (18) inches to the face of the curb. 
(d)  The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way. 
(e)  A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction repairs for purposes of public safety. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if he/she fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way after receiving a written order from the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-169. - Multiple connections. 
    Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection will be required to install a backflow assembly on each of the additional service lines to the premises. The type of assembly will be determined by the degree of hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the buildings on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-170. - Protection required; installation. 
(a)  The backflow prevention assembly protection which is required under this article shall be any of the duly nationally recognized and authorized backflow prevention assemblies listed in a State of Texas approved plumbing code, or as determined by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority prior to installation must have approved each backflow prevention assembly. Failure to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention assembly may result in the backflow prevention assembly failing to meet final approval by the regulatory authority. The city shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city. The assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but is in no way limited to the following circumstances: 
(1)  The nature and extent of any activity on the premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity on the premises, or materials stored on the premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
(2)  Premises having any one or more cross-connections shall require an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB) that protects connections(s). 
(3)  Internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable. 
(4)  Intricate plumbing arrangements that are present which make it impractical to ascertain whether cross-connections exist. 
(5)  There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross-connections do not exist. 
(6)  Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the judgment of the city. 
(7)  An appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the public works/water utilities department of the city upon request of the city. 
(8)  A fire suppression system that is connected to the city's water system. 
(9)  All new construction if deemed necessary in the customer service inspection. The type of assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard. 
(10)  When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such a building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be installed at the service connection that supplies water for public domestic use. 
(11)  Any used water return system. 
(12)  In the event a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by this article, a premises isolation assembly will be required. 
(13)  If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may be required. 
(14)  All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank. 
(15)  Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the city deems necessary to retrofit. 
(b)  All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective date of this article shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease of inspection by the city. Any currently installed backflow prevention assemblies which are located in inaccessible locations, or where the tester is subject to physical danger shall be relocated to approved locations following current national guideline standards. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-171. - Testing of assemblies. 
(a)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected and tested or caused to be inspected and tested by the city in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Immediately after installations; 
(2)  Whenever the assembly is moved; 
(3)  A minimum of once a year; 
(4)  Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one (1) year, prior to reoccupancy. 
(b)  All assembly testing shall be performed by a state certified backflow prevention assembly tester, approved by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. Persons and occupants of premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly of indirectly, shall allow the city or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, testing, records, examination, or in the performance of any of their duties. Where persons or occupants of the premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make the necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(d)  The city is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly which may occur during testing. 
(e)  A water use survey may be conducted at any establishment located in the city which is served by a public water supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination that the establishment falls under the provisions of this article and requires a backflow prevention assembly, a notice to abate the condition or to install the proper backflow prevention assembly shall be issued. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of the person who owns or controls property to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this article. Assemblies may be tested more frequently if the regulatory authority deems necessary. 
(g)  All results from assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall be placed on a form that is purchased by the tester from the city for a fee to be established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-172. - Thermal expansion. 
    It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-173. - Pressure loss. 
    Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-174. - Residential service connections. 
    Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross-connection will be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross-connection or have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-175. - Rental properties. 
    Any person who owns or controls property is responsible for the installation, testing, and repair of all backflow assemblies on his property. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-176. - Customer service inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to TNRCC Water System Regulations, a customer service inspection for cross-connection control shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Water service to a newly constructed facility or previously non-existing premises. 
(2)  After any material improvement to building(s) or premises. 
(3)  Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises. 
(4)  The city deems it necessary. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility(s) until after the customer service inspection is completed. 
(c)  Temporary water service which poses a potential cross-connection threat to the portable water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-177. - Installation guidelines and requirements for backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  General. To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the following national guideline requirements shall apply to the installation of these assemblies. 
(1)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the current TNRCC Rule and these regulations. The assembly installer must obtain the required plumbing permits and have installation inspected by the city. 
(2)  At facilities which require a backflow prevention assembly to be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, such installation of an assembly must be before any branch in the line and on private property located just inside the boundary between the city right-of-way and the landowner's property. The city may specify other areas for installation of the assembly. Assemblies that must be installed that are located on city rights-of-way are the responsibilities of the business or entity that the water line is serving. 
(3)  The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions. 
(4)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the city. 
(5)  All vertical installations of backflow assemblies must have prior approval by the city. 
(6)  Assemblies that are larger than four (4) inches and installed more than five (5) feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing and maintenance personnel. 
(7)  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings, which could be used for connecting a bypass line, must not be installed. 
(8)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two assemblies installed parallel. They should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the maximum flow required. 
(9)  Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly. 
(10)  All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a backflow assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair, and maintenance can be performed. 
(11)  The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damages resulting from installation, operation, and/or maintenance of a backflow assembly. The owner shall be responsible for keeping all backflow prevention assembly vaults reasonably free of debris and silt. 
(12)  Upon completion of installation, the city shall be notified and all assemblies must be inspected and tested. All assemblies must be registered with the city and shall provide the date of installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number of the backflow assembly, and initial test report. 
(b)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RP's) may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RP shall be effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(1)  RP's must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data. 
(2)  The assembly must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in an area where water damage to building or furnishing would not occur from relief valve discharge. The property owner assumes a responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from an RP assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. 
(3)  No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPs are typically installed above grade in well-drained areas, but may be installed below grade (ground level) if a boresight drain to daylight, is provided. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends. 
(4)  Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies. Daylight drain ports must be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly. 
(5)  Assemblies 2 inches smaller shall have at least six-inch clearance on both sides and on top of the assembly and twelve (12) inches below and behind the assembly. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches on the backside, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least twelve (12) inches plus nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six (6) feet eight (8) inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches is required on all vault lids. 
(6)  All RP assemblies must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have the prior written approval of the city. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies (RPDA) may be utilized in all installations requiring a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly detector metering. 
(1)  RPDAs shall comply with installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies (RP). 
(2)  The line size RP assembly and the bypass RP assembly must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(d)  Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DC) may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(1)  DC's must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for premises being served. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data. 
(2)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. Assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required. 
(3)  The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DC's may be installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. 
(4)  Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance below and on both sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than twenty-four (24) inches below grade. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches on the backside, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and twelve (12) inches below the assembly. Headroom of six (6) feet zero (0) inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches is required on all vault lids. "Y" pattern double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. These clearance standards apply to all assemblies installed in vaults, enclosures, and meter boxes. 
(5)  Vertical installations of DC's are allowed only on sizes up to and including 4 inches that meet the following requirements: 
a.  Internally spring-loaded check valves. 
b.  Flow is upward through assembly. 
c.  Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical position. 
d.  Approved by director. 
(6)  All DC's must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the city. 
(d)  Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDA) may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  DCDA's shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve assemblies (DC's). 
(2)  The line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(e)  Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVB) may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVB's protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure. 
(1)  Assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above highest downstream piping. 
(2)  PVB's shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water discharge. 
(3)  The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches all around the assembly. 
(4)  All PVB's must be tested in compliance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(5)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the regulatory authority. 
(f)  Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVB) may be utilized in all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. 
(1)  SVB's shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for pressure vacuum, breaker backflow prevention assemblies. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-178. - Air gap separation. 
    Air gaps provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and should be utilized at all locations where "high" hazardous substances are at risk of entering potable water system. 
(a)  An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel and in no case less than one inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45-degree angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed. 
(b)  Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the regulatory authority and must be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(c)  Side walls, ribs, or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or a distance greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-179. - Fire suppression systems. 
    All new installations of fire suppression systems, which utilize the city's potable water supply, shall have installed an approved backflow prevention device according to the degree of hazard. 
    An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems. Piping material that is not approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through during each twenty-four-hour period, cannot be used unless a variance has been issued in writing from the city. A (RPDA) must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this ordinance. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the regulatory authority. All costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing, and repair of a (DCDA) or (RPDA) device is the responsibility of the property owner and persons in charge of any premises. 
(b)  Upon the approved installation of the (DCDA) or (RPDA) device, a cross-connection test report completed by a licensed fireline tester must be sent to the attention of the city and include the information required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-180. - Fire hydrant protection. 
    An approved double check device backflow prevention assembly (DCD) or reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other uses which would pose a potential hazard to the public water supply. A (RPDA) must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter to abide by the conditions of this article. All fire hydrant water meter rentals shall meet the current requirements. 
(b)  Only the city fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed to be used within city limits. 
(c)  A refundable deposit is required to insure the return of all water meter and backflow assemblies to the City of Decatur. Failure to return the assemblies can result in the forfeiture of deposit and/or enforcement action being taken against the responsible party, as allowed for in the penalty section of this article. (See fees.) 
(d)  All non-approved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use in the city will be confiscated and enforcement action taken against the responsible party, as allowed for in the enforcement section in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-181. - Responsibilities of property owner. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of all property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this article and to comply with the following: 
(1)  Payment of all costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing, and repair of backflow assemblies. 
(2)  Install and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this article and acceptable industry practice. 
(3)  All commercial establishments shall cause to have backflow prevention assemblies on their premises tested annually. Such a certified cross-connection tester must conduct testing who is registered with the city. 
(4)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. 
(5)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner, which allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the city. 
(6)  All records related to backflow prevention assembly installation, testing, and repair shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three (3) years. 
(b)  Certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Annually register with the city and pay the required fee. 
(2)  Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition/calibration. 
(3)  Maintain the design or operation characteristics of an assembly. 
(4)  Ensured that devices are tested according to accepted industry practice and TNRCC regulations. 
(5)  Enter required testing data, including test gauge serial numbers, on cross-connection test forms obtained from the city. 
(6)  Report test results to the regulatory authority within thirty (30) days of the testing. 
(7)  Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises. 
(8)  Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-182. - Backflow prevention assembly tester certification-Registration required. 
    Only approved TNRCC licensed backflow prevention assembly testers can test backflow prevention assemblies in the city. Testers must register annually with the city, provide proof of TNRCC certification, and provide proof that testing equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2, psid accuracy and pay an annual, non-refundable, tester registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-183. - Fees. 
    There shall be a testing fee charged by the tester for each separate backflow prevention assembly on which a test is performed. This fee applies to but is not limited to all newly installed backflow devices, which the city may choose to randomly test. If upon inspection or testing of a newly installed backflow prevention assembly it is deemed not to be working properly, it is the responsibility of the property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to make necessary repairs. A retest fee will be assessed by the tester for each retest. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-184. - Compliance for lawn irrigation.. 
    For all lawn irrigation system installations a permit shall be required. Such a permit shall be issued by the building inspection department. Installation requirements must comply with the current city plumbing code and/or guidelines for the appropriate device found in this article. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water source is prohibited unless appropriate backflow prevention is installed. High hazard backflow protection devices must be installed if any mechanical injection stations are used with the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-185. - Mobile units. 
    The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless such a connection is protected by an air gap or an approved backflow prevention assembly. Prior to approval, an annual device testing of any backflow prevention assembly must be received from the city before connecting to any potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 14-186. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the city administrator or his designee. 
(b)  The city shall inspect and initially test, or cause to be tested, all backflow prevention assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this article. For new facilities, permanent water service shall not be provided until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. Except in cases where the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or auxiliary equipment, the regulatory authority shall not approve a certificate of occupancy until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. The city shall not be liable for damage caused to any backflow prevention assembly as a result of the inspection or testing. 
(c)  Violations: 
(1)  A person commits an offense if there is failure to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if there is failure to comply with a repair order issued by the city. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if backflow from premises owned, operated, or managed by the person, enters the public water supply system. 
(4)  A person commits an offense if there is a failure to pay any fees required by this article. 
(5)  A person commits an offense by violating any section of this article. 
(6)  A person commits an offense if discontinued or disconnected water service to premises under this article is reinstated except as directed by the city. 
(7)  A person in charge of any facility commits an offense by allowing an unregistered tester to perform testing work at their establishment. 
(8)  A person commits an offense by testing backflow prevention assembly within the city without being registered with the city. 
(9)  A person commits an offense by testing backflow prevention assembly within the city without being certified by TNRCC. 
(d)  Penalty. 
(1)  A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable as set forth in the Code of Ordinances, by a fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each act of violation and for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(2)  In addition to proceeding under the authority of this article, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person committing any violation of this article including injunction and civil penalties. 
(e)  A certified testers' registration may be reviewed and revoked by the city if it is determined that the tester: 
(1)  Has falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately reported assembly reports; 
(2)  Has used inaccurate gauges; 
(3)  Has used improper testing procedures; or 
(4)  Has created a threat to public health or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-09,  1, 10-8-01) 
Chapter 15 - SIGNS 

Sec. 15-1. - Applicability/purpose. 
(a)  The official name of this document is the "City of Decatur Sign Ordinance" although in this document it will just be called "this document" or "this chapter". It is a stand alone ordinance. The regulations contained in this chapter are applicable to and enforceable in the Decatur City Limits and the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of Decatur. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by regulating signage in order to minimize visual clutter, to minimize driver distraction and to preserve the character of the city and its ETJ. The regulations in this document protect the historic and small town character of Decatur while giving businesses adequate visibility to succeed and to also protect those areas outside the corporate limits that are subject to annexation. This chapter allows each business to be adequately identified, but does not allow each business to compete for the attention of passing drivers which creates safety hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-10,  1(Exh. A), 11-10-08) 
Sec. 15-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Some of the important words used in this document are listed below, followed by an explanation of what the words mean: 
    Abandoned sign means a sign pertaining to or associated with an event, business, or purpose which is no longer ongoing and which has been inactive or out of business for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days or longer; or a sign which contains structural components but no display for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days or longer or a sign which has a display surface with torn and/or unreadable coverage on the message board which has remained in such state for a period of forty-five (45) consecutive days or more. 
    Alter means to change the size or shape of a sign. 
    Building frontage means the exterior wall of a building or tenant space that has a primary, public entrance. 
    Building setback means the shortest distance from the nearest public street right-of-way to the building frontage. 
    Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) means a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including light emitting diode (LED) or electronic message board or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway. 
    Electronic message board means any sign with a fixed or changing display/message composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display screen composed of electrically illuminated segments. 
    Off-premise sign means any sign, including without limitation, signs commonly known as billboard, displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not located or manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located or that directs persons to a location other than the premises where the sign is installed and maintained. 
    On-premise sign means any freestanding sign identifying or advertising a business, person, or activity, and installed and maintained on the same premises as the business, person or activity for business purposes. 
    Reface means to refurbish or to update the area or display surface used for the message but without altering the sign. 
    Sign means a picture, logo, letters, lights, color, displays and all other such devices or items used to promote or attract attention to a product, business, service or activity. 
    Sign area means the total area of a box drawn around the entire dimension of a sign background (which is used to distinguish the sign), sign cabinet or structure (See Illustration A). 

    Sign code area means the corporate limits of the City of Decatur and the area identified as the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) as defined by the Texas Local Government Code,  42.021 and as expanded in accordance therewith from time to time by annexation. 
    Sign height means the distance from grade to the top of the sign. 
    Signs that cannot be seen from the street frontage (defined herein) are not regulated by this chapter nor are signs that are installed by public utilities and governments that are erected for safety reasons, such as traffic and street signs. 
    Street frontage means the property line adjacent to the right-of-way of a public street. 
(b)  Words not defined are to be interpreted according to the normally accepted meaning of the word or its customary usage. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-10,  1(Exh. A), 11-10-08) 
Sec. 15-3. - About the process. 
(a)  The city's planning director is responsible for interpreting, administering and enforcing this chapter. If need be, the director may designate others who are qualified to help in this process. 
(b)  To make sure this chapter is followed, all signs being installed, altered or moved require a permit and everyone engaged in the business of installing signs is required to get a registration permit from the city. Signs being refaced for maintenance or to accommodate change of business are excluded. 
When seeking a sign permit, the applicant shall provide the necessary information, including without limitation the following: 1) plot plan, 2) sign drawings and details, 3) building elevations, and 4) engineered plans for freestanding signs over eight (8) feet in height. Once the permit is issued, the recipient has one hundred eighty (180) days to complete the work before the permit expires. 
(c)  To help cover the cost, a fee shall be charged for the registration permit and the sign permit. This fee shall be set by city council and listed in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
(d)  To protect the city and its citizens, everyone applying for a registration permit must first provide a good and sufficient surety bond payable to the city in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-10,  1(Exh. A), 11-10-08) 
Sec. 15-4. - Enforcing this chapter. 
(a)  To make sure this chapter is followed and to protect the city and its citizens, the planning director shall require signs to be inspected, shall revoke licenses or permits for violations, shall issue penalties for violations after due process and shall have illegal signs removed. 
(b)  Fines for violations shall range from a fifty dollar ($50.00) minimum to a five hundred dollar ($500.00) maximum and shall be charged daily for each separate violation. Temporary illegal signs or signs imposing an immediate danger shall be removed immediately without notification. Illegal permanent signs shall be removed only after notification and a thirty-day opportunity to correct the problem. 
(c)  To lessen violations, the city shall not issue new sign permits where illegal signs or violations still exist. 
(d)  Decisions and interpretations by the planning director can be appealed to the city council provided that written notice of such appeal is filed by the applicant with the city secretary no later than ten (10) days following the applicant's receipt of the planning director's written decision or interpretation. The decision of the planning director shall become final upon the expiration of the ten (10) day appeal period set forth herein. 
Upon receipt of such written notice, the city secretary shall place the appeal on the next regularly scheduled council meeting agenda. The city council may also authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, extraordinary hardship shall result from requiring strict compliance. The determination of the city council shall be final. 
Sec. 15-5. - About existing signs. 
(a)  After this chapter is adopted, all permanent signs not meeting the requirements of this chapter are legal but nonconforming. As such, they are not required to conform unless they are removed, moved or suffer damage in excess of fifty (50) percent of their replacement costs. 
(b)  After this chapter is adopted, all illegal temporary signs are subject to removal. 
(c)  After the adoption of this chapter, abandoned signs and sign poles are subject to removal after notification and a thirty-day opportunity to correct the problem. This also applies to signs that advertise a business that has closed. 
(d)  If the situation arises where a sign has to be removed and the owner has failed to correct the problem, then the city shall have the sign removed. The cost for the removal shall then be assessed against the land or building where the sign was located. 
(e)  The ultimate liability and responsibility for all signs rests with the property owner, the applicant and/or business owner and the sign installer. These three parties are responsible to see that signs comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-10,  1(Exh. A), 11-10-08) 
Sec. 15-6. - Rules applying to signs. 
(a)  The following regulations are applicable to all signs in the sign code area as defined herein: 
(1)  The sign shall be on the same site to which its advertisement refers. Except as specifically allowed in this chapter, off-premise signs are prohibited. 
(2)  The leading edge of a permanent sign shall be at least five (5) feet off the street right-of-way. Temporary signs must not be on or over street right-of-way. 
(3)  Signs shall not be attached to fences, natural features or utility poles. 
(4)  Permanent signs shall be attached so that they are not moved by the wind. 
(5)  Signs shall not have words or pictures which display specified sexual activities, nudity or semi-nudity as defined in the city's Code of Ordinances, chapter 7, article V, titled "Sexually Oriented Business". 
(6)  The sign and surrounding area (four-foot radius) must be kept clean, safe, neatly painted and maintained and in good repair. 
(7)  The sign cannot have flashing or flickering lights or moving parts unless it is an electronic message board sign allowed by this chapter (See section 15-7(a)(21)). 
(8)  Illuminated signs shall not interfere with traffic or traffic devices. An illuminated sign adjacent to a residential area must be separated from this residential area by a distance equal to four (4) times its height measured from property edge to edge. 
(9)  The sign shall meet all other adopted codes, such as building, electrical and fire codes. 
(10)  The sign shall be at least ten (10) feet from power lines or the distance required by the adopted electrical code, whichever one requires the most separation. 
(11)  The sign can only have two (2) faces, a front and a back, with a distance of not more than eighteen (18) inches between these faces. 
(12)  The wiring to freestanding signs shall be underground. The wiring to all other signs shall be hidden. 
(13)  Freestanding signs over eight (8) feet in height (from grade to top of sign) require structural plans sealed by a civil or structural engineer licensed in Texas. 
(14)  Freestanding signs shall be designed for a minimum ninety (90) miles per hour wind load. 
(15)  Freestanding signs shall be at least five (5) feet away from buildings, driveways and parking areas. For protection, they must have a curbed or protected landscape area around the sign of at least four (4) feet from the sign structure. This area must be at least four (4) times the size of the sign area. 
(16)  Mobile signs are not permitted unless specifically allowed herein. 
(17)  CEVMS prohibited. Changeable electronic variable message signs are prohibited. This prohibition applies to all off-premise signs, including without limitation, billboards, in place at the time of adoption of this chapter or which are constructed after the date of adoption of this chapter. 
(18)  Except as otherwise expressly allowed herein, electronic message boards are only allowed on on-premise pole or monument signs along FM 51 and U.S. Business 380 and are expressly prohibited on all other signs in all other locations, including without limitation, signs located on US Highway 81/287 or 380 Bypass. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-10,  1(Exh. A), 11-10-08) 
Sec. 15-7. - Signs allowed in Decatur. 
(a)  The following is a list of signs allowed in the sign code area as defined herein along with regulations for each such sign. Signs not listed are not allowed: 
(1)  Incidental signs used to inform or give direction for safety reasons, for example, "stop engine", "no smoking" and "do not enter". 
Max. size: Two (2) square feet 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(2)  Identification signs such as nameplates and addresses used primarily for convenience and not for advertisement. 
Max. size: Two (2) square feet 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(3)  Shingle signs hanging perpendicular to the door at least seven (7) feet off the ground. 
Max. size: Four (4) square feet 
Number: One (1) per establishment 
Permit: Not required 
District: All districts 
(4)  Garage sale or yard sale signs as long as no more than two (2) sales are conducted each year and the signs are not up more than four (4) days before or one day after the sale. (These are the only signs allowed off-site). 
Max. size: Two (2) square feet 
Number: One (1) on-site; no more than three (3) off-site 
Height: Three (3) feet 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(5)  Development signs advertising a new development or subdivision or the names of the people or businesses involved with the development. These signs may be installed on-premise after the plat is filed and can remain up until the subdivision is filled or the development is complete. 
Size: Thirty-two (32) square feet + bonus 
Bonus: Add 1/4 square feet of area for every one (1) foot of street frontage over one hundred (100) feet. 
Max. size: Sixty-four (64) square feet 
Number: One (1) per street; no more than two (2) 
Height: Eight (8) feet 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(6)  Real estate signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of a property. 
Max. size: Six (6) square feet residential/thirty-two (32) square feet commercial 
Number: One (1) per street front; no more than two (2) 
Height: Six (6) feet 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(7)  Political signs with information about a candidate, political party or public issue in the current election campaign. 
Max. size: Thirty-six (36) square feet 
Number: Unlimited 
Height: Eight (8) feet 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(8)  Temporary banners that are firmly tied down so that they do not blow freely in the wind. Banners cannot be up for more than ten (10) consecutive days or a total of thirty (30) days, annually. After this time, the banners and all of their components must be removed for ten (10) consecutive days. 
Max. size: Forty (40) square feet 
Number: One (1) freestanding/one wall 
Height: Six (6) feet; ten (10) feet if attached to a wall 
Permit: Not required 
District: CO, C-1, C-1A, & C-2 
(9)  Holiday and public event signs showing support for public, community-wide, noncommercial special events, such as Flag Day, Independence Day and school sporting events. These signs cannot be up for more than ten (10) consecutive days. 
Max. size: Unlimited 
Number: Unlimited 
Height: Unlimited 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(10)  Special event signs advertising a public, community-wide commercial event, such as a rodeo, car show or circus. These signs cannot be up for more than ten (10) consecutive days. 
Max. size: Unlimited 
Number: Unlimited 
Height: Unlimited 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(11)  Sponsorship signs and scoreboards located within public facilities, such as sports stadiums and ball fields, and designed to attract attention only from the people within the facilities. These signs require special written permission (but not a permit) from the planning director who shall verify that the signs only attract the attention of the people within the facilities. 
Max. size: Unlimited 
Number: Unlimited 
Height: Unlimited 
Permit: Not required 
District: All 
(12)  Window signs are signs hung in or placed on the glass of a window staying entirely within the frame. 
Number: Unlimited 
Location: Within frame of window 
Permit: Not required 
District: CO, C-1, C-1A, C-2 & M-1 
(13)  Wall signs are signs placed flat against a building wall or structure, such as a canopy over fuel pumps, and they do not extend out for more than twelve (12) inches. These signs are allowed for every building or tenant space that has at least twenty (20) feet of building frontage. 
Number: Unlimited 
Height: Twenty (20) feet; not above wall 
Location: Middle seventy-five (75) percent (See Illustration B) 
Permit: Required 
District: MF, Commercial and Industrial 

Just how much wall sign is allowed depends upon the size of the building or tenant space and how far it sits back on the property. (Please note that the frontage and setback of one building or tenant space cannot be used for a sign on another building or tenant space). For each zoning district specified, the following regulations apply: 
For property zoned MF: 
Max. size: Ten (10) square feet 
For property zoned C-O, C-1 & C-1A (See Illustration C): 
Size: Twenty (20) square feet + bonus 
Bonus: Add one-fourth (1/4) square feet of area for every one (1) foot of building frontage + one-fourth (1/4) square feet of area for every one (1) foot of building setback 
Max. size: Two hundred (200) square feet 
For property zoned C-2 & M-1: 
Size: Thirty (30) square feet + bonus 
Bonus: Add one-fourth (1/4) square feet of area for every one (1) foot of building frontage + one-fourth (1/4) square feet of area for every one (1) foot of building setback 
Max. size: Five hundred (500) square feet 

(14)  Monument signs are allowed when there is a front yard of at least ten (10) feet and fifty (50) feet of street frontage. Emergency signs, such as at hospitals, may deviate from these exact requirements whenever adequate emergency signage cannot otherwise be achieved. The planning director shall be responsible for making this determination. 
Max. size: Sixty (60) square feet per face/one hundred twenty (120) square feet in C-2 & M-1 zones 
Number: One (1) per street frontage; two (2) max. 
Height: Eight (8) feet/ten (10) feet in C-2 & M-1 zones; see section 15-3(b) 
Location: Mid one-third ( 1/3 ) of street frontage 
Permit: Required 
District: MF, CO, C-1, C-1A, C-2 and M-1 
(15)  Pole signs are allowed when there is a front yard of at least twenty (20) feet and one hundred (100) feet of street frontage and are in lieu of monument signs. 
Max. size: One hundred twenty (120) square feet per face 
Number: One (1) per street frontage; two (2) max. 
Height: Twenty-five (25) feet; see section 15-3(b) 
Location: Mid one-third ( 1/3 ) of street frontage 
Permit: Required 
District: C-2 & M-1 
(16)  Joint use signs are required when more than one business shares a common building or parking area. In these cases, each business cannot have their own monument or pole sign but must share a common monument or pole sign called a joint use sign. 
The requirements of the joint use sign are the same as the monument sign and the pole sign except that the size and height can be increased as follows: 
For every five (5) feet of street frontage over one hundred (100) feet, add one square foot of size and one-fourth (1/4) foot of height. (Please note that the frontage of one street cannot be used for a sign on another street frontage.) The new maximum size and height would be as follows: 
Max. size: Two hundred fifty (250) square feet monument/two hundred (200) square feet pole 
Height: Thirty (30) feet for monument and pole; see section 15-3(b) 
(17)  Highway pole signs are allowed for businesses zoned C-2 which have at least one hundred (100) feet of street frontage on U.S. Highway 81/287 or 380 Bypass. They are only allowed on the street frontage that is adjacent to the highway and are in lieu of all other freestanding signs. Their size depends on their height as follows: 
The bottom of the sign must be a least twenty-five (25) feet high. At thirty (30) feet high, the sign can be one hundred forty (140) square feet. For every one foot added in height, two feet in area can be added to the following maximums: 
Max. size: Two hundred (200) square feet per face 
Height: Sixty (60) feet; see section 15-3(b) 
(18)  Highway monument signs are allowed for businesses zoned C-2 which have at least one hundred (100) feet of street frontage on U.S. Highway 81/287 or 380 Bypass. They are only allowed on the street frontage that is adjacent to the highway and are in lieu of all other freestanding signs. 
Max. size: One hundred sixty-two (162) square feet per face 
Height: Fifteen (15) feet; see section 15-3(b) 
(19)  Directional signs are limited to directional text or directional graphics, such as, "office", "entrance", "exit" or "parking" and can be either wall, monument or pole signs. 
Max. size: Four (4) square feet 
Number: One per curb cut/unlimited for interior 
Height: Three (3) feet for freestanding/ten (10) feet for wall 
Location: Varies 
Permit: Required 
District: MF, C-1, C1-A, C2, and M-1 
(20)  Subdivision entry signs are allowed for residential subdivisions that have ten (10) or more lots. These signs can be monument signs or can be attached to a decorative, masonry fence or wall. All components of the sign, including wiring, lighting and structure, must be on private property. 
Max. size: Ten (10) square feet 
Number: Two (2) per entry 
(21)  Electronic message board sign are bonus signs that may be placed on pole signs (but not highway pole signs) or monument signs. This sign is to be underneath the main identification sign. 
Max. size: Thirty (30) square feet 
Permit: Required 
District: C-2 & M-1 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-10,  1(Exh. A), 11-10-08) 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 00-05-08 
AN ORDINANCE PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PLATS, PLANS AND SUBDIVISIONS OF LAND WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, TEXAS, OR WITHIN ITS JURISDICTION, CONTAINING CERTAIN DEFINITIONS, REPEALING AND REPLACING APPENDIX A OF THE CITY CODE OF ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR A PRELIMINARY PLAT, A FINAL PLAT, AND PROVIDING FOR FINAL APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS BY SECTIONS. 
WHEREAS, under the laws of the State of Texas, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City of Decatur, Texas, or within its jurisdiction; who may hereafter divide the same in two (2) or more tracts described by metes and bounds or otherwise for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of such tract of land or any addition to said City of Decatur, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys or parks and other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, are required to submit a plat of such subdivision or addition for approval by the City Council of the City of Decatur, and, 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Decatur is empowered by law to promulgate and establish the general plan of said City and its streets, alleys, parks, public utility facilities, including those which have been or may be laid out, together with the general plan for the extension of such City and of its roads, streets, and public highways within the City or within it jurisdiction; 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, TEXAS: 
On and after the passage of this Ordinance, any person firm or corporation seeking approval of any plat, plan or replat of any subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Decatur or within its exclusive extraterritorial jurisdiction and not within the corporate limits of any other city or within the exclusive extraterritorial jurisdiction of another city, as defined by Article 970a, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, shall be required to comply with those Subdivision Rules, Regulations and Design Standards as attached hereto as Exhibit "A", before such approval may be granted. 
Passed and approved by the City Council of the City of Decatur, Texas this the 8th day of May, 2000. 
      Robert M. Wilson, Mayor   ATTEST: 
      Rita L. Frick, City Secretary   Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the subdivision ordinance of the City of Decatur, Texas, Ordinance Number 00-5-8, adopted on May 8, 2000. Said ordinance repealed  2-1, 2-2, 3-1-3-6, 4-1-4-4, 5-1, 5-2, 6-1-6-4, 7-1-7-6, 8-1-8-7, 9-1-9-4 in their entirety and enacted  101-104, 201, 202, 301, 302, 401-403, 501-508, 601-613, 701-703, 801-810. Formerly, said sections pertained to similar subject matter. Words in brackets have been added for clarification. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notations. 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission,  2-126 et seq.; master plan authorized,  2-129; location of livestock restricted,  3-62; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; mobile home parks,  9-26 et seq.; nuisances, Ch. 10; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 14. 

CHAPTER 1. - ADMINISTRATION 

SECTION 101 - GENERAL 
101.1 - Title. 
This Ordinance may be known and cited as the "Decatur Subdivision Ordinance" and will be referred to herein as "this code". 
101.2 - Referenced Documents. 
The Design Criteria and Construction Standards are hereby adopted as a part of this Ordinance and shall be in full force and effect from and after the effective date of the ordinance. This document, herein referred to as Design Standards, shall be maintained by and kept current by the City Engineer and/or Planning Director and is available for viewing in the office of the City Secretary. 
101.3 - Authority. 
This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including Chapter 231, Acts of the 40th Legislature, Regular Session, 1927, as heretofore or hereafter amended (codified as Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code). 
101.4 - Purpose. 
This Ordinance was created to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the City and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City; promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community; establish orderly policies and procedures to guide development of the City; provide for establishment of minimum specifications for construction and engineering design criteria to maintain land values, reduce inconveniences to residents of the area, and to reduce related unnecessary costs to the City for correction of inadequate environmental conditions; ensure that development of land and subdivisions shall be of such nature, shape and location that utilization will not impair the general welfare and to ensure against the dangers of fires, floods, erosion, landslides, or other such menaces; provide proper utilities and services for adequate drainage, water supply, and disposal of sanitary and industrial waste; provide streets that ensure safe, convenient and functional systems for vehicular and pedestrian circulation; furnish adequate sites, convenient to schools, parks, playgrounds, and other community services, respecting topography and existing vegetation so that the natural beauty of the land shall be preserved. 
101.5 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations, it is the intention of the City Council that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the platting and developing of subdivisions in the City of Decatur, and, where other ordinances of the City are more restrictive in their requirements, such other ordinances shall control. 
101.6 - Fees. 
A fee for service shall be charged. All fees shall be set by the jurisdiction and an officially adopted Fee Schedule shall be available at the office of the City Secretary. 
101.7 - Severability & Validity. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Ordinance are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Ordinance shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this Ordinance of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
101.8 - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage. 
101.9 - Amendment. 
The City Council may from time to time amend this Ordinance, in accordance with appropriate procedures provided by law. It is the responsibility of the Developer to obtain the most current Subdivision Ordinance as adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 102 - REQUIREMENTS 
102.1 - Compliance to This Code. 
No subdivider shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the City or within its exclusive extraterritorial jurisdiction and neither within another city nor within the exclusive extraterritorial jurisdiction of another city, as defined by Article 970a, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
102.2 - Compliance to Other Codes. 
All subdivisions and development shall comply with other adopted codes whether specified herein or not, including, but not limited to, the Design Standards, Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance. 
102.3 - Plat Required. 
The owner of a tract of land located within the limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Decatur who divides the tract into two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the City of Decatur, to lay out suburban, building or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts must have a plat of the subdivision prepared. 
102.4 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as allowable by state law, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this Ordinance. 
102.5 - Improvements Required. 
The subdivider shall furnish, extend, install and/or construct all infrastructure, including but not limited to, the water and sanitary sewer systems and the street and drainage facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. All such facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Design Standards referenced as part of this Ordinance, the Master Plan and other standards, specifications and drawings as may be hereafter adopted, approved by the City Council and placed on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
Where considered necessary by the City Engineer and/or Planning Director or shown on the Master Plan, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by the Design Standards to provide for future growth and expansion. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 103 - VARIANCES 
103.1 - Authority. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize a variance from these subdivision regulations when, in its opinion, extraordinary hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. 
103.2 - Special Circumstances Required. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not propose a variance unless there are special circumstances or conditions influencing the subdivision involved. 
103.3 - Conditions Advantageous to Public Interest. 
In the recommendation of a variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall set out the conditions that it finds necessary or advantageous to the public interest in proposing such variances that will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. In granting a variance, the Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest. 
103.4 - Procedure. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission, in the recommendation of a variance to the City Council, shall submit to them a letter containing all the specific facts and pertinent data upon which such a variance has been based. 
103.5 - Financial Hardship Insufficient. 
Financial hardship to the applicant shall not be deemed sufficient reason to constitute the recommendation of a variance. 
103.6 - Variances to Meet Intent of Code. 
Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
103.7 - Criteria for Approval. 
In making the findings herein below required, the Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. 
103.8 - Conditions for Approval. 
No variance shall be granted unless the Council finds that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land, and 
2.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, and 
3.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area, and 
4.  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
103.9 - Findings Recorded. 
Findings of the Council shall be entered into the official minutes of the Council Meeting. 
103.10 - Council Decision Final. 
Findings of the Council after due consideration of the material submitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final. 
103.11 - Appeals. 
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding or action of the Commission and/or Council shall appeal by filing written Petition in a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days from the date of such finding or action and not thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 104 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ENFORCEMENT 
104.1 - Conditions for Filing Plat. 
A subdivision plat shall not be filed of record until it has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, the Developer has completed improvements and provided required maintenance bond(s), and such improvements have been properly inspected, approved and dedicated to the City. Any actual recording shall be void unless such approval shall be endorsed on the face of the plat as hereinafter provided. 
104.2 - No Construction until Plat Approved. 
No construction work shall begin on the proposed improvements in the proposed subdivision prior to the final plat being approved by the City Council. 
104.3 - No Plat Changes without Approval. 
No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to any plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and endorsed on the plat in writing, unless said change, revision or modification is first submitted to and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. 
104.4 - No Building Permit without Services. 
No building permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on any lot in a subdivision that is not serviceable by the community sanitary sewer collection system and fresh water distribution system. 
104.5 - No Permits without Full Compliance. 
No building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
104.6 - No City Authorization without Full Compliance. 
The City shall not authorize any other person nor shall the City itself repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
The City shall not authorize any other person nor shall the City itself sell or supply any water, gas, electricity or sanitary sewer service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
104.7 - No Dedications on Disapproved Plats. 
Disapproval of a plat by the Council shall be deemed a refusal by the City to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. Approval of a plat shall not impose any duty upon the City concerning the maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the City have actually appropriated the same by entry, use or improvement. The Council in any manner provided by law may vacate any such dedication, before or after actual appropriation. 
104.8 - City Attorney to Institute Appropriate Action. 
On behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
104.9 - Other Affected Parties May Resort to Court. 
In addition thereto, any abutting owner or lessee or other person prejudicially affected by the violation of the terms of this Ordinance may resort to any court of competent jurisdiction for any writ or writs, or to obtain such relief, either in law or equity, as may be deemed advisable in these premises. 
104.10 - Resolution of Non-Compliance. 
If any subdivision occurs for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, the City Council shall pass a resolution reciting the facts of such non-compliance and failure to secure final plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of this Section will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein. The City Secretary shall, when directed by Council, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the City to be filed in the Deed of Records of the County in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the City Secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the Deed of Records of such county stating that the provisions of this section no longer apply. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 

SECTION 201 - GENERAL 
201.1 - Scope. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter. 
201.2 - Interchangeability and Directive Terms. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance certain terms or words herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
2.  The singular includes the plural. 
3.  The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual. 
4.  The term "shall" is always mandatory. 
5.  The term "may" is directive. 
201.3 - Terms Defined in Other Codes. 
Where terms not defined in this code are defined in other City codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
201.4 - Terms Not Defined. 
Words and terms not expressly defined herein are to be construed according to the normally accepted meaning of such words or terms or, where no definition appears, then according to their customary usage in the practice of municipal planning and engineering. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 202 - DEFINITIONS 
Abandonment: The legal process by which land dedicated to public use may revert to private use. 
Addition: See Subdivision. 
Administrative Officers: Any office referred to in this Ordinance by title, e.g., Building Official, City Secretary, City Attorney, City Engineer, Director of Public Works, Planning Director, etc., shall be the person so retained in this position by the City or their duly authorized representative. 
Alley: A minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Base Flood: The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, determination based upon Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) guidelines and as shown in the current effective Flood Insurance Study. 
Block: A tract or parcel of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-ways [rights-of-way], highway, stream or corporate boundary lines. 
Building: Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or movable property of any kind. 
Building Official: The building inspector charged with the responsibility for issuing building permits and enforcing the Building Code of the City of Decatur Texas. 
Building Permit: An official certificate issued by the City through the Building Official that indicates that the subdivision has been approved, the plat has been recorded and that construction may begin. 
Building Setback Line: The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or other structure and the adjacent street line or property line. 
Certificate of Occupancy: An official certificate issued by the City through the Building Official which indicates conformance with City standards, regulations and conditions of zoning variances, if applicable, and that authorizes legal use of the premises. 
City: The City of Decatur, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies. 
City Council: The duly elected governing body of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
City Engineer: "City Engineer" shall apply only to such licensed professional engineer or firm of licensed professional engineers that has been specifically designated as such by resolution of the City Council or the person so retained in this position by the City or their duly authorized representative. 
Commission: See Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Comprehensive Master Plan: The plan adopted by the City Council as the official policy regarding the guidance and coordination of the development of private and public land in the City of Decatur, Texas. 
Construction Plans: See Engineering Plans. 
County: Wise County, Texas. 
Cul-de-sac: A street having but one outlet to another street and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
Dead-End Street: A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
Design Standards: The Design Criteria and Construction Standards adopted as a part of this Ordinance. 
Developer: See Subdivider. 
Easement: An area for restricted use on private property upon which any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easements. Any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. 
Engineer: A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering and who is specifically qualified to design and prepare construction plans and specifications for subdivision development. 
Engineering Plans: A set of drawings and/or specifications, including paving, water, wastewater, drainage or other required plans, submitted to the City for review in conjunction with a subdivision or a development. 
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction: The unincorporated area of the County that is contiguous to the corporate boundaries of a municipality, more specifically described in Section 42.021 of the Local Government Code, as may exist or be amended in the future. 
Fee Schedule: The officially adopted Fee Schedule on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
Final Acceptance: Acceptance by the City of Decatur of all infrastructure improvements constructed by the Developer in conjunction with the development of land. 
Final Plat: (Also known as Record or Filing Plat) The one official and authentic map of any given subdivision of land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a Surveyor or Engineer with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner and all boundaries, corners and curves of the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. 
Angular measurements and bearings shall be accurate to the nearest minute. Distances shall be accurate to the nearest tenth of a foot. The final Plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be recorded in the Records of Wise County, Texas. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map issued by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) where the areas of special flood hazards have been designated. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map on which the FIA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to flood insurance. 
Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the FIA containing flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood and the flood hazard boundary map. 
Floodplain: The area subject to be inundated by water from the base flood. 
Floodway: A drainage area designated on a plat to accommodate the design flood for existing creeks and open drainage ways. 
Floodway Easement: A drainage area dedicated to the city for control and maintenance of a floodplain. 
Home-Owners Association: (Also known as Property Owners Association) A formal nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which (a) each lot and/or homeowner in a specific residential area is automatically a member and (b) each lot or property interest is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expense for the organization's activities, such as the maintenance of common property, and (c) the charge if unpaid, becomes a lien against the nonpaying member's property. 
Infrastructure: All streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm drainage, water and wastewater facilities, utilities, lighting, transportation and other facilities as required by the City of Decatur. 
Land Planner: Persons other than Surveyors or Engineers who also possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency in the planning of residential, commercial, industrial and other related developments, such proficiency often having been acquired by education in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum and/or by actual experience and practice in the field of land planning and shall be a member of the A.I.C.P. 
Lot: An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement which is designated as a distinct and separate tract and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record. 
Master Plan: See Comprehensive Master Plan. 
Off-site: Located outside the boundary of a development. 
On-site: Located within the boundary of a development. 
Pavement Width: The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the faces of the curbs. Otherwise, it is the portion between the edges of the pavement. 
Planning and Zoning Commission: The regulatory body that is responsible for managing the growth and development of the city and for recommending zoning district boundaries and appropriate regulations. 
Planning Director: The administrative official charged with enforcing zoning ordinances, development criteria and floodplain administration, or the Planning Director's duly authorized representative. 
Preliminary Plat: The graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and developing a tract shown by superimposing a scaled drawing of the proposed land division on a topographic map and showing in plan existing and proposed drainage features and facilities, street layout and direction of curb flow and other pertinent features with notations sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of proposed development. 
Pre-application Plan: A sketch drawing of initial development ideas superimposed on a topographic map to indicate generally the plan of development and to serve as a working base for noting and incorporating suggestions of the City Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission, City Engineer or others who are consulted prior to the preparation of the Preliminary Plat. 
Property Owners Association: See Home-Owners Association. 
Record Plat: See Final Plat. 
Replatting: The re-subdivision of any part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract. 
Resubdivision: See Subdivision. 
Right-of-Way: That portion of the subdivision dedicated for public streets with the adjacent lot lines being the boundaries of the right-of-way. 
Street: A public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular traffic access to adjacent lands. 
Subdivider: Any person or any agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner of land to be divided. 
Subdivision: (Includes Resubdivision and Additions) Subdivision, Resubdivision or Addition of land, as used in this Ordinance, shall be held and construed to include all of the following new uses or utilizations of a particular tract of land within the City of Decatur, Texas, or its extraterritorial jurisdiction: 
1.  Any division of an existing tract of land in two or more parts (by lots, by metes and bounds or by any other method of subdivision or conveyance) for the purpose of thereby creating separate lots for ownership, usage or building purposes, and 
2.  Any division of an existing tract of land in two or more parts for laying out any suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, streets, alleys or parks, or 
3.  Other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, and 
4.  Any division of a lot or tract of land formerly in single ownership (that is, ownership by one person or more than one person who own undivided interests in the whole of such tract or lot) in two or more parts for separate or different ownership of the divided parts, whether accomplished by conveyance, partition or in any other manner, and 
5.  Any lot not recorded as a part of a subdivision of the City, or a lot and a fractional part of any adjoining lot, or the fractional part of two adjoining lots, on which the owner or any person makes application for a building permit for any structure on such unrecorded lot or combined lots or parts thereof, and 
6.  Any other subdivision or resubdivision of land contemplated by the provisions of Article 974a, Texas Revised Civil Statutes. 
Surveyor: A Licensed State Land Surveyor or a Registered Professional Land Surveyor as authorized by the Texas State statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
Utility Easement: See Easement. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
CHAPTER 3. - GENERAL SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT 

SECTION 301 - GENERAL 
All property not subdivided into lots, blocks and streets, or property to be resubdivided, within the City or within its jurisdiction shall hereafter be laid out subject to the approval of both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and no other subdivision will be recognized by the City. Prior to the consideration of the plans and plats by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Planning Director and his/her duly authorized representatives shall check the submittal and make recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 302 - PROCEDURE SUMMARY 
302.1 - Conformance to Procedure. 
Any owner or Developer of any lot, tract or parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the City or within its jurisdiction who may wish to effect a subdivision of such land shall conform to the general procedure described as follows: 
1.  Pre-application Conference. 
2.  Preliminary Plat. 
3.  Final Plat and Construction Plans. 
4.  Posting of Performance Bonds. 
5.  Construction Improvements. 
6.  Posting of Maintenance Bonds. 
7.  City Acceptance of Improvements. 
8.  Filing of the Final Plat. 
302.2 - Unauthorized Changes Prohibits Filing. 
Any change in the Preliminary Plat directed by the City Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, unless accepted by the subdivider and the Final Plat so changed, shall prohibit the Developer from recording the Final Plat. 
302.3 - Detailed Steps in Following Chapters. 
The detailed steps within each phase of the subdivision development procedure are covered in the remaining chapters of this Ordinance. 
302.4 - Subdivision Development Procedure Chart. 
A flow chart indicating the sequence of the steps involved in obtaining approval for subdivision development is shown on the following page. 

SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE CHART 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
CHAPTER 4. - PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE 

SECTION 401 - GENERAL 
401.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Pre-application Conference is to give the Developer an opportunity to: 
1.  Discuss the proposed development with the Director of Public Works, the Planning Director and the City Engineer, and 
2.  Obtain copies of all forms, publications, design criteria, Comprehensive Master Plan criteria and standards available from the City, and 
3.  Determine whether the current zoning is appropriate for the proposed development or if rezoning may be required, and 
4.  Determine whether a Preliminary Plat is required for the development. 
401.2 - Requirements may be Waived. 
The Pre-application Conference and Pre-application Plan requirement may be waived at the Planning Director's discretion. 
401.3 - Conference to Streamline Process. 
The plan submittal and the conference provide an opportunity for the Developer and the City to communicate and streamline the platting process. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 402 - SUBMITTAL 
The submittal for the Pre-application Conference shall be as follows: 
1.  The Pre-application Plan shall be clearly labeled "Pre-Application Plan." 
2.  A minimum of four (4) sets of the Pre-application Plan shall be submitted to the City at least one week prior to the scheduled conference. 
3.  The Pre-application Plan shall be drawn to a scale such that the maximum possible detail is shown and still fit on a 24;inch;  36;inch; sheet size (folded to 81/2;inch;  11;inch; when submitted to City). Only scales 1:10, 1:20, 1:30, 1:40, 1:50, 1:100, or 1:200 accepted. 
4.  The Pre-application Plan shall contain a title block that clearly indicates the name, address and phone number of the Developer and the Engineer or Surveyor responsible for the design or survey. The block shall also contain the scale and date. 
5.  The Pre-application Plan shall clearly show the limits of the development with North clearly indicated. 
6.  The Pre-application Plan shall specify the gross area of the subdivision, the proposed number of residential lots, including the individual lot areas and the approximate area of parks and other non-residential uses. 
7.  The Pre-application Plan shall have a location map that clearly defines the location of the site within the City. 
8.  The Pre-application Plan shall include a narrative description in as much detail as possible that describes the current and proposed uses and activities. It shall include the current and planned uses for the abutting properties. 
9.  The Pre-application Plan shall contain existing zoning for the site and for all adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 403 - EXPIRATION 
The Pre-application Plan shall expire twelve (12) months after the submittal date unless a Preliminary Plat is approved by City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
CHAPTER 5. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

SECTION 501 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
501.1 - Preliminary and Final Plat Required. 
For all property which must be platted, both a Preliminary Plat and a Final Plat are required. 
501.2 - Preliminary Before Final. 
No Final Plat will be accepted for consideration if the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council have not approved the Preliminary Plat. 
501.3 - Requirement Waived. 
For property which is less than three (3) acres and contains no infrastructure improvements to be dedicated to the City, the Planning Director may waive this requirement. 
501.4 - No Subdivision without Final Plat. 
No subdivision of land shall be allowed without proper submittal, approval and adoption of a Final Plat. 
501.5 - Registered Surveyor Required. 
All plats, whether preliminary, final, replats or amendments, must be prepared by a Registered Professional Surveyor. 
501.6 - Licensed Engineer Required. 
A Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas in accordance with this Ordinance must prepare the Construction Plans and Specifications for Improvements. 
501.7 - Positive Recommendation not Acceptance. 
It is to be understood that recommending approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission does not constitute official acceptance of the proposed subdivision by the City. 
501.8 - No Field Work until Approval. 
There shall be no work done in the field on the proposed subdivision until the Final Plat has been approved. Preliminary site grading will be considered on a case-by-case basis, but only after submittal, approval and installation of an erosion control plan. 
501.9 - Compliance Required. 
All preliminary plats shall comply with other adopted codes whether specified herein or not, including, but not limited to, the Design Standards, Master Plan and the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 502 - APPLICATION 
502.1 - Initial Review. 
The Developer shall provide three (3) 24;inch;  36;inch; bond copies of the Preliminary Plat for initial review, comments and corrections. 
502.2 - Submittal. 
After addressing comments and making corrections based on the initial review, the Developer shall provide ten (10) 24;inch;  36;inch; bond copies of the Preliminary Plat. 
502.3 - Fees and Application Required. 
The submittal shall include payment of the required fees and a completed City application. The City will consider no Preliminary Plat until the prescribed fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 503 - REVIEW PROCESS (See Procedure Chart) 
503.1 - Conformity Review. 
Upon receipt of the Preliminary Plat and the required filing fees and application, the Planning Director shall check the Plat as to its conformity with the Design Standards, Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable standards. 
503.2 - Engineer's Review. 
The Planning Director shall transmit one (1) copy of the Preliminary Plat to the City Engineer who shall check the same for conformity with applicable engineering standards and specifications set forth herein, as well as with generally accepted engineering principles when not covered specifically herein. 
503.3 - Comments to Developer. 
The City Engineer shall return comments on the Preliminary Plat to the Planning Director with suggestions as to modifications, additions, alterations or other matters pertinent to the Preliminary Plat. The Planning Director shall submit the Engineer's comments and all other staff comments to the Developer for corrections. 
503.4 - Changes to Plat. 
Developer shall make changes according to comments provided and resubmit to Planning Director. 
503.5 - Approved Plats on Agenda. 
After all corrections are made and approved by the City Engineer and Planning Director, the Planning Director shall place item on agenda for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
503.6 - Comments Available. 
The Planning Director shall make the City Engineer and Staff suggestions available to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 504 - FORM AND CONTENT 
504.1 - General. 
The Preliminary Plat shall include the following general information: 
1.  The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale such that the maximum possible detail is shown and still fit on a 24;inch;  36;inch; sheet size (folded to 81/2;inch;  11;inch; when submitted to the City). Only scales 1:10, 1:20, 1:30, 1:40, 1:50, 1:100 or 1:200 accepted. 
2.  Include the name and address of the Developer and the Engineer or Surveyor responsible for the design or survey, tract designation and other descriptions according to the abstract and survey records of Wise County, Texas. 
3.  Include the proposed name under which the subdivision is to be recorded. The name shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision located within the City or within five miles of the current City Limits. 
4.  The Preliminary Plat shall include an accurate location of the subdivision with reference to the abstract and survey records of Wise County, Texas. 
5.  Include the name and recording information for any contiguous subdivisions, the location of any contiguous lots, the name of owners and recording information for any contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land and an indication of whether contiguous properties are platted and filed of record. 
6.  Include a vicinity map showing location of tract by reference to existing streets or highways. 
7.  The Preliminary Plat shall include the location of city limit lines, the outer border of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction and zoning district boundaries, if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision or are contiguous to such boundary. 
8.  Include conditions adjacent to the tract affecting design of the subdivision including such information as may be available from field observation, aerial photographs and available maps. 
9.  Include the date of preparation, the scale of the drawing and a north arrow. 
10.  The following notice shall be placed on face of the Preliminary Plat: 
PRELIMINARY PLAT 
FOR REVIEW PURPOSES ONLY 
11.  The Preliminary Plat shall name the responsible entity for the operation and maintenance of any building, park, equipment, pools, plantings, lawns or other legal interests, if it is proposed that they are to be shared by owners of the real property within the subdivision. 
12.  Private restrictions. 
13.  North arrow, drawing scale, date of preparation and a vicinity map. 
14.  Certification by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by the surveyor and that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist and that their location, size and material description are correctly shown (see example below). 
STATE OF TEXAS   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR COUNTY OF WISE   I, the undersigned, a (registered professional land surveyor) in the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. (Surveyor's Seal) Registered Professional Land Surveyor Date: ____________  
15.  A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks, easements, trails and playgrounds to public use forever by all owners and Lien Holders of the land, with a certificate of acknowledgment by a Notary Public, along with a complete and accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary of the land to be subdivided and the streets to be dedicated (see example on following page). 
16.  Letters of approval for acceptance by the following entities and/or utilities as affected by the property being platted: 
i.  Electric 
ii.  Natural Gas 
iii.  Telephone 
iv.  Cable Television 
v.  School district 
vi.  Texas Department of Transportation 
vii.  Any other holder of dedicated easements or rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to property. 
STATE OF TEXAS   OWNER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT & DEDICATION COUNTY OF WISE   I (we), the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat within the area described by metes and bounds as follows: (Metes and Bounds Description of Boundary) and designated herein as the ____________ subdivision to the City of Decatur, Texas, and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements, rights-of-way and public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. _____
Owner Date: _____ STATE OF TEXAS   COUNTY OF WISE   BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________ , known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purposes and considerations therein stated. Given under my hand and seal of office this ;daterule; day of ____________ , ____________ .      _____
    NOTARY PUBLIC      _____ County, Texas  
17.  The following certificates shall be placed on the Preliminary Plat: 
THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION OF DECATUR, TEXAS ON THE ____________ DAY OF ;daterule;, ____________ VOTED AFFIRMATIVELY TO RECOMMEND CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF THIS PRELIMINARY PLAT, SUBJECT TO CONDITIONS ENUMERATED IN MINUTES OF THIS DATE. 
BY: CHAIRMAN 
ATTEST: CITY SECRETARY 
THE CITY COUNCIL OF DECATUR, TEXAS ON THE ____________ DAY OF ;daterule;, ____________ , VOTED AFFIRMATIVELY TO CONDITIONALLY APPROVE PREPARATION OF A FINAL PLAT SUBJECT TO CONDITIONS ENUMERATED IN MINUTES OF THIS DATE. 
BY:    MAYOR    
ATTEST:    CITY SECRETARY    
504.2 - Property. 
The Preliminary Plat shall include the following property information: 
1.  Provide the location of existing blocks, lots, building lines, water courses, ravines, bridges, culverts, present structures and any pertinent natural features in the area affected. Principal dimensions and all significant information relative to the property and within one hundred (100) feet on all sides of the subject property shall be shown. 
2.  Provide the tract designation and other description according to the real estate records of the City or County Assessor and Recorder. The plat shall also show the proposed use designation of the area of land within the subdivision. 
3.  Include primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers and similar data shall be referred. 
4.  Accurate location, material and approximate size of all monuments, including the location of a minimum of two (2) permanent benchmarks used to establish the 100-year floodplain and minimum finished floor elevations. 
5.  All property corners shall be referenced to City approved coordinates. 
6.  Include subdivision boundary lines, accurate in scale and indicated by heavy lines, of the total area proposed for subdivision and the computed acreage of the total area. Bearing and length of each boundary line shall be shown on the plat. A description by metes and bounds of the subdivision perimeter must be shown on the plat. 
7.  Include the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed right-of-ways [rights-of-way], alleys, reservations, easements or other public right-of-ways [rights-of-way] within the proposed subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries. 
8.  Include all existing, or recorded, and proposed residential lots, parks, public areas, permanent structures within or contiguous with the proposed subdivision shall be shown. 
9.  Include front building setback lines on all lots and sites. Side yard building setback lines shall be shown at street intersections and crosswalks. 
10.  Include the location and dimensions of all lots and blocks with bearings, distances and all relevant curve data proposed for inclusion in the first phase of development. 
11.  Include the gross area of the subdivision, the proposed number of residential lots and the area of the individual lots and the approximate area of parks and other non-residential uses. 
12.  Identify each lot and block with a number or letter. List the street address for each lot as provided by the Planning Director. 
13.  Indicate proposed phases for final platting. 
504.3 - Public Utilities. 
The Preliminary Plat shall include the following public utility information: 
1.  The Preliminary Plat shall include all existing sewers, water mains, gas mains, electric and telephone lines, culverts or other underground structures or utilities within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes and locations indicated. 
2.  In the event water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction, distance and size of the destination mains, including invert elevations of the sewer lines. 
3.  The size and location of all proposed water distribution mains, including valves and fire hydrants, may be required. 
4.  The size and location of all proposed sewer mains, including manholes, preliminary grades for each main between manholes and the depth of each manhole may also be required. 
504.4 - Park Dedication. 
The Preliminary Plat shall show all areas proposed for park dedication. 
504.5 - Landscaping. 
The Preliminary Plat shall show all proposed areas for landscaping. 
504.6 - Buffers. 
The Preliminary Plat shall show all proposed buffers. 
504.7 - Green Space. 
The Preliminary Plat shall show all proposed green space. 
504.8 - Streets. 
The Preliminary Plat shall include the following street information: 
1.  Indicate all existing and proposed streets within and abutting the proposed subdivision. All streets shall conform to the Design Standards and the Master Plan. All pavement widths shall be dimensioned perpendicular to the direction of travel and shall be clearly shown on the Preliminary Plat. 
2.  When the Preliminary Plat includes curved streets, all relevant curve data including arc lengths, radii, internal angles, points of curvature, and length and bearing of tangents shall be shown. For lots facing on curved streets, the cord length of the lot at the front building setback line shall be shown. 
504.9 - Drainage. 
The Preliminary Plat shall include the following drainage information: 
1.  The Preliminary Plat shall include topographical information including contour lines on a basis of five-foot intervals in terrain with a slope of five percent or more and on a basis of one foot intervals in terrain with a slope of less than five percent. All elevations shall be on U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum or referenced to a City benchmark on the same datum. The datum used shall be specified on the drawing. 
2.  Any proposed changes in topography shall be shown by contour lines on a basis of one (1) foot intervals. 
3.  Include a description of contributing drainage to the proposed subdivision. The submittal shall include the area, slope and type of development in the contributing area. 
4.  Include the locations of discharge for drainage from the proposed development, including contributing areas. All drainage must be planned and constructed in accordance with the Master Plan and in the best interests of the immediate and adjacent properties. 
5.  Indicate the location, dimension, description and flow line of existing and proposed drainage structures and the location, flow line and 100-year floodplain and floodway boundaries of existing water courses within the subdivision or contiguous tracts. 
6.  Include the width of drainage and other easements, conforming to the Design Standards referenced as part of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 505 - TRAFFIC STUDY 
505.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of a traffic study is to determine the traffic flow and safety on street facilities within the city limits of the City of Decatur, Texas. The intent of these studies is to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public by reducing traffic congestion, improving traffic safety and flow and ensuring that traffic to be generated from the proposed development can be adequately and safely served by the existing and future street system. 
505.2 - Study Required. 
For any property to be submitted that the City feels will have a significant traffic impact, the City may require that the Developer provide, at the Developer's expense, a traffic study of the proposed development. 
505.3 - Submittal. 
Three (3) copies of this study shall be submitted for review concurrently with the submittal of the Preliminary Plat. 
505.4 - Licensed Engineer Required. 
The traffic study shall be prepared and sealed by a Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
505.5 - Revisions Required. 
Prior to Preliminary Plat approval, revisions to the traffic study shall be made as required by the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 506 - DRAINAGE STUDY 
506.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of a drainage study is to determine the drainage flow, ensure safety from flooding and to verify that the proposed development can be adequately served by existing and proposed drainage facilities. The intent of the drainage study is to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public by reducing the risk of flooding private property and public right-of-ways [rights-of-way]. 
506.2 - Study Required. 
The City may require that the owner provide, at the owner's expense, a drainage study of the proposed development. 
506.3 - Submittal. 
Three (3) copies of this study shall be submitted for review concurrently with the submittal of the Preliminary Plat. 
506.4 - Licensed Engineer Required. 
The drainage study shall be prepared and sealed by a Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
506.5 - Revisions Required. 
Prior to Preliminary Plat approval, revisions to the drainage study shall be made as required by the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 507 - METHOD OF APPROVAL 
The method of approval and approval sequence are as follows: 
1.  Following the satisfactory review of the Preliminary Plat, plans and other materials shall be submitted for conformity to the regulations of this Ordinance and other City codes. 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days, act on the submittal. If approved, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall indicate the conditions of approval. One such condition shall be the filing of a Final Plat. 
3.  If disapproved, the Commission shall, upon request of applicant, state the grounds for disapproval in writing within a reasonable time after the request is made. 
4.  After recommending approval of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the same shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration and approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 508 - PLAT EXPIRATION 
The Preliminary Plat expires twelve (12) months after City Council approval unless a Final Plat for the property, consistent in all respects with the approved Preliminary Plat, has been submitted for approval. If the subdivision is to be constructed in phases, the Preliminary Plat will remain valid as long as no more than two (2) years time passes between approval of the final plat for a phase and the submittal of the final plat for approval of the subsequent phase and each phase incorporates at least twenty-five (25) percent (by lot count) of the approved Preliminary Plat. The Preliminary Plat may also be extended once for a time not to exceed six (6) months with City Council approval by filing a written request prior to the plat's expiration. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
CHAPTER 6. - FINAL PLAT AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

SECTION 601 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
601.1 - Preliminary and Final Plats Required. 
For all property which must be platted, both a Preliminary Plat and a Final Plat are required. 
601.2 - Preliminary Plat Before Final Plat. 
An approved Preliminary Plat, if required must first precede Final Plats. 
601.3 - No Subdivision without Final Plat. 
No subdivision of land shall be allowed without proper submittal, approval and adoption of a Final Plat. 
601.4 - Registered Surveyor Required. 
A Registered Professional Surveyor shall prepare all plats, whether preliminary, final, replats or amendments. 
601.5 - Licensed Engineer Required. 
A Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas in accordance with this Ordinance must prepare the Construction Plans and Specifications for Improvements. 
601.6 - Positive Recommendation not Acceptance. 
It is to be understood that recommending approval of the Final Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission does not constitute official acceptance of the proposed subdivision by the City. 
601.7 - No Field Work until Approval. 
There shall be no work done in the field on the proposed development until the Final Plat has been approved. Preliminary site grading will be considered on a case-by-case basis, but only after the submittal, approval and installation of an erosion control plan. 
601.8 - Compliance Required. 
All Final Plats shall comply with other adopted codes whether specified herein or not, including, but not limited to, the Design Standards, Master Plan and the Zoning Ordinance. 
601.9 - Impact Fees. 
At the time the Building Permit is issued, the impact fee shall be assessed for the amount per service unit currently in effect, as set forth in the Impact Fee Ordinance and the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 602 - APPLICATION 
602.1 - Initial Review. 
The Developer shall provide three (3) 24;inch;  36;inch; bond copies of the Final Plat for initial review, comments and corrections. 
602.2 - Submittal. 
After addressing comments and making corrections based on the initial review, the Developer shall provide eighteen (18) 24;inch;  36;inch; bond copies and two (2) 24;inch;  36;inch; mylar copies of the Final Plat and fifteen (15) copies of complete Construction Plans. 
602.3 - Fees and Application Required. 
The submittal shall include payment of the required fees and a completed City application. The City will consider no Final Plat until the prescribed fees have been paid in full. 
602.4 - Tax Certificates Required. 
The Final Plat submittal shall include certificates from the City, School District and County Tax Collectors showing that all City, School District and County taxes on the land being subdivided have been paid to the current year. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 603 - PORTIONS OR PHASING 
If desired by the Developer and approved by the City Council, the Final Plat may constitute only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the Developer proposes to record and develop; however, such portion shall conform to all the requirements of this Ordinance. 
If Final Plats are submitted for approval by portions or phases of the proposed subdivision, each portion or phase shall carry the name of the entire subdivision and shall bear a distinguishing letter, number or subtitle. Block letters shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such subdivision might be approved in phases. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 604 - REVIEW PROCEDURE (See Procedure Chart) 
604.1 - Conformity Review. 
Upon receipt of the Preliminary Plat and the required filing fees and application, the Planning Director shall check the Plat as to its conformity with the Design Standards, Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable standards. 
604.2 - Engineer's Review. 
The Planning Director shall transmit one (1) copy of the Final Plat and Construction Plans to the City Engineer who shall check for the same conformity with applicable engineering standards and specifications set forth herein, as well as with generally accepted engineering principles when not covered specifically herein. 
604.3 - Comments to Developer. 
The City Engineer shall return comments on the Final Plat and Construction Plans to the Planning Director with suggestions as to modifications, additions, alterations or other matters pertinent to the Final Plat and the Construction Plans. The Planning Director shall submit the Engineer's comments and all other staff comments to the Developer for corrections. 
604.4 - Changes to Plat. 
Developer shall make changes according to comments provided and resubmit to Planning Director. 
604.5 - Approved Plats on Agenda. 
After all corrections are made and approved by the City Engineer and Planning Director, the Planning Director shall place item on agenda for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
604.6 - Comments Available. 
The Planning Director shall make the City Engineer and Staff suggestions available to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 605 - FORM AND CONTENT 
605.1 - General. 
The Final Plat shall include the following general information: 
1.  The Final Plat shall be drawn to a scale such that the maximum possible detail is shown and still fit on a 24;inch;  36;inch; sheet size. Only scales of 1:10, 1:20, 1:30, 1:40, 1:50, 1:60, 1:100 or 1:200 accepted. 
2.  The Final Plat shall also be supplied in electronic format. 
3.  Include the name of the proposed Development, the name and address of the Developer and the Engineer or Surveyor responsible for the design or survey, tract designation and other descriptions according to the abstract and survey records of Wise County, Texas. 
4.  Include the proposed name under which the subdivision is to be recorded. The name shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision located within the City or within five miles of the current City Limits. 
5.  The Final Plat shall include an accurate location of the subdivision with reference to the abstract and survey records of Wise County, Texas. 
6.  Include the name and recording information for any contiguous subdivisions, the location of any contiguous lots, the name of owners and recording information for any contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land and an indication of whether contiguous properties are platted and filed of record. 
7.  The Final Plat shall include the location of city limit lines, the outer border of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction and zoning district boundaries, if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision or are contiguous to such boundary. 
8.  Include conditions adjacent to the tract affecting design of the subdivision including such information as may be available from field observation, aerial photographs and available maps. 
9.  The following notice shall be placed on the face of the Final Plat: 
FINAL PLAT 
10.  The Final Plat shall name the responsible entity for the operation and maintenance of any building, park, equipment, pools, plantings, lawns or other legal interests, if it is proposed that they are to be shared by owners of the real property within the subdivision. 
11.  Private restrictions. 
12.  North arrow, drawing scale, date of preparation and a vicinity map. 
13.  Certification by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey 
STATE OF TEXAS   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR COUNTY OF WISE   I, the undersigned, a (registered professional land surveyor) in the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. (Surveyor's Seal) Registered Professional Land Surveyor Date: ____________  
made by the surveyor and that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist and that their location, size and material description are correctly shown (see example above). 
14.  A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks, easements, trails and playgrounds to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a Notary Public by all owners and Lien Holders of the land, along with a complete and accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary of the land to be subdivided and the streets to be dedicated (see example on right [below]). 
STATE OF TEXAS   OWNER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT & DEDICATION COUNTY OF WISE   I (we), the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat within the area described by metes and bounds as follows: (Metes and Bounds Description of Boundary) and designated herein as the ____________ subdivision to the City of Decatur, Texas, and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements, rights-of-way and public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. _____
Owner Date: _____ STATE OF TEXAS   COUNTY OF WISE   BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________ , known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purposes and considerations therein stated. Given under my hand and seal of office this ;daterule; day of ____________ , ____________ .      _____
    NOTARY PUBLIC      _____ County, Texas  
15.  Letters of approval for acceptance by the following entities and/or utilities as affected by the property being platted. 
i.  Electric 
ii.  Natural Gas 
iii.  Telephone 
iv.  Cable Television 
v.  School district 
vi.  Texas Department of Transportation 
vii.  Any other holder of dedicated easements or rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to property. 
16.  The following certificates shall be placed on the Final Plat: 
ON THE ____________ DAY OF ;daterule;, ____________ , THIS PLAT WAS DULY APPROVED BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, TEXAS. 
BY:    CHAIRMAN    
ATTEST:    CITY SECRETARY    
THE CITY COUNCIL OF DECATUR, TEXAS, ON THE ____________ DAY OF ;daterule;, ____________ , VOTED AFFIRMATIVELY TO ADOPT THIS PLAT AND APPROVE IT FOR FILING OF RECORD. 
BY:    MAYOR    
ATTEST:    CITY SECRETARY    
605.2 - Property. 
The Final Plat shall include the following property information: 
1.  Provide the location of existing blocks, lots, building lines, water courses, ravines, bridges, culverts, present structures and any pertinent natural features in the area affected. Principal dimensions and all significant information relative to the property and within one hundred (100) feet on all sides of the subject property shall be shown. 
2.  Provide the tract designation and other description according to the real estate records of the City or County Assessor and Recorder. The plat shall also show the proposed use designation of the area of land within the subdivision. 
3.  Include primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers and similar data shall be referred. 
4.  Accurate location, material and approximate size of all monuments, including the location of a minimum of two (2) permanent benchmarks used to establish the 100-year floodplain and minimum finished floor elevations. 
5.  All property corners shall be referenced to City approved coordinates. 
6.  Include subdivision boundary lines, accurate in scale and indicated by heavy lines, of the total area proposed for subdivision and the computed acreage of the total area. Bearing and length of each boundary line shall be shown on the plat. A description by metes and bounds of the subdivision perimeter must be shown on the plat. 
7.  Include the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed right-of-ways [rights-of-way], alleys, reservations, easements or other public right-of-ways [rights-of-way] within the proposed subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries. 
8.  Include all existing, or recorded, and proposed residential lots, parks, public areas, permanent structures within or contiguous with the proposed subdivision shall be shown. 
9.  Include front building setback lines on all lots and sites. Side yard building setback lines shall be shown at street intersections and crosswalks. 
10.  Include the location and dimensions of all lots and blocks with bearings, distances and all relevant curve data proposed for inclusion in the first phase of development. 
11.  Include the gross area of the subdivision, the proposed number of residential lots and the area of the individual lots and the approximate area of parks and other non-residential uses. 
12.  Identify each lot and block with a number or letter. List the street address for each lot as provided by the Planning Director. 
13.  Indicate the proposed phase to be final platted. 
605.3 - Public Utilities. 
The Final Plat shall include the following public utility information: 
1.  All existing sewers, water mains, gas mains, electric and telephone lines, culverts or other underground structures or utilities within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes and locations indicated. 
2.  In the event water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction, distance and size of the destination mains, including invert elevations of the sewer lines. 
3.  The size and location of all proposed water distribution mains, including valves and fire hydrants, may be required. 
4.  The size and location of all proposed sewer mains, including manholes, preliminary grades for each main between manholes and the depth of each manhole may also be required. 
605.4 - Park Dedication. 
The Final Plat shall show all areas proposed for park dedication. 
605.5 - Landscaping. 
The Final Plat shall show all proposed areas for landscaping. 
605.6 - Buffers. 
The Final Plat shall show all proposed buffers. 
605.7 - Green Space. 
The Final Plat shall show all proposed green space. 
605.8 - Streets. 
The Final Plat shall include the following street information: 
1.  Indicate all existing and proposed streets within and abutting the proposed subdivision. All streets shall conform to the Design Standards and the Master Plan. All pavement widths shall be dimensioned perpendicular to the direction of travel and shall be clearly shown on the Preliminary Plat. 
2.  When the Final Plat includes curved streets, all relevant curve data including arc lengths, radii, internal angles, points of curvature, and length and bearing of tangents shall be shown. For lots facing on curved streets, the cord length of the lot at the front building setback line shall be shown. 
605.9 - Drainage. 
The Final Plat shall include the following drainage information: 
1.  Topographical information including contour lines on a basis of five (5) foot intervals in terrain with a slope of five (5) percent or more and on a basis of one (1) foot intervals in terrain with a slope of less than five (5) percent. All elevations shall be on U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum or referenced to a City benchmark on the same datum. The datum used shall be specified on the drawing. 
2.  Any proposed changes in topography shall be shown by contour lines on a basis of one (1) foot intervals. 
3.  A description of contributing drainage to the proposed subdivision. The submittal shall include the area, slope and type of development in the contributing area. 
4.  Locations of discharge for drainage from the proposed development, including contributing areas. All drainage must be planned and constructed in accordance with the Master Plan and in the best interests of the immediate and adjacent properties. 
5.  The location, dimension, description and flow line of existing and proposed drainage structures and the location, flow line and 100-year floodplain and floodway boundaries of existing water courses within the subdivision or contiguous tracts. 
6.  Width of drainage and other easements, conforming to the Design Standards referenced as part of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 606 - AGREEMENT TO INDEMNIFY CITY 
Prior to Final Plat approval by the City Council, all Developers for any subdivision or re-subdivision of land, shall be required to execute and file with the City Secretary a written agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all judgments, claims, demands or causes of action of any nature whatsoever occasioned by or arising out of the inadequate or improper surface drainage of said subdivision or re-subdivision for a period of five (5) years from the date of approval by the City Council of the Final Plat of the said subdivision or re-subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 607 - RESTRICTIONS AND PURCHASE CONTRACTS 
The restrictions and the purchase contract shall notify lot owners that houses to be built on lots which are lower than the road or roads on which they front and/or abut shall be built such that the minimum finished floor elevation is at least one (1) foot above the proposed grade of the yard adjacent to the house. This is to reduce the risk from damage to houses caused by stormwater drainage. 
The restrictions shall notify property owners that no houses shall be built in a 100-year floodplain. In no case shall the minimum finished floor elevation be less than one (1) foot above the 100-year floodplain elevation. 
The restrictions shall notify lot owners that any filling or obstruction of the floodplain or drainage easements is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 608 - CONSTRUCTION PLANS 
608.1 - General. 
Construction Plans shall include the following: 
1.  All improvements shall be designed in accordance with the Design Standards and Master Plan referenced as part of this Ordinance. 
2.  Fifteen (15) copies of complete construction plans, specifications, engineering calculations and detailed cost projections for streets, drainage, sanitary sewers, water distribution, and any other improvements to be constructed, are required to be submitted with the Final Plat. Construction plans must be one hundred (100) percent complete at the time of submittal. Any incomplete sets of construction plans shall be returned unreviewed. 
3.  The Construction Plans shall be submitted on standard 24;inch;  36;inch; sheets. 
4.  Each sheet of the Construction Plans shall contain a title block, including space for the notation of revisions. This space is to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly note the nature of the revision and the date that the revision was made. 
5.  Each sheet of the Construction Plans shall include north arrow, scale, date and benchmark description to sea level datum. 
6.  The Specifications and each Construction Plan sheet shall bear the seal and signature of the Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas who prepared the plans. 
608.2 - Paving Plan. 
The Construction Plans shall include the following: 
1.  The Construction Plans, at a minimum, shall include a plan and profile of each street with stationing, top of curb grades, if applicable, or street centerline, borrow ditch flowline and existing and proposed ground lines. The typical cross-section of proposed streets shall show the width of roadway, pavement type and location and width of sidewalk. 
2.  Three (3) copies of the geotechnical report recommendations for pavement thickness and subgrade preparation, as required by the Design Standards, shall be submitted with the Construction Plans. 
608.3 - Sanitary Sewer and Water Plan. 
The Construction Plans, at a minimum, shall include a plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers with stationing, grades and pipe sizes indicated and showing locations of manholes, cleanouts, etc., and a plan of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves, fire hydrants and fittings, etc. Applicable construction details shall be included with the Construction Plans. 
608.4 - Storm Drainage Plan. 
Regarding storm drainage, the Construction Plans shall include the following: 
1.  The Construction Plans shall include a general location map of the subdivision showing the entire watershed (a U.S.G.S. quadrangle is satisfactory) and the limits of all on-site and off-site stormwater draining to the project. 
2.  The Construction Plans shall include calculations showing the anticipated stormwater flow, including watershed area, percent runoff, runoff factors, storm intensity and time of concentrations showing basis for design. 
3.  The Construction Plans shall include a plan and profile of proposed storm sewers or channels, showing stationing, hydraulic data, pipe grades and sizes, manholes, inlets, pipe connections, outlet structures, etc. 
4.  The Construction Plans shall include a detailed plan for any bridges, culverts, catch basins, any other drainage structures or any other improvements to be made and shall include all of the following: 
i.  The open channel or storm drain grades, design flow, design velocity, capacity and hydraulic grade line. 
ii.  A plan and profile of all culverts under any street with the design flow of water, headwater and tailwater depth and tail water velocity. 
iii.  The size of all driveway culverts to carry the design flow of water at each point of installation. 
iv.  Typical ditch sections and the width of any right-of-way or easement needed. 
v.  A summary sheet of all drainage facilities. 
vi.  The seal and signature, prominently displayed on each sheet, of the Licensed Professional Engineer responsible for the design. 
5.  The plat shall notify lot owners that any filling or obstruction within the floodplain and drainage easements shall be prohibited. 
608.5 - Grading Plan. 
Any proposed changes in topography shall be shown by contour lines on a basis of five (5) foot intervals in terrain with a slope of five (5) percent or more and on a basis of one (1) foot intervals in terrain with a grade less than five (5) percent. 
608.6 - Erosion Control Plan. 
The Developer shall submit an Erosion Control Plan in compliance with local, state and federal guidelines. 
608.7 - Landscape Plan. 
The Developer shall submit a Landscape Plan. 
608.8 - Buffer Plan. 
The Developer shall submit a Buffer Plan. 
608.9 - Green Space Plan. 
The Developer shall submit a Green Space Plan. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 609 - DESIGN SUMMARY 
A separate document or report entitled "Engineering Design Summary" may be required as directed by the City Engineer and included with the submittal of the Construction Plans and Specifications. It shall summarize calculations and other such engineering information pertaining to the major items of design. It shall be used during the review to determine whether the facilities proposed for construction have been designed in accordance with the intent of the Design Standards. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 610 - METHOD OF APPROVAL 
The method of approval and approval sequence are as follows: 
1.  Upon receipt, the Planning Director will check the Final Plat application for completeness, including filing fees. 
2.  After approval by the Planning Director, the Final Plat application will be sent to the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation and then to the City Council for approval. 
3.  If the City Council has indicated its approval subject to certain changes being made by the applicant, the Engineer for the applicant shall make all such changes and submit the final drawing for approval by the City Engineer prior to the signing of the certificate of approval. 
4.  After the Final Plat and Construction Plans have been approved by the City Council, and before construction of any improvements the Developer shall furnish the City with five (5) sets of the approved Construction Plans and Specifications. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 611 - WITHDRAWING PLAT APPLICATION 
At any time during the platting process, the applicant may make a request in writing that the Final Plat be withdrawn from the present consideration of the City Council, as the case may be. Such written request abandons the initial filing date with such body and designates a subsequent date to be the new filing date for the Final Plat before that body. The applicant may be permitted, without the necessity of paying an additional filing fee, to withdraw and refile the Final Plat with such body on the new filing date designated in the written request. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 612 - EXPIRATIONS 
612.1 - Construction Plan Expiration. 
If construction has not commenced within one (1) year after approval of the Construction Plans, resubmittal of Construction Plans, which comply with the current Subdivision Ordinance, shall be resubmitted to the City for review. The Planning Director may require additional filing fees. 
612.2 - Final Plat Expiration. 
The Final Plat expires two (2) years after City Council approval, unless construction has commenced and all the requirements of this Ordinance, prior to construction have been met. 
If the subdivision is to be constructed in phases, the final plat will remain valid as long as no more than two (2) years time passes between approval of the construction plans for a phase and the submittal of the construction plans for approval of the subsequent phase. The final plat may also be extended once for a length of time not to exceed six (6) months with City Council approval by filing a written request prior to the plat's expiration. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 613 - FILING OF THE FINAL PLAT 
613.1 - Filing of the Final Plat. 
After the following criteria are met the Final Plat may be filed with the County: 
1.  Final Plat is approved by the City Council and all revisions required by the City Council are complete. 
2.  The Developer has submitted final copies of the Final Plat and Construction Plans and all required signatures have been obtained. 
3.  All required fees have been paid in full. 
4.  All public improvements have been constructed, inspected, approved and dedicated to the City. 
5.  The Developer has provided proof that private restrictions have been filed of record, and 
6.  The Developer has provided all required maintenance bonds. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
CHAPTER 7. - REPLATS AND AMENDING PLATS 

SECTION 701 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
701.1 - Replats Required. 
A replat is required for property in which there has been a change in lot allocation, setbacks, dedicated infrastructure or easements. 
701.2 - Requirement Waived. 
The Planning Director may waive this requirement. 
701.3 - Fees Required. 
Applicable fees per the City's Fee Schedule shall accompany Replats. 
701.4 - Certified Copies Required. 
Certified copies of the entire subdivision and deed restrictions shall accompany Replats. 
701.5 - Subject to Final Plat Requirements. 
Replats are subject to the same requirements as Final Plats, and shall contain the information required by Chapter 6, Final Plat and Construction Documents. 
701.6 - Vacating Plats Required. 
All property to be replatted shall have the preceding plat vacated unless the Planning Director waives this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 702 - APPLICATION 
702.1 - Initial Review. 
The Developer shall provide three (3) 24;inch;  36;inch; bond copies of the replat for initial review, comments and corrections. 
702.2 - Submittal. 
After addressing comments and making corrections based on the initial review, the Developer shall submit ten (10) 24;inch;  36;inch; bond copies and two (2) 24;inch;  36;inch; mylar copies of the replat. 
702.3 - Fees and Application Required. 
The submittal shall include payment of the required fees and a completed City application. The City will consider no replat until the prescribed fees have been paid in full. 
702.4 - Tax Certificates Required. 
The replat submittal shall include certificates from the City, School District and County Tax Collectors showing that all City, School District and County taxes on the land being replatted have been paid to the current year. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 703 - AMENDING PLATS 
The Planning Director may approve and issue an amending plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is solely for one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
1.  To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat, 
2.  To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat, 
3.  To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat, 
4.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments, 
5.  To show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat, 
6.  To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the Planning Director, including lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent recorded plats, 
7.  To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots if: 
i.  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat, and 
ii.  Neither lot is abolished, and 
iii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions, and 
iv.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat. 
8.  To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement, 
9.  To relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots if: 
i.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat, and 
ii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions, and 
iii.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots. 
10.  To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
i.  The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the City of Decatur, and 
ii.  The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions, and 
iii.  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the Planning and Zoning Commission has approved after a public hearing as a residential improvement area. 
11.  To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
i.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat, and 
ii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions, and 
iii.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots, and 
iv.  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
12.  Notice, a hearing and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
CHAPTER 8. - CONSTRUCTION 

SECTION 801 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
801.1 - Preconstruction Conference Required. 
A preconstruction conference is required prior to start of any construction. The meeting shall include the Contractor(s), Director of Public Works, Developer Engineer, City Engineer, Planning Director and City Inspector(s). Only one preconstruction meeting will be held. 
801.2 - Designated Representative Required. 
If the Developer has divided the construction of the public improvements among more than one (1) contractor, the Developer shall designate one (1) person to represent all of the construction for the development. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 802 - PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BOND 
802.1 - Bond Required Before Construction. 
Prior to the construction of said improvements, the Developer (being the owner or owners of the subdivision) or the authorized agents thereof, shall be required to furnish to the City a good and sufficient Performance and Payment bond executed by a corporate surety approved by the City in an amount equal to the total cost of said improvements and guaranteeing their Construction. The bond must: 
1.  Be payable to the Mayor or City Secretary, and 
2.  Be in an amount determined by the City Secretary to be adequate to ensure the proper construction or installation of the water and sewer service facilities to service the subdivision but not to exceed the estimated cost of construction or installation of the facilities, and 
3.  Be executed with sureties as may be approved by the City Secretary, and 
4.  Be executed by a company authorized to do business as a surety in this state if the governing body requires a surety bond executed by a corporate surety, and 
5.  Be conditioned that the water and sewer service facilities will be constructed or installed: 
i.  In compliance with the model rules adopted under Section 1.343, Water code and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City, and 
ii.  Within the time stated on the plat or on the document attached to the plat for the subdivision or within any extension of that time. 
802.2 - Cash or Credit In Lieu of Bond. 
In lieu of the bond an owner may deposit cash, a letter of credit issued by a federally insured financial institution or other acceptable financial guarantee. 
802.3 - Letter of Credit Requirements. 
If a letter of credit is issued, it must: 
1.  List as the sole beneficiary the Mayor or City Secretary, and 
2.  Be conditioned that the water and sewer service facilities will be constructed or installed: 
i.  In compliance with the model rules adopted under Section 16.343, Water code and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City, and 
ii.  Within the time stated on the plat or on the document attached to the plat for the subdivision or within any extension of that time. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 803 - INSPECTIONS 
803.1 - Inspections Required. 
All construction, such as street grading, street paving, drainage structures, curb and gutter, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water mains, shall be subject to inspection during the construction period by the proper authorities of the City. 
803.2 - Assuring Conformance. 
During the progress of the work, all materials, equipment and workmanship shall be subjected to such inspections and tests as will assure conformance with the City requirements. 
803.3 - Testing Laboratory. 
A testing laboratory approved by the City shall do all testing. 
803.4 - Test Locations. 
The City shall select the location of all testing. 
803.5 - Testing Fees. 
The Contractor shall pay for all testing. 
803.6 - Test Coordination. 
The Contractor is solely responsible for coordination with the testing laboratory, for scheduling of the tests and for timely delivery of the results to the City. 
803.7 - Additional Tests. 
The City may elect to perform additional testing above and beyond that required by the specifications. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 804 - WORK TIMES LIMITED 
Work times shall be limited to Monday through Saturday, sunup to sundown unless otherwise authorized by the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 805 - FINAL UTILITY INSPECTION 
Once the utilities are installed, and prior to the construction of any pavement, the City Inspector, the Director of Public Works, the City Engineer and a contractor's representative shall perform a walk through for all infrastructure placed under a proposed street. All testing associated with the utility installation shall be completed prior to the walk through. The City Engineer shall prepare a list of items that needs to be completed prior to the commencement of any paving. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 806 - FINAL INSPECTION 
The City Inspector, the Director of Public Works, the City Engineer and a Contractor's representative shall perform a final inspection. If the Developer has divided the construction of the public improvements among more than one (1) contractor, the Developer shall designate one (1) person to represent all of the construction for the development. There will be only one (1) final inspection of the development. The City Engineer shall prepare a list of items that needs to be completed prior to the final acceptance of the project. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 807 - RECORD DRAWINGS 
Upon completion of the construction, the Developer shall request a final inspection of the work. The Developer shall provide one (1) good quality full-size reproducible mylar and one (1) full-size blue or black line record drawing. The mylar must be revised by the Developer to reflect construction records prior to the final inspection. The City Engineer prior to the final acceptance of the subdivision must approve the record drawings. The record drawings shall include a copy of the approved Final Plat. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 808 - MAINTENANCE BOND 
808.1 - Maintenance Bond Required Upon Completion. 
Upon completion of said improvements and prior to acceptance by the City, the Developer or the authorized agents thereof, shall be required to furnish to the City a good and sufficient Maintenance Bond executed by a corporate surety approved by the City in an amount equal to the total cost of said improvements and guaranteeing their maintenance for a period of two (2) years. 
808.2 - Cost Estimates. 
Prior to approval of the Final Plat, the subdivider shall provide Opinions of Probable Construction Cost for the construction of water, sanitary sewer, drainage and roadway improvements. A Professional Engineer licensed by the State of Texas shall prepare the Opinions. 
808.3 - Permits Suspended for Non-Compliance. 
Issuance of building and/or occupancy permits within the subdivision may be suspended during any period of non-compliance with the requirements of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 809 - ACCEPTANCE BY THE CITY 
Once all the requirements of the City have been met, the City Engineer shall recommend acceptance of the subdivision in the form of a letter to the Planning Director. Acceptance by the City shall be in the form of a letter from the Planning Director or other authorized City Official to the Developer. The letter shall state that inspections were conducted and the facilities were completed in accordance with specifications and standards provided for herein or approved by the City Council at the time the Final Plat was approved for the said subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
SECTION 810 - PERMITS AND SERVICES WITHHELD UNTIL FULL COMPLIANCE 
No building permit, water, sanitary sewer, plumbing or electrical permit or service shall be issued or allowed to a Developer, owner or any other person with respect to any property in any subdivision, except for temporary construction offices, covered by this Ordinance until such time as all of the applicable requirements of the Ordinance have been satisfactorily completed and the construction accepted by the City and the Final Plat is filed. 
(Ord. No. 00-5-8, 5-8-00) 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the City of Decatur, Texas, Ordinance Number 2015-03-01, adopted on March, 23, 2015. Ord. No. 2015-03-01,  3(Att. A), adopted March 23, 2015, amended appendix B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former appendix B, part I, arts. 1-7, part II, art. 8, part. III, arts. 11-16, part IV, arts. 17-20, part V, arts. 21-23, part VI, arts. 24, 25, part VII, apps. 1-13, part VIII, apps. 1-4, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. Words in brackets have been added for clarification. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Edits have been made for uniformity. 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission,  2-126 et seq.; animals, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; mobile homes and manufactured housing, Ch. 9; mobile home parks,  9-26 et seq.; location of mobile home restricted,  9-27; nuisances, Ch. 10; weeds and wild growth and vegetation regulated,  10-26 et seq.; junked, wrecked and abandoned personal property other than vehicles,  10-56 et seq.; junked, wrecked and abandoned vehicles,  10-81 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 12; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 14. 

ARTICLE 1. - ENACTING PROVISIONS 

Section 1.1 - Enacting Clause 
    This ordinance is hereby enacted and adopted as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Decatur, Texas, herein referred to as "the City", in its entirety to provide as follows: 
Section 1.2 - Title 
    This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City's "Zoning Ordinance." 
Section 1.3 - Purpose 
    As authorized by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, the zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with an adopted comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to ensure adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and thus avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, wastewater treatment, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of each zoning district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. 
Section 1.4 - Zoning District Map 
1.4.1   Relationship to Zoning Ordinance
    The City is hereby divided into zones, or districts, and the boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the Zoning District Map of the City, which may also be cited as the "Zoning Map", said map being adopted as a part of this Ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
1.4.2   Original Zoning Map
    One original of the Zoning District Map shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary and labeled as: 
"Official Zoning Map of the City of Decatur, Texas-Ordinance No. 2015-03-01." 
    This copy shall be the original Zoning District Map adopted with this Ordinance and shall bear the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Secretary, and shall bear the seal of the City under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the City of Decatur, Texas, Ordinance No. 2015-03-01 of the City of Decatur, Texas, adopted on the 23rd day of March, 2015." 
    This copy shall not be changed in any manner. In case of any question, this copy, together with amending ordinances, shall be controlling. 
1.4.3   Official Copies of the Zoning Map
    A copy of the official Zoning District Map shall be placed in the office of the Planning Director. The map copy shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments. Any changes or amendments made to the zoning district boundaries shall be made on the map copy after the amendment has been approved by the City Council in accordance with the requirements of State law and this Ordinance. Each entry for a Zoning Map amendment shall include an ordinance number that references the Zoning Ordinance amendment. 
1.4.4   Zoning Map Reproductions
    Reproductions for informational purposes may be made of the official Zoning District Map in print version or digitally by electronic files, computer disks or on the web. All reproductions shall be clearly labeled as a reproduction, include a "Current as of March 23, 2015" date indication and a statement that the actual zoning of a parcel can only be verified with the City and after review of the official map. 
1.4.5   Replacement of Official Zoning Map
    In the event that the official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret due to age, exposure, or the nature or number of changes or additions, the City Council may, in accordance with State law requirements, hold a public hearing and adopt by ordinance, a new official Zoning Map which shall replace and supersede the prior official Zoning Map, but which shall not, in effect, amend or otherwise change the original official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment to the original official Zoning Map. The new official Zoning Map shall bear the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Secretary, and shall bear the seal of the City under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the original Official Zoning Map referred to in the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 2015-03-01 of the City of Decatur, Texas, adopted on the 23rd day of March, 2015." 
Section 1.5 - Zoning District Boundaries 
1.5.1   Boundaries Generally
    The Zoning District boundary lines shown on the Official Zoning Map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. 
1.5.2   Boundary Uncertainty
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundary Interpretation 
(1)  Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries shown as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits. 
(4)  Boundaries shown as following railroad lines shall be construed to be located along the centerline of the railroad right-of-way lines. 
(5)  Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, creeks, canals, bodies of water, or drainage ways shall be construed to follow such centerlines, and in the event of change in any such centerlines shall be construed to move with such centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries shown as parallel to, or extensions of, features described in Paragraphs (1) through (5) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by the approximate scale of the Map and verified by a survey. 
(7)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council, or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or public way (or to the new property ownership boundary line, if it is not determined to be at the former centerline) and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(8)  The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the centerline of the street unless, as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street. 
B.  Boundary Determination 
(1)  If there is a discrepancy between the physical features on the ground and the information shown on the official Zoning District Map, or if there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of Paragraphs (1) through (8) in A. Boundary Interpretation above, then the Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide a recommendation to City Council, and City Council shall interpret the zoning district boundaries. 
(2)  If the zoning of property is invalidated or vacated by a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the property shall be considered classified as it was prior to the rezoning or as specifically set forth in the Court Order. 
(3)  In the event of conflict or ambiguity between legal descriptions, the legal description in the most recently adopted rezoning ordinance shall control. 
Section 1.6 - Compliance Required and Application of Regulations 
1.6.1   Conformance with Standards and Regulations
    All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the City which are hereafter occupied, used, constructed, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished, and/or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished and/or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located, as hereinafter provided. All of the standards and regulations prescribed herein shall be considered as the minimum requirement unless explicitly stated otherwise. 
1.6.2   Uses Prohibited by State or Federal Law
    No uses shall be allowed which are prohibited by State or Federal law or which operate in excess of State or Federal environmental, pollution or performance standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Texas State Department of Health (TSDH), Texas Commission of Environmental Quality (TCEQ), Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC), their respective successor agency or any other applicable State or Federal agency, as the case may be. 
Section 1.7 - Zoning upon Annexation 
1.7.1   Timing of Proceedings to Establish Zoning
    Proceedings to establish zoning may be undertaken concurrently with annexation procedures (i.e., notified at the same time, public hearings scheduled at the same time as annexation, etc.), however zoning approval and formal adoption of the ordinance establishing zoning shall only occur after annexation approval and adoption have occurred, and as a separate and distinct action by the City Council. 
1.7.2   Initial Zoning Requirements
    The initial zoning of a land parcel, whether by initiation of the landowner or by initiation of the City, must meet the requirements for notification and public hearings as set forth in this Ordinance and all other applicable State laws. 
1.7.3   Application by Property Owner
    The owner of land to be annexed may submit an application for zoning the property simultaneously with submission of the petition for annexation, but no such annexation application may be made conditioned upon the approval of any particular zoning classification. 
ARTICLE 2. - LEGAL STATUS 

Section 2.1 - Effect of Interpretation 
    This Ordinance sets forth the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and/or general welfare and shall be interpreted and applied as minimum required standards. It is not intended that this Ordinance interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control for the purpose of determining compliance with this Ordinance. 
Section 2.2 - Preserving Rights in Pending Litigation and Violations under Existing Ordinances 
    By the passage of this Ordinance, no presently illegal Use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such use specifically falls within a Zoning District where it is classified as an allowed Use. Otherwise, such uses shall be classified as either a legal Nonconforming Use or an illegal use based upon the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Section 2.3 - Vested Rights and Review Procedure 
2.3.1   Existing Land Use upon Annexation
    Vested rights in land use in existence upon annexation shall be governed by Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 43, as amended, and other applicable State law. 
2.3.2   Site Plan-Validity and Expiration
A.  Site Plan Validity and Lapse of Approval. A Site Plan shall be considered a "permit" as described by State law in Chapter 245, as amended, of the Texas Local Government Code. 
(1)  Valid for Two Years. Any City approved Site Plan shall be deemed expired two (2) years from the date on which the Site Plan was originally approved by the City if no progress has been made toward completion of the project. Any County approved Site Plan shall be deemed expired two (2) years from the date on which the property covered by the Site Plan is annexed by the City if no progress has been made toward the completion of the project. 
(2)  Progress Benchmarks. The term "progress" shall be as defined by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245.005, as amended, and progress shall be deemed to have taken place if one or more of the following have occurred: 
(a)  Plans for construction and an application for a building permit for at least one of the buildings on the approved Site Plan are submitted within two (2) years following approval of the Site Plan; 
(b)  A good-faith attempt is made to file with the City an application for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project; 
(c)  Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is located; 
(d)  Fiscal security is posted with the City to ensure performance of an obligation required by the City; or 
(e)  Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been paid to the City. 
(3)  Expiration. In the event that "progress", as defined above, has not occurred within a two (2) year period as required by this Section, an approved Site Plan shall be deemed expired in accordance with A above. 
(4)  Extension and Reinstatement Procedure. 
(a)  Prior to the expiration of a Site Plan, the applicant may petition the City (in writing) to extend the expiration date of the Site Plan for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval of such extension. 
(b)  A petition for extension of a Site Plan expiration date shall be submitted to the Planning Director at least forty-five (45) days prior to such expiration date. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official to approve or deny the request. Appeals of a denial shall be processed in the manner outlined in 4.5.2A(5)(b). 
(c)  If a Site Plan was approved administratively, then the administrative official responsible for approving the site plan shall have authority to grant up to a two (2) year extension. 
(d)  In determining whether a request for extension should be recommended and/or granted, the City Manager and/or the Planning Director shall consider all facts and information that it deems pertinent, including without limitation, the following: 
(i)  The reasons for the lapse; 
(ii)  The ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval; and 
(iii)  The extent to which development regulations would apply to the Site Plan at that point in time. 
(e)  If a petition is not submitted and approved in a timely manner in accordance with this Section, then the Site Plan shall be deemed to have expired and shall become null and void. Any new request for Site Plan approval thereafter shall be deemed a "new permit", and shall be submitted with a new application form, with a new filing fee, and with new plans and materials in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section. The new request shall be reviewed for compliance with the ordinances and regulations in effect on the date that the new application is submitted to the City for approval. 
B.  Planned Development (PD) Concept Plans, Validity and Expiration. In conformance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, as amended, the applicant shall retain the following rights related to a Concept Plan for a PD. 
(1)  Valid for Two Years. All PD Concept Plans shall expire two (2) years from the date of City Council approval of the PD Ordinance unless a preliminary plat is filed for a buildable lot in the PD. 
(2)  Progress Benchmarks. The term "progress" shall be as defined by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245.005, as amended, and progress shall be deemed to have taken place if one or more of the following have occurred: 
(a)  Plans for construction and an application for a building permit for at least one of the buildings on the approved Concept Plan are submitted within two (2) years following approval of the Concept Plan; 
(b)  A good-faith attempt is made to file with the City an application for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project; 
(c)  Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is located; 
(d)  Fiscal security is posted with the City to ensure performance of an obligation required by the City; or 
(e)  Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been paid to the City. 
(3)  Expiration. In the event that "progress", as defined above, has not occurred within a two (2) year period as required by this Section, an approved Concept Plan shall be deemed expired in accordance with A above. 
(4)  Extension and Reinstatement Procedure. 
(a)  Prior to the expiration of a Concept Plan, the applicant may petition the City (in writing) to extend the expiration date of the Site Plan for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval of such extension. 
(b)  A petition for extension of a Concept Plan expiration date shall be submitted to the Planning Director at least forty-five (45) days prior to such expiration date. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official to approve or deny the request. Appeals of a denial shall be processed in the manner outlined in 4.5.2A(5)(b). 
(c)  If a Concept Plan was approved administratively, then the administrative official responsible for approving the site plan shall have authority to grant up to a two (2) year extension. 
(d)  In determining whether a request for extension should be recommended and/or granted, the City Manager and/or the Planning Director shall consider all facts and information that it deems pertinent, including without limitation, the following: 
(i)  The reasons for the lapse; 
(ii)  The ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval; and 
(iii)  The extent to which development regulations would apply to the Concept Plan at that point in time. 
(e)  If a petition is not timely submitted and approved in accordance with this Section, then the Site Plan shall be deemed to have expired and shall become null and void. Any new request for Site Plan approval thereafter shall be deemed a "new permit", and shall be submitted with a new application form, with a new filing fee, and with new plans and materials in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section. The new request shall be reviewed for compliance with the ordinances and regulations in effect on the date that the new application is submitted to the City for approval. 
2.3.3   Vested Rights Request
A.  Any property owner who believes that he has obtained a vested right under Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, shall submit to the City Secretary a letter explaining the factual and legal bases upon which the property owner relies in his contention that he has a particular vested right and, consequently, is exempt or not subject to a particular City order, regulation, ordinance, rule, expiration date, or other properly adopted requirement (hereinafter referred to collectively as "regulations"). Such written submission shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the property owner (or the property owner's duly authorized agent); 
(2)  Identification of the property for which the property owner claims a vested right; 
(3)  Identification of the "project," as that term is defined in the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245, as amended; 
(4)  Identification of the original application for the first permit in the series of permits required for the project, as described in the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245, as amended; 
(5)  The date that the first permit in the series of permits required for the project was filed with the City; 
(6)  A chronology of the history of the project, with specific facts establishing that the project was in progress on or commenced after September 1, 1997, as required in the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245, as amended; 
(7)  Identification of all City regulations in effect at the time the original application for the permit was filed that (a) the owner contends are vested and (b) the owner contends control the approval, disapproval, or conditional approval of an application for a permit, as required in the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245, as amended; and 
(8)  Identification of all City regulations that the property owner contends do not apply to the project due to the vested rights provided the property owner by Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as well as all City regulations that the property owner believes predate the commencement date of his vested rights claim and therefore are applicable to his project. This portion of the written submission shall be in accordance with the requirements of B below. 
B.  A written submission that fails to comply with the any one or more of the requirements under A above shall be deemed incomplete and therefore ineligible for review under this Section. 
2.3.4   Vested Rights Determination
    The City Secretary shall promptly forward the owner's vested rights request pursuant to 2.3.3 Vested Rights Request, along with any supporting information or documentation provided along with the request, to the City Manager and City Attorney for their respective reviews. The City Manager, after consultation with the City Attorney, within sixty (60) business days shall issue a final administrative determination of whether a vested right exists in relation to the project, and shall identify, with particularity, all claims for vested rights that have been granted and all claims for vested rights that have been denied. Prior to rendering his final determination, the City Manager may request a pre-determination conference with the owner to discuss the owner's vested rights claim and to ensure that the nature of the claim is fully and completely understood by the City Manager. 
2.3.5   Vested Rights Appeals to the City Council
    If the property owner believes that the City Manager's vested rights determination is in error, the property owner shall have the right to appeal such determination to the City Council, which shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide the appeal. The property owner shall have thirty (30) business days after the date of the City Manager's vested rights determination to file his appeal or the decision of the City Manager shall be final. The City Council shall make a determination on the property owner's request within sixty (60) days. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
ARTICLE 3. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 3.1 - Use and Interpretation 
    For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall also include the future tense; words used in the masculine gender shall also include the feminine gender; words used in the singular number shall also include the plural number; and words in the plural number shall also include the singular number, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. For any term or use not defined herein, Webster's Dictionary (latest edition) shall be used. 
Section 3.2 - Definitions 
    Abut: To physically touch or border upon; to share a common property line but not overlap (see Adjoining Lot or Land). 
    Accessory Building: A subordinate building to the main building used for purposes accessory and incidental to the main use. 
    Accessory Dwelling: A subordinate building that is detached from the main building, used as a residence, and is not involved in the conduct of a business. 
    Accessory Use: A use that is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or building(s) and that is located upon the same lot therewith. 
    Adjoining Lot or Land: A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. 
    Airport or Landing Field: A place where aircraft can land and take off that is usually equipped with hangars, facilities for aircraft refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers. 
    Alcoholic beverage: Alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one (1/2) percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
    All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV): Any motorized, off-road vehicle fifty (50) inches or less in overall width, having a dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, designed to travel on three (3) or more low pressure tires, having a seat designed to be straddled by the operator and handle bars for steering control. 
    All-Weather Surface: A created surface, such as brick, stone, concrete, or asphalt, placed on the land to facilitate pedestrian or vehicular passage, as may be required. Also may be referred to as paving or pavement. 
    Alley: A minor right-of-way that is dedicated to public use and which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
    Ambulance: A motor vehicle used to transport sick or injured people with medical needs to, from, or between places of treatment for an illness or injury. Ambulances can be cars, trucks, helicopters, boats, or airplanes. Ambulances may be staffed with paramedics, nurses, doctors, emergency medical technicians, or a combination of healthcare providers. 
    Ambulance Service, Emergency Medical Services (EMS) and other similar uses: Any part of a public or private system designed to respond to medical emergencies and provide pre-hospital or in-hospital treatment and-or transport to definitive care by paramedics, emergency medical technicians (EMTs) and certified first responders (CFRs). The terms also often refer to ambulances and first responders, though emergency medical services (EMS) may include all services necessary to help ill or injured people return to the state of health they enjoyed before their emergencies. Also known as: EMS, first responders, ambulance services, emergency medical system. 
    Amusement, Indoor: A commercial amusement enterprise that is wholly enclosed within an acoustically-treated building so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the Adjoining Lot or Land or of an adjoining lot or land, and that provides activities, services and/or instruction for the entertainment of customers or members for a fee, but not including Amusement Arcades. Uses may include, but are not limited to, the following: bowling alley, ice-skating rink, martial arts club, racquetball/handball club, indoor tennis courts/club, indoor swimming pool or scuba diving facility, and other similar types of uses. 
    Amusement, Outdoor: A commercial amusement enterprise offering entertainment and/or games of skill to the general public for a fee wherein any portion of the activity takes place outdoors and including, but not limited to, a golf driving range, archery range, miniature golf course, batting cages, go-cart tracks, amusement parks, and other similar types of uses. 
    Amusement, Temporary: Outdoor or indoor commercial amusement provided on a temporary or seasonal basis, examples of which include a carnival or haunted house. 
    Amusement Arcade: Any building, room, place or establishment of any nature or kind, and by whatever name called, where more than ten (10) percent of the public floor area is devoted to four (4) or more Amusement Devices that are operated for a profit, whether the same is operated in conjunction with any other business or not. 
    Amusement Devices: Devices including but not limited to coin-operated pinball machines, video games, electronic games, shuffle boards, billiard tables, or other similar amusement devices. The term does not include musical devices, billiard tables which are not coin-operated, machines that are designed exclusively for small children, and devices designed to train persons in athletic skills or golf, tennis, baseball, archery, or other similar sports. 
    Animal Shelter: A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
    Antenna: A device used in communication which transmits or receives radio signals. 
    Antique Shop: A retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture and/or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building. 
    Appliance Service and Repair: The maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances that are customarily used in the home including, but not limited to, washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners, etc., but not including appliances/equipment which have internal combustion engines. 
    Applicant: A person who submits or files an original or renewal application with the city, the county judge, or the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission for a license or permit. 
    Approved Plan: A plan that has been granted final approval by the appropriate approving authority in accordance with this Ordinance. 
    Art Gallery/Museum/Dealer: An institution for the collection, display and/or distribution of objects of art or science, and which is typically sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and generally open to the public. 
    Assisted Care, Acute Care, or Living Facility: A facility providing primarily in-patient health care, personal care, or rehabilitative services over an extended period of time to persons who are chronically ill, aged or disabled and who need ongoing health supervision but not hospitalization. Also referred to as "nursing home," "convalescent home," or "long-term care facility." 
    Automobile: A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people including but not limited to the following: passenger cars, light duty trucks and sport utility vehicles, vans and mini-vans, motor scooters and motorcycles. 
    Automobile Accessories and Parts, New Retail Sales: The use of any building or other premise for the primary inside display and sale of new parts for automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. 
    Automobile Accessories and Parts, Used Retail Sales: The use of any building or other premise for the primary inside display and sale of used parts for automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. 
    Automobile Accessory Installation, Minor: Installation of minor automobile accessories such as car alarms, radio and stereo equipment, window tinting, pin striping, and similar accessories. 
    Automobile Dealer, Primarily New Sales: Retail sales of new automobiles or light load vehicles, including, as an accessory use, the sales of used automobiles or light load vehicles and the service of new or used vehicles. Includes other new vehicles, such as boats. 
    Automobile Dealer, Primarily Used Sales: Retail sales of primarily used automobiles or Light Load vehicles. Includes other new vehicles, such as boats. 
    Automobile Rental: Storage or renting of automobiles and light trucks. 
    Automobile Repair, Major: General repair or reconditioning of engines, air-conditioning systems and transmissions for motor vehicles; wrecker service; collision repair services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; undercoating and rust-proofing; and other similar uses. 
    Automobile Repair, Minor: Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes and batteries; diagnostic services; minor maintenance services such as grease, oil, spark plug and filter changing; tune-ups; emergency road service; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses and brake parts; automobile washing and polishing; performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; normal servicing of air-conditioning systems; and other similar minor services for motor vehicles except Heavy Load Vehicles. 
    Automobile Storage or Automobile Auction: The storage or impoundment, on a lot or tract of operable automobiles for the purpose of holding such vehicles for sale, distribution and/or storage. This definition shall not include Wrecking Yards. 
    Automobile Wash, Full-Service or Detail Shop: Washing, waxing or cleaning of automobiles or light duty trucks where the owner of the vehicle does not actually wash the vehicle. The owner either leaves the vehicle and comes back to retrieve it later, or the owner waits in a designated area while employees of the car wash facility vacuum, wash, dry, wax and/or detail the vehicle for a fee. 
    Automobile Wash, Self-Service: Washing, waxing or cleaning of automobiles or light duty trucks where the owner of the vehicle causes the vehicle to become washed. One type of unattended car wash facility utilizes automated self-service (drive-through/rollover) wash bays and apparatus in which the vehicle owner inserts money or tokens into a machine, drives the vehicle into the wash bay, and waits in the vehicle while it is being washed. The other type of unattended facility is comprised of wand-type self-service (open) wash bays in which the vehicle owner drives the vehicle into the wash bay, gets out of the vehicle, and hand washes the vehicle with a wand-type apparatus by depositing coins or tokens into a machine. 
    Bakery, Retail: A facility for the production, distribution, and/or sale of baked goods directly to the public. 
    Bakery, Wholesale: A manufacturing facility for the production, distribution, and/or sale of baked goods and confectioneries to retail outlets. 
    Bank or Financial Institution: An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange and/or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds, examples of which include banks, saving and loans, and credit unions. 
    Bar/tavern: An establishment that derives seventy-five (75) percent or more of the establishment's gross revenue from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Barn: A structure intended for the purpose of storing farming and ranching related equipment and/or housing livestock. 
    Basement or Cellar: A portion of a building that is partly or wholly underground. 
    Bed and Breakfast Inn: A dwelling occupied as a permanent residence by an owner or renter which serves breakfast and provides or offers sleeping accommodations in not more than five (5) rooms for transient guests for compensation, generally for a period not to exceed seven (7) days. 
    Beer: A malt beverage containing one-half of one (1/2) percent or more of alcohol by volume and not more than four (4) percent of alcohol by weight, and does not include a beverage designated by label or otherwise by a name other than beer. 
    Block: An area within the City enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings. If used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two (2) streets which intersect said street on said side. 
    Board of Adjustments (BOA): A board appointed by the City Council authorized to approve variances and special exceptions to the Zoning Ordinance, and to hear and decide any appeals that allege error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance. Also referred to as the Zoning Board of Adjustments (ZBA) and having such other authority as designated by the City Council. 
    Boarding or Rooming House: A building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not to exceed eight (8) persons. 
    Bounding Property Line: The far side of any street, alley, stream or other permanently dedicated open space from the noise source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and adjacent property. When no such open space exists, the common line between two (2) parcels of property shall be interpreted as the bounding property line. 
    Building: Any structure intended for shelter, occupancy, housing or enclosure for persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building Height: The vertical distance from finished grade to the top of the highest roof beams on a flat or shed roof, and the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs (see Figure 1. Building Height). 

    Building or Setback Line: A line parallel, or approximately parallel, to any lot line at a specific distance therefrom, marking the minimum distance from the lot line that a building may be erected, and marking the building envelope, which is the area in which a building may be erected. 
    Building, Accessory: See Accessory Building. 
    Building, Main: A building in which the primary or principal use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted. 
    Building Materials Sales: The indoor or outdoor sale of materials, tools, and/or hardware customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, including facilities for storage of materials for retail sales. 
    Building Official: The person designated by the City Manager to serve as the Building Official for the City. When used in this Ordinance the term Building Official shall include the designees of the Building Official. 
    Building Site: The tract, parcel or lot of land area which is being developed and which is designated on the building permit application, together with all contiguous tracts or parcels of land held under common ownership and any existing buildings and associated parking. 
    Buffer: A specified land area, together with the planting and landscaping required on any building site, which may also contain a barrier, such as a berm or a fence, where such additional screening is necessary to achieve the desired level of buffering between various activities and provides a year-round visual obstruction. 
    Bus Station or Terminal: Any premises for the transient housing or parking of motordriven buses, and the loading and unloading of passengers. 
    Cabinet or Upholstery Shop: A business for the construction and/or sale of cabinets or the upholstery and reupholstery of furniture. 
    Caretaker's or Security Guard's Housing: A residence located on a premises with a main residential or nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises (e.g., residence for guard in a private street development, residence for a guard/manager/caretaker for a self-storage facility or a restricted access business park). 
    Carport: A structure that is open on a minimum of two (2) sides and designed or used to shelter vehicles. 
    Cemetery or Mausoleum: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbaria, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
    Certificate of Occupancy: An official certificate issued by the City through the Building Official which indicates conformance with the zoning regulations and building codes and which authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
    Chapter 245: Refers to Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
    Child-Care: Foster Family Home (Independent): Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS), a single independent home that is the primary residence of the foster parents and licensed to provide care for six (6) or fewer children up to the age of eighteen (18) years. See Chapter 42 of the Human Resources Code for more information. 
    Child-Care: Foster Group Home (Independent): Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS), a single independent home that is the primary residence of the foster parents and licensed to provide care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children up to the age of eighteen (18) years. See Chapter 42 of the Human Resources Code for more information. 
    Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Center: Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS), an operation providing care for seven (7) or more children younger than fourteen (14) years old for less than 24 hours per day at a location other than the permit holder's home. See Chapter 42 of the Human Resources Code for more information. 
    Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Home: Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS), the primary caregiver provides care in the caregiver's own residence for children from birth through thirteen (13) years. The total number of children in care varies with the ages of the children, but the total number of children in care at any given time, including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed twelve (12). See Chapter 42 of the Human Resources Code for more information. 
    Child-Care: Listed Family Home: Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS), a caregiver at least 18 years old who provides care in the caregiver's own home for compensation, for three or fewer children unrelated to the caregiver, ages birth through 13 years. Regular care is provided, which is care provided for at least four hours a day, three or more days a week, and more than nine consecutive weeks. The total number of children in care, including children related to the caregiver, may not exceed 12. See Chapter 42 of the Human Resources Code for more information. 
    Child Care: Registered Child-Care Home: Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS), a caregiver who provides regular care in the caregiver's own home for not more than six (6) children from birth through thirteen (13) years. Child day care can be provided for six (6) additional school-aged children before and after the customary school day. The total number of children in care at any given time, including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed twelve (12). See Chapter 42 of the Human Resources Code for more information. 
    Church, Temple, or Other Place of Worship: A building for regular assembly for religious worship which is used primarily and designed for such purpose and those accessory uses which are customarily associated therewith, such as the place of residence or parsonage for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis (tax exempt as defined by State law). For the purposes of this Ordinance, this definition does not include Bible study and other similar activities which occur in a person's primary residence. 
    City Council or Council: The governing body of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
    City: The City of Decatur, Texas. 
    Cleaning Plant, Commercial Laundry: An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis. 
    College or University: An academic institution of higher learning accredited or recognized by the State and covering a program or series of programs of academic study. 
    Collocation or Collocate: The act of locating wireless communication equipment owned or used by more than one (1) provider on a single wireless communication facility. 
    Commission: The Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
    Community Center, Public: A building or complex of buildings that house cultural, recreational, athletic, food service and/or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a governmental agency or private nonprofit agency. 
    Community or Social Building: A building used for recreational, social, educational, and cultural activities generally owned, maintained and operated by a homeowners association for the enjoyment of its resident members. 
    Community Home: A place where not more than six (6) physically or mentally impaired or handicapped persons are provided room and board, as well as supervised care and rehabilitation by not more than two (2) persons as licensed by the Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation. (see Texas Human Resources Code Chapter 123) 
    Comprehensive Plan: Document adopted by Ordinance of the City Council that consists of graphic and textual policies which govern the future development of the City and which consists of various components governing specific geographic areas and functions and services of the City. 
    Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant, Permanent: A permanent manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt. 
    Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant, Temporary: A temporary manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt during construction of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed. 
    Convenience Store, with Gasoline Sales: Retail establishment with the selling of gasoline, food for on- or off-premises consumption, and a limited selection of groceries and sundries. Does not include or offer any automobile repair services. 
    Convenience Store, without Gasoline Sales: Retail establishment with the selling food for on- or off-premises consumption and a limited selection of groceries and sundries. Does not include or offer any automobile repair services or the sale of gasoline. 
    Copy or Print Shop: An establishment which reproduces, in printed form, individual orders from an individual, business, profession, service, industry or government organization. 
    Contractor's Shop, with Outside Storage Yard: A building, part of a building, or land area for the construction or storage of materials, equipment, tools, products, and vehicles. 
    Country Club: A private land area and buildings which may include a golf course, clubhouse, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests. 
    Court: An open, unobstructed space, bounded on more than two (2) sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one (1) side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space. 
    Coverage: The lot area covered by some type of Impervious Surface, which includes buildings located thereon, overhanging roofs, and parking areas. 
    Custom Personal Shop: See Personal Service Shop. 
    Dairy Plant: A place, premise or establishment where milk or milk products are collected, handled, processed, stored, pasteurized, bottled or prepared for distribution. 
    Dance Hall or Dancing Facility: An establishment open to the general public for dancing. 
    Day Camp: A facility arranged and conducted for the instruction and organized outdoor recreation of children on a daytime basis. Day Camps can also be conducted inside or may be a combination of inside and outside activities. 
    Daytime: The hours between sunrise and sunset on any given day. 
    Decibel: A unit of measurement of sound pressure. 
    Density: The total number of residential dwelling units allowed upon a given tract of land usually expressed in total number of units per gross acres or net acre. 
    Designated Historical Area: A historical site and all of its property so designated by this Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the following locations: 
  The Waggoner Mansion, 
  Wise County Heritage Museum, 
  All property within the C-1A, Decatur Square Business District, and 
  All property fronting Main and Walnut streets from North to South US 81/287 Business. 
    Detached: Having no physical connection above the top of the floor line of the first floor with any other building or structure. 
    Diameter: The measurement of a tree's caliper inches at forty-eight (48) inches above ground level. 
    Distribution Center: Building or facility used for the storage and distribution of wholesale items/products. 
    Drinking Establishment: See Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission definitions. 
    Drip Line: The periphery of an area underneath a tree, which would be encompassed by the perpendicular line dropped from the outermost edges of the crown of the tree. 
    Dry Cleaning, Retail Only (Drop-Off/Pick-Up): A facility where clothing and other fabrics are washed and/or dried in machines on the premises that are operated by employees of the facility. 
    Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one (1) or more families. 
    Dwelling, Accessory: See Accessory Dwelling. 
    Dwelling, Multiple Family: Three (3) or more dwelling units on a single lot designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of one another, exclusive of hotels or motels. Includes three-family units (triplex) and four-family units (quadraplex), as well as traditional apartments. 
    Dwelling, Single Family, Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one (1) or more sides by a party (i.e., shared) wall, which is designed for occupancy by one (1) family, and which is located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and/or rear lot lines. Includes townhomes. 
    Dwelling, Single Family, Detached: A dwelling designed and constructed as a free-standing structure for occupancy by one (1) family and located on a lot or separate building tract having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract. A single family dwelling is one with a common entrance, one (1) common kitchen facility and is utilized as one (1) living quarters for a single family. Includes traditional single family homes and patio or "zero lot line" homes. 
    Dwelling, Triplex: Three (3) attached dwellings in one (1) structure under one (1) common ownership, each unit designed to be occupied by one (1) family. 
    Dwelling, Two Family: Two (2) attached dwellings in one (1) structure under one (1) common ownership, each side designed to be occupied by one (1) family. Includes duplex homes. 
    Dwelling, Zero Lot Line or Patio Home: A single-family dwelling on a separately platted lot which is designed such that one (1) side yard is reduced to zero (0) feet in order to maximize the width and usability of the other side yard, and which permits the construction of a detached single-family dwelling with one (1) side (i.e., wall) of such dwelling placed on the side property line. 
    Dwelling Unit: A portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters for one (1) family, and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping. One (1) dwelling unit occupied by one (1) family has a common entrance, utilities, kitchen and food preparation facilities and sleeping and restroom facilities accessible by all (see Family). 
    Easement: A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or some other entity or third party. 
    Electrical Generating Plant: A facility used for the generation of electric energy for transmission to ultimate consumers or additional transmission point. 
    Electrical Substation: A subsidiary relay station in which electric current is transformed. 
    Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Helicopter Landing Site: A site that is not permitted or licensed as a heliport or helistop and that is located at or as near as practical to a medical emergency or at or near a medical facility and is designated an EMS helicopter landing site. 
    Emergency Medical Technician (EMT): A certified healthcare provider who is trained to treat and transport victims of emergencies. Emergency medical technicians (EMT) provide basic life support to victims and may also work in the emergency department and fire department, however, the certification is primarily used by persons providing care in an ambulance. 
    Emergency Use Facility: An area for accommodating helicopters in support of emergency public safety agency operations, but that is not permitted or licensed as a heliport or helistop. 
    Enclosed Living Area: The total square footage of floor space within a residential structure's exterior walls that is heated and/or air conditioned including the livable area, closets and storage but excluding breezeways, garages, open porches, carports and accessory buildings. 
    Extraction and Storage of Sand, Soil, Stone, or Gravel: A site used for the extraction/quarry or storage of sand, soil, stone, or gravel. 
    Equipment Storage Building: A small, unmanned, single story building, typically less than five hundred (500) square feet, used to house radio transmitters and related equipment. 
    Facility, Major: A wireless communication facility greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
    Facility, Minor: A wireless communication facility less than thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
    Fairground or Rodeo: An area or space either outside or within a building for the display of animals, exhibitions, topic-specific goods, or information. 
    Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or a group not to exceed four (4) persons not all related by blood or marriage, adoption or guardianship, occupying a dwelling unit and living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Farm, Ranch, Garden, Crops, or Orchard: An area used for growing usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by City ordinance or other applicable law. 
    Feed and Grain Store or Farm Supply Store: An establishment for the selling of corn, grain and other food stuffs for animals and livestock, and including implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm machinery. 
    Field Office or Construction Yard or Office, Temporary: A structure or shelter used in connection with a development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment. 
    Fixed-Wing Aircraft: An aircraft capable of flight using forward motion that generates lift as the wing moves through the air and may be referred to as an airplane, aeroplane, or simply plane. 
    Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodplain Administrator: City engineer or person responsible for the City's floodplain. 
    Floor Area, Gross: The total gross square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six (6) feet, carports, residential garages, open porches, and breezeways. 

    Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The floor area of a main building or buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area (Figure 2. Floor Area Ratio (FAR)). 
    Florist Shop, Retail Only: An establishment for the display and retail sale of flowers, small plants and accessories. 
    Food Processing Plant: A manufacturing or light industrial use that primarily deals with the processing and packaging of food (such as dairy or grain) products that are intended for human consumption, but which are not typically sold in volume to end users on the premises. Incidental retail sales of food products (e.g., bread and baked goods, dairy products such as cheese, etc.) created and packaged on the premises may be allowed as an accessory use. 
    Food or Grocery Store: A retail business establishment that displays and sells consumable goods that are not to be eaten on the premises. 
    Franchised Private Utility: A utility such as one distributing heat, chilled water, closed circuit television or similar service and requiring a franchise to operate in the City. 
    Fraternal Organization: An organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members such as Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, or a labor union. 
    Fraternity or Sorority House: A building other than a motel/hotel that is occupied only by individuals enrolled in a college or university located within the City and persons to attend the house and supervise activities of the fraternity or sorority. Except for the attendants, each resident must be a member of a fraternity or sorority that is recognized by the college or university and chartered by a state or national organization. 
    Frequency: The number of times per second a vibration or sound wave oscillates. 
    Funeral Home: A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
    Furniture and Appliance Store: Includes retail stores selling new or used goods for furnishing the home including, but not limited to furniture, floor coverings, draperies, glass and chinaware, domestic stoves, refrigerators, and other household electrical and gas appliances. 
    Garage, Private: An accessory building enclosed on at least three (3) sides or a part of a main building used for storage of automobiles and used solely by the occupants and their guests. Also referred to as "enclosed parking space." 
    Garage, Public: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, storing, or parking motor driven vehicles. 
    General Commercial Facility: Any establishment other than personal service shop for the treatment and/or processing of products as a service on a for-profit basis including, but not limited to, newspaper printing, laundry plant, or cleaning and dyeing plant. 
    General Retail Stores: Retail stores which sell a number of lines of primarily new merchandise including but not limited to dry goods, apparel and accessories, furniture and home furnishings, small wares, small appliances, hardware, and food to the public. The stores included in this group are known as department stores, variety stores, general merchandise stores, general stores, etc. 
    Golf Course, Commercial: Operated as a for-profit business open to the public for a fee. A tract of land laid out with a least nine (9) holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. May include a clubhouse, restrooms, driving range, and shelters as accessory uses. 
    Golf Course, Private Country Club: Operated as a private club for members and their invited guests. A tract of land laid out with at least nine (9) holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. May include a clubhouse, restrooms, driving range, and shelters as accessory uses. 
    Golf Course, Public/Municipal: Operated by the City or other public entity open to the public with or without a fee. A tract of land laid out with a least nine (9) holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. May include a clubhouse, restrooms, driving range, and shelters as accessory uses. 
    Grade: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
    Ground Cover: Grasses and other plants grown to keep soil from being blown or washed away and planted so as to develop full coverage within eighteen (18) months. Including but not limited to bark, mulches, gravel, and other pervious material for use as ground cover under trees and shrubs. 
    Guest Room: A room in a hotel designed for the overnight lodging of hotel guests for an established rate or fee. 
    Gymnastic, Dance, or Art Studio: A building or portion of a building used as a place of work for a gymnast or dancer, or for instructional classes in gymnastics or dance or instruction for artistry or music. 
    Hardware Store: Retail stores where items such as plumbing, heating, and electrical supplies, sporting goods, and paints are sold. 
    Health Club, Indoor: Includes, but is not limited to, an establishment which provides facilities and equipment (e.g., gymnasiums, weight rooms, swimming pools/spas, exercise apparatus, instruction/classes) which are intended to promote health, fitness, weight reduction and/or similar health-related activities. 
    Heavy Load Vehicle: A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) of greater than sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds (including trailers), such as large recreational vehicles (originally manufactured as RVs, not converted), tractor-trailers, buses, vans, and other similar vehicles. When used herein, the term "truck" shall be construed to mean Heavy Load Vehicle unless specifically stated otherwise. 
    Heavy Machinery Sales and Service: A building or open area used for the display, sale, rental or storage of heavy machinery, tractors or similar machines, or a group of machines which function together as a unit. 
    Helicopter: A type of rotorcraft in which lift and thrust are supplied by one (1) or more engine driven rotors which in contrast with fixed-wing aircraft, allows the helicopter to take off and land vertically, to hover, and to fly forwards, backwards, and laterally. 
    Heliport: An area of land or water or a structural surface which is used or intended to be used for the landing and take-off of helicopters, along with any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used, for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities, and that is permitted or licensed. Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Zoning Ordinance, the term Heliport shall include Helistops as defined herein. 
    Helistop: A minimally developed heliport for boarding and discharging passengers or cargo. The heliport/helistop relationship is comparable to a bus terminal/bus stop relationship with respect to the extent of services provided or expected. Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Zoning Ordinance, the term Heliport shall include helistops as defined herein. 
    Home Improvement Center: A retail facility for the sale of building materials, tools, lawn/garden supplies, and home decor to the general public. 
    Home Occupation: An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit, or in an accessory building to a dwelling unit, by a resident of the premises only, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes (see Section 6.2.3 Home Occupations). 
    Hospital, Acute Care: An institution that is licensed by the State of Texas where sick or injured patients are given medical and/or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life. 
    Hospital, Chronic Care: An institution that is licensed by the State of Texas where those persons suffering from illness, injury, deformity and/or deficiencies pertaining to age are given medical care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis. 
    Hotel or Motel: A facility offering temporary lodging accommodations or guest rooms on a daily rate to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, housekeeping service and recreational facilities. See definition for "Guest Room". Also includes an extended stay lodging facility that may be used for weekly or monthly occupancy periods. 
    Household Care Facility: A dwelling unit which provides temporary residence and care to not more than nine (9) persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are elderly; disabled; orphaned, abandoned, abused, or neglected children; victims of domestic violence; or rendered temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster or financial setbacks, living together with not more than two (2) supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. This definition is subject to Art. 4442c-4 (Personal Care Facility Licensing Act) V.A.C.S. (Tex.) and Art. 1011n (Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act) V.A.C.S. (Tex.) as they presently exist or may be amended in the future. Also referred to as "hospice". 
    Household Care Institution: An institution which provides temporary residence and care to ten (10) or more persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are elderly; disabled; orphaned, abandoned, abused, or neglected children; victims of domestic violence; convalescing from illness; or temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster, or financial setback together with supervisory personnel. 
    HUD-Code Regulations: The Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standard Act, 42 U.S.C.S., Section 5401 et seq., as the same now exists or as is amended. 
    Impervious Surface: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. 
    Industrialized Home, Modular Prefabricated Structure, or Modular Home: A structure or building module as defined under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards, that is transportable in one (1) or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and that is designed to be installed and used by a consumer as a fixed residence on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include mobile homes or HUD-Code manufactured homes as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f, V.A.C.S.). 
    Industrial Products Storage: Establishments providing storage for industrial products to individuals or businesses. 
    Institutional Use: A nonprofit, religious, or public use, such as a church, library, public or private school, hospital, or government owned or operated building, structure or land used for public purpose(s). 
    Junk: Any manufactured good, appliance, fixture, furniture, machinery, vehicle, personal property or other thing or part thereof, whether of value or valueless, that is demolished, discarded, dismantled, dilapidated, or so worn, deteriorated, or in such condition as to be generally unusable and/or inoperable. Without limiting the generality of the aforementioned, anything that is water-soluble, primarily organic, or not typically associated with wrecking or salvage yard activities may not be considered junk. 
    Kennels, Indoor Pens: An establishment with indoor pens in which domesticated animals more than one (1) year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial purposes. 
    Kennels, Outdoor Pens: An establishment with outdoor pens in which domesticated animals more than one (1) year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial purposes. 
    Kiosk: A small, free-standing, one-story accessory structure used for retail purposes, such as automatic teller machines or the posting of temporary information and/or posters, notices and announcements. Kitchen, Residential: Generally, that portion of a residential dwelling that is devoted to the preparation and/or cooking of food for the purpose of consumption by residents of the dwelling. A kitchen, as referred to within this Ordinance, generally indicates the presence of complete cooking facilities (i.e., stove, oven, microwave oven and/or refrigerator) as differentiated from a "kitchenette" which provides very limited cooking facilities (i.e., single-burner hot plate, under-counter refrigerator, microwave oven only, etc.). 
    Laboratory, Scientific or Research: An establishment that engages in research, testing or evaluation of materials or products, but not medical-related (see Medical Facilities, Medical Laboratory). 
    Landfill or Dump Area: A lot or part thereof used primarily for the disposal by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning, or other means and for whatever purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or nontoxic waste material of any kind. 
    Landscaping: Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms, and non-living durable materials that are commonly used in landscaping such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
    Laundromat Washateria or Self-Service: A commercial retail facility where patrons wash, dry and/or dry clean clothing and other fabrics in machines on the premises that are operated by the patron/general public for money. 
    Laundry Plant, Commercial: An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis. 
    Library, Public: A public, nonprofit facility in which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials such as but not limited to books, manuscripts, computers, recordings, or films are kept for use by or loaned to patrons of the facility, but are not normally offered for sale. 
    Licensee: A person who is the holder of a license provided in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, or any agent, servant, or employee of that person. 
    Light Load Vehicle: A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) not greater than sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds and having no more than two (2) axles, such as pick-up trucks, sport utility vehicles, vans and mini-vans, recreational vehicles (less than thirty-two (32) feet in length), campers and other similar vehicles but not including automobiles and motorcycles. 
    Liquor: Any alcoholic beverage containing alcohol in excess of four (4) percent by weight, unless otherwise indicated. Proof that an alcoholic beverage is alcohol, spirits of wine, whiskey, liquor, wine, brandy, gin, rum, ale, malt liquor, tequila, mescal, habanero or barreteago, is prima facie evidence that it is liquor. 
    Liquor (package) store: A business that sells alcoholic beverages, including liquor as defined herein, for consumption off-premises. For the purposes of this section, the term "liquor store" shall exclude grocery stores or convenience stores in which beer and/or wine is offered for sale as a minor part of an overall larger inventory of goods. It shall also exclude a restaurant that is otherwise operating in accordance with its approved liquor license and all other provisions of this section. 
    Live-Work Unit: A single unit (e.g., studio, loft, or one (1) bedroom) consisting of both a commercial/office and a residential component that is occupied by the same resident. 
    Loading Space: An off-street space or berth used for delivery and loading/unloading of vehicles. 
    Local Utility Distribution Lines: The facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for distribution or collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, sewage, electric power or telephone service, including pad- and pole-mounted transformers. 
    Loft Dwelling or Live-Above Unit: An apartment dwelling unit located above a nonresidential use. 
    Lot: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or otherwise permitted by law (as specified in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended), to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
    Lot, Corner: A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths upon a street (Figure 3. Lot Types). 
    Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having frontage upon two (2) non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot (Figure 3. Lot Types). 
    Lot, Flag: A lot having access to a street by means of a stem or a narrow strip of land connecting the lot to the street; the stem or narrow strip generally has a depth greater than its street frontage (Figure 3. Lot Types). 
    Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot (Figure 3. Lot Types). 
    Lot, Key: A corner lot whose exterior side is adjacent to the front yard of another lot (Figure 4. Key Lot). 


    Lot Area: The total net area within lot lines and not including portions of streets and alleys. 
    Lot Coverage: The lot area covered by all structures located thereon. Structures shall include main structures and accessory structures with or without a permeable roof. 
    Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines (Figure 5. Lot Depth). 

    Lot Frontage: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting onto a street. 
    Lot Line: A line of record bounding a lot that divides one (1) lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
    Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Wise County, as applicable, or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
    Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line (Figure 6. Lot Width). 

    Main Building: The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use. 
    Manufactured Home Display or Sales: The offering for sale, storage, or display of new or previously owned (i.e., used) manufactured housing units on a parcel of land, but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
    Manufactured Housing Units: Any one (1) of three (3) types of prefabricated housing products (e.g., mobile homes/trailers, HUD-Code homes, modular homes/industrialized homes) which are typically manufactured/assembled at a location other than the end user's permanent site, and which are regulated by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f and 5221f-1, V.A.C.S.). For the purpose of this Ordinance, there are three types of manufactured homes: 
a.  Mobile Home/Trailer: A movable dwelling designed to be transported on its own chassis on the highway (either intact or in major sections) by a prime mover, which is constructed with a base section so as to be independently self-supporting, and which does not require a permanent foundation for year-round living. A mobile home is also defined as any manufactured home that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976. 
b.  Manufactured Home or HUD-Code Manufactured Home: A movable dwelling designed to be transported on the highway (either intact or in major sections) by a prime mover, which can be used as a residential dwelling either with or without a permanent foundation. A HUD-Code manufactured home is also defined as a movable manufactured home that was constructed after June 15, 1976. 
c.  Modular Home/Industrialized Home: A structure or building module as defined under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards and that is installed and used as a residence by a consumer, transportable in one (1) or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include a mobile home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f V.T.C.S.), nor does it include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as the primary structural component. 
    Manufactured or Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land which is designed, improved, or intended to be used for short- or long-term occupancy by manufactured or mobile homes in designated spaces. Facility may include a residence for the owner/manager of the premises, utility hook-ups, accessory structures, playgrounds and open space areas, fenced yard areas for pets, and other similar amenities. 
    Manufactured or Mobile Home Space: A plot of ground within a manufactured/mobile home park, or manufactured/mobile home subdivision which is designed for the accommodation of one (1) manufactured/mobile home. 
    Manufactured or Mobile Home Subdivision: A parcel of land which is designed, platted, improved and intended for the long-term placement of individually owned manufactured/mobile home units or HUD-Code manufactured homes on platted lots which can be purchased outright by the owners of the manufactured/mobile home units. Subdivision may include a residence for the owner/manager of the premises, utility hook-ups, accessory structures, playgrounds and open space areas, fenced yard areas for pets, and other similar amenities. 
    Manufacturing or Industrial, Heavy: Establishments engaged in the manufacturing or transformation of materials into new products. These establishments are usually described as plants and factories, and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer. 
    Manufacturing or Industrial, Light: Manufacturing of finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials, including fabrication, assembly, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
    Massage Therapy: Any place of business in which massage therapy is practiced by a massage therapist, as defined and licensed by State law. "Massage therapy", as a health care service, means the manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body massage. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tub, shower or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for "massage therapy" are massage, therapeutic massage. Massage and "therapeutic" do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. 
    Meat Packing Plant: A facility where live animals are killed and processed; and/or a building where meat, poultry, or eggs are cooked, smoked, or otherwise processed or packed but does not include a butcher shop or rendering plant. 
    Medevac: A fixed wing aircraft, helicopter, or a motor vehicle used as an ambulance. 
    Mining or Storage of Mining Wastes: The development or extraction of a mineral from its natural occurrences on affected land. Also includes the residual of equipment, liquid, machines, mineral, rock, soil, tools, vegetation, or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations. 
    Mixed beverage: One (1) or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed beverage permit, the holder of a daily temporary mixed beverage permit, the holder of a caterer's permit, the holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit, the holder of a private club registration permit, or the holder of a private club late hours permit. 
    Model Home: A dwelling in a developing subdivision, located on a legal lot of record, that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built within the same subdivision. 
    Monastery or Convent: A building or group of buildings designed to provide group housing for persons under religious vows or orders. 
    Monopole: A tower used to support communications equipment and composed of a single spire with no guy wires. 
    Motorcycle: A self-propelled vehicle with two (2) or more wheels and having one (1) or two (2) saddles or seats, and which may have a sidecar attached, including without limitation motorbikes, motorscooters, mopeds and similar vehicles. 
    Motor or Railroad Freight Terminal: An area and building where cargo is stored and where railcars or trucks, including tractor and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis, which may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment. 
    Motor Vehicle: Any vehicle designed to carry one (1) or more persons which is propelled or drawn by mechanical power, such as automobiles, vans, trucks, motorcycles and buses. 
    Municipal Facility or Use: Any area, land, building, structure and/or facility which is owned, used, leased or operated by the City, including police and fire department facilities. 
    Nighttime: The hours between sunset and sunrise on any given day. 
    Nonconforming Structure: A structure lawfully constructed as of the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto, but which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
    Nonconforming Use: A use of land lawfully occupied as of the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto, but which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
    Nursery: An establishment, including a building, part of a building or open space, for the growth, display and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees and other materials used in indoor or outdoor planting. 
    Occupancy: The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
    Octave Band: A portion of the audible sound spectrum. An octave band analyzer divides the audible sound spectrum into eight (8) octave bands. 
    Odor Threshold: The concentration of odorous matter in the atmosphere necessary to be perceptible to the olfactory nerve of a normal person which is determined as specified in this Ordinance. 
    Off-premises: Refers to the site of consumption rather than the site of sale and refers to the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. 
    Office Showroom or Office Warehouse: An establishment where the majority of its total floor area is not devoted to storage and warehousing. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas. 
    Offices, Professional and General Business: A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management and/or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, legal, personnel, travel, secretarial services, medical, dental, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, but excluding medical offices. 
    Officially Approved Place of Access: Access to a property which is approved by the City, and which is not access from a dedicated street. 
    On-premises: Refers to the site of consumption rather than the site of sale and refers to the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
    Open Space: Any land or area, the preservation of which in its present use would: 
(1)  Conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources; or 
(2)  Protect streams or water supply; or 
(3)  Promote conservation of soils, wetlands, beaches, or tidal marshes; or 
(4)  Enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife preserves, nature reservations, or sanctuaries; or 
(5)  Enhance recreation opportunities. 
    Outdoor Sales: The temporary keeping, displaying or storing, outside a building, of any goods, materials, merchandise or equipment on a lot or tract (such as the display of grills, patio furniture, flowers, Christmas trees, etc.) for the purpose of selling. 
    Outdoor Storage: The permanent and/or continuous keeping, displaying or storing, outside a building, of any goods, materials, merchandise or equipment on a lot or tract. Also referred to as "open storage." 
    Paint Shop: A commercial establishment where painting services other than automotive-related painting services, are performed. (See also Automobile Repair, Major.) 
    Paramedic: A person who provides advanced life support to victims. 
    Park or Playground, Private: A recreation facility, park or playground which is not owned by a public agency such as the City or School District, and which is operated for the exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests and not for use by the general public. 
    Park or Playground, Public: Publicly owned and operated parks, recreation areas, playgrounds, swimming pools and open spaces that are available for use by the general public without membership or affiliation. 
    Parking Lot: An off-street (i.e., not on a public street or alley), ground level area, paved in accordance with City parking lot standards, for the short- or long-term storage of motor vehicles. 
    Parking Lot or Structure: An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of passenger cars and trucks of less than one (1) ton capacity for a fee which may include, in the case of a parking structure only, a facility for servicing automobiles provided that such facility is an internal function for use only by automobiles occupying the structure. 
    Parking Lot, Heavy Load Vehicles: Any public or private land area designed and used for parking Heavy Load Vehicles. 
    Parking Space: An area meeting the dimensional requirements prescribed by this Ordinance, paved with a concrete or asphalt surface together with a concrete or asphalt surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress. 
    Particulate Matter: Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water, which is released into the atmosphere. 
    Paving or Pavement: See All-Weather Surface. 
    Pawn Shop: An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property that is pledged in the owner's keeping (pawnbroker). Retail sales of primarily used (i.e., pre-owned) items is also allowed, provided that the sale of such items complies with City, State and Federal regulations. 
    Permanent Makeup Application: Salon services involving licensed artists applying permanent makeup for clients, sometimes called intradermal cosmetics, as regulated by the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
    Permittee: A person who is the holder of a permit provided for in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, or an agent, servant, or employee of that person. 
    Person: A natural person or association of natural persons, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation, organization, or the manager, agent, servant, or employee of any of them. 
    Personal Service Shop: Shops and offices whose business relies on providing a service to customers rather than primarily retail sales, including, but not limited to, offices for some doctors, chiropractors and massage therapists, and barber/beauty shops, shoe repair shops, and dry cleaners. 
    Pet Shop or Animal Grooming Shop: A retail establishment offering small animals, fish and/or birds for sale as pets, where such creatures are housed within the building, or an establishment offering grooming services of dogs, cats and similar animals. 
    Petroleum Distribution or Storage: A facility for the long-term storage and distribution of petroleum that may also involve wholesale sales, but not retail sales, of petroleum and petroleum-based products. 
    Petroleum and Natural Gas Extraction: Any activity that is constructed on or disturbs land in association with oil or gas drilling, production, or waste treatment and disposal, including but not necessarily limited to wells, tanks or tank batteries, pits, access roads for ingress and egress, and pipelines. 
    Philanthropic Institution: An establishment engaged in the giving of foods, goods, financial assistance, or grants, or offering services or other socially useful programs on a benevolent, nonprofit basis. 
    Planned Development (PD) District: Planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units, such as industrial parks or industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing, including attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated as integral land use units either by a single owner or by a combination of owners. 
    Planning Director: The person designated by the City Manager to administer the Zoning Ordinance. When used in this Ordinance, the term Planning Director shall include the designees of the Planning Director. 
    Planning and Zoning Commission or Commission: A board which is appointed by the City Council as an advisory body, and which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning of property and other planning functions as delegated by the City Council. 
    Plat: A plan showing the subdivision of land, creating building lots or tracts, showing all essential dimensions and other information in compliance with the subdivision standards of the City. 
    Plat of Record: A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots and showing all essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City and subject to recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the City Council and filed in the plat records of Wise County. 
    Playfield or Stadium, Private: An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by an agency other than the City or the School District. 
    Playfield or Stadium, Public: An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency, such as the City or the School District. 
    Plot: See Lot. 
    Premises: The grounds and all buildings, vehicles, and appurtenances pertaining to the grounds, including any adjacent premises if they are directly or indirectly under the control of the same person. 
    Primary Use: The principal or predominant use of any lot or building. 
    Private Club: An establishment providing social and/or dining facilities which may provide alcoholic beverage service, to an association of persons, and otherwise falling within the definition of, and permitted under the provisions of, that portion of Title 3, Chapter 32, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, Alcoholic Beverage Code, as the same may be hereafter amended, and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs. 
    Private school. A school maintained by private individuals, religious organizations or corporations, not at public expense, and open only to pupils selected and admitted by the proprietors or governors, or to pupils of a certain religion or possessing certain qualifications, and generally supported, in part at least, by tuition, fees, or charges. 
    Professional Service: Work performed which is commonly identified as a profession, and which may be licensed by the State of Texas. 
    Propane Sales: Retail sales of gaseous substances commonly used for household purposes such as propane and/or butane; does not include the storage, sale or distribution of other types of combustible substances or alternative fuels such as containerized natural gas, liquid propane, etc. 
    Public Agency Building, Shop, Yard, or Facility: Any building, land, area and/or facility (including maintenance/storage yards and shops) which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or occupied by any subdivision or agency of the following: the State of Texas, the United States, or other public utility or agency. The term also includes any facility which is owned, leased, used and/or occupied by the City, Wise County, the federal government, or other recognized political subdivision or public agency. 
    Public Safety Facility: A government facility for public safety and emergency services, including a facility that provides police or fire protection and related administrative facilities. 
    Public school: A school established under the laws of the state (and usually regulated in matters of detail by local authorities), in the various districts, counties, or cities, maintained at the public expense by taxation, and open, usually without charge, to the children of all the residents of the city, city or other district. Schools belonging to the public and established and conducted under public authority. 
    Public View: Areas visible from public property, public right of way, or a public or private thoroughfare. 
    Quarry: A site currently or previously used for the open-pit excavation of natural materials. 
    Quasi-Public: A use conducted or facility owned/operated by a non-profit or religious institution that provides recreational, education, religious, or similar services to the public. 
    Queue Space: The amount of space within a parking lot or drive-thru to accommodate temporary waiting traffic. 
    Railroad Passenger Station: A facility, either light or heavy rail, for the boarding of passengers and related ticketing sales and offices. 
    Railroad Team Track: A siding for spotting and unloading or loading railroad cars and which is connected to a public street by a drive for access. 
    Railroad Track or Railroad Right-of-Way: A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed principally on a private right-of-way. 
    Recreational Vehicle (RV): A self-propelled (i.e., motorized), mobile living unit which is typically used for temporary human occupancy away from the users' permanent place of residence. 
    Recreational Vehicle or Camper Sales and Leasing: An establishment that sells, leases and/or rents new and/or used recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers, boats/watercraft, and similar types of vehicles. 
    Recreational Vehicle Park or Campground: A parcel of land which is designed, improved, or intended to be used for short- or long-term occupancy by recreational vehicles (including travel trailers) in designated spaces. 
    Rehabilitation Care Home: A dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not more than nine (9) persons regardless of legal relationship who have demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct living together with not more than two (2) supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. (Also referred to as a "halfway house".) 
    Rehabilitation Care Institution: A facility which provides residence and care to ten (10) or more persons, regardless of legal relationship, who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct together with supervisory personnel. 
    Residence: See Dwelling. 
    Residential District: District where the primary purpose is residential use. 
    Residential Use: Any building or portion thereof that is designed or used as living quarters for one (1) or more households. 
    Restaurant or cafe: An establishment building or portion of a building, where the primary business is the on-premises sale of prepared food, with adequate facilities for the preparation of the food to be sold, the adequacy of said kitchen facilities to be based upon the seating capacity of the restaurant and the type of menu offered. Said establishment may serve alcohol with a valid Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission License as long as the establishment derives less than seventy-five (75) percent of its gross revenues from alcohol sales and includes all indoor and outdoor seating areas, kitchen, bar area, restrooms and lobby. 
    Restaurant or Cafeteria: Any building or premises primarily engaged in the retail sale of prepared food and drink for on-site or off-site immediate consumption. 
    Restaurant, with Drive-In Service: An eating establishment where food and/or drinks are primarily served to customers in motor vehicles, or where facilities are provided on the premises which encourage the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the restaurant premises. 
    Restaurant, with Drive-Thru Service: An eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or are self-served, where food is consumed on the premises, and which may include a drive-thru window(s). Retail Store: See General Retail Stores. 
    Retail or Service Uses, Incidental: Any use different from the primary use but which complements and/or supplements the primary use (for example, a sundries shop that serves tenants of an office building or hospital). 
    Right-of-Way: An easement that allows the privilege to pass over the land of another, whereby the holder of the easement acquires only a reasonable and usual enjoyment of the property, and the owner of the land retains the benefits and privileges of ownership consistent with the easement. 
    Roof Projection: The farthest point of the roofline or eave extending from the building. 
    Room: A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities. 
    Sand, Gravel, or Stone Storage or Sales: The process of storing and/or selling sand, gravel, stone, topsoil, compost or other products from the earth. 
    School, Business or Vocational: A for-profit business that offers vocational instruction and training in trades or services such as welding, barber/beauty college, art school, brick laying, machinery operation/repair, and similar trades. 
    School, Elementary: A public or private educational institution for kindergarten through sixth grade. 
    School, Junior High or High: A public or private educational institution for seventh through twelfth grades. 
    Screened: Shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from the view of a person standing at ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm or similar architectural or landscape feature. 
    Screening: Any method of visually shielding or obscuring one (1) land use from another by the planting of evergreen trees or shrubs, or both, or the erection of a screening fence designed to minimize the transmission or propagation of noise, light, vibration, or dust from traffic or other activity on one (1) property to adjoining public or private properties. 
    Seasonal Uses: Seasonal uses include the sales of items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, snow cones, fresh produce, and other items which are typically only available at certain times of the year. 
    Secondary or Ancillary Use: Uses that are secondary activities associated with a primary land use directly associated with and supporting said primary land use. Examples of ancillary uses include, but are not limited to, small factory stores associated with an active manufacturing plan, on-site childcare facilities, etc. 
    Sexually Oriented Business: A sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer (see the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 243). 
    Shrub: Any self-supporting, woody, deciduous or evergreen species, which is generally multi-stemmed and sold by height or spread and measured in inches or feet, as normally will grow in the county. 
    Sight-Proof: Opaque, blocking clear view. 
    Small Engine Repair Shop: Shop for the repair of lawn mowers, chain saws, lawn equipment, and other machines with one-cylinder engines. 
    Small Wind Energy Systems: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion electronics which will be used to reduce on-site consumption of utility power. 
    Smelter or Refinery: A building or facility for the extraction of metals using heat, or the refining or processing of oil. 
    Smoke: The visible discharge of particulate matter from a chimney, vent or combustion process. 
    Stable, Boarding: A stable and related open pasture where horses, mules, and ponies are quartered for owners on a fee basis. 
    Stable, Commercial Rental: An establishment where horses, mules, or ponies are kept and rented to the general public for riding. 
    Stable, Private Club: A paddock, stable, and related riding and quartering facilities for horses owned by a specific number of recorded members and maintained for the exclusive use of such members and guests. 
    Stealth Facility: A wireless communication facility that is virtually unidentifiable to the surrounding area, which although present is camouflaged to conceal the presence of telecommunications equipment. Stealth facilities may replicate or duplicate the construction of common structures, such as clock towers, church steeples or flagpoles, so that they blend into the surrounding environment. 
    Story: That portion of a building (above grade), other than a basement, that is included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. 
    Story, Half: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the floor area is finished off for use. This definition does not include a half-story containing an independent apartment or self-contained living quarters. 
    Street: Any dedicated public or private thoroughfare (right-of-way), which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. A public street is termed a major thoroughfare or arterial when the right-of-way is greater than sixty (60) feet. 
    Street Intersection: Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground (also see definition of "Building"). 
    Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as load-bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
    Subdivision: A division or re-division of any tract of land situated within the City's corporate limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction into two (2) or more parts, lots or sites, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership, or building development. "Subdivision" includes re-subdivisions of land or lots which are part of a previously recorded subdivision, also known as "replats". 
    Swimming Pool, Commercial: A swimming pool with accessory facilities which is not part of the municipal or public recreational system and which is not a private swim club, but where the facilities are available for use by the general public for a fee and built in accordance with the City Code of Ordinances. 
    Swimming Pool, Private: A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a single-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling and located, fenced and built in accordance with the City Code of Ordinances. 
    Tattoo or Body Piercing Studio: A building or portion of a building used for selling and/or applying tattoos (by injecting dyes/inks into the skin), and/or for piercing the skin with needles, jewelry or other paraphernalia, primarily for the purpose of ornamentation of the human body. 
    Telephone Line and Exchange, Switching or Relay Station: A line for the transmission of telephone signals and a central office in which telephone lines are connected to permit communication but not including a business office, storage (inside or outside) or repair yards. 
    Temporary: Used or lasting for only a limited period of time; not permanent. 
    Temporary Building: A Temporary nonresidential prefabricated structure which is not originally manufactured or constructed at its use site, and requires the on-site installation of utilities and/or a foundation. 
    Temporary Field Office or Construction Yard or Office: A structure or shelter used in connection with a development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment. 
    Theater, Drive-In, Outdoor: An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. 
    Theater or Playhouse, Indoor: A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances. 
    Theater or Playhouse, Outdoor: An establishment for the performing arts with open-air seating for audiences. Such establishments may include related incidental services such as food and beverage sales and other concessions. 
    Thrift or Secondhand Store: An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of used clothing, household goods, furniture, or appliances. This classification does not include antique shops. 
    Tire Sales, Indoor without Outside Storage: A retail establishment engaged in the internal or indoor sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles, but without outside storage. 
    Tire Sales, Outdoor with Outside Storage: A retail establishment engaged in the external or outdoor sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles, with outside storage. 
    Tool and Machinery Rental: A building or a portion of a building used for the display and rental of tools, machinery and instruments and that may have outdoor storage. 
    Tower: Any columnar or spire structure used to support communications equipment or antennas. 
    Toxic and Noxious Matter: Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter which is present in sufficient quantities to endanger the health, safety and comfort of persons in the vicinity or which may cause injury or damage to property. 
    Tract: A single individual parcel or lot. 
    Tractor-Trailer: See "Heavy Load Vehicle". 
    Trailer, Hauling: A vehicle or device which is pulled behind an automobile or truck and which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
    Trailer, Travel or Camping: A portable or mobile living unit which is used for temporary human occupancy away from the users' permanent place of residence, which does not constitute the users' principal place of residence, and which is designed to be towed behind another vehicle. 
    Trailer Rental or Sales: An establishment providing the rental or sales of trailers (i.e., U-Haul). 
    Transportation and Utility Structures or Facilities: Permanent facilities and structures operated by companies engaged in providing transportation and utility services including but not limited to railroad track rights-of-way, sewage pumping stations, telephone exchanges, transit station turnarounds, water reservoirs and water pumping stations. 
    Tree: A plant having a permanently woody main stem or trunk, ordinarily growing to a considerable height, and usually developing branches at some distance from the ground. 
    Truck: A light or heavy load vehicle (see Light Load Vehicle and Heavy Load Vehicle). 
    Truck and Bus Repair: An establishment providing major and minor automotive repair services to heavy load vehicles. 
    Truck and Bus Leasing: The rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles or motor-driven buses in operable condition and where no repair work or intensive cleaning operations are performed. 
    Truck Stop: A facility designed for the parking, refueling and/or minor repair of heavy load tractor-trailer trucks. These facilities may also include retail sales of food and/or other items, restaurant(s), restroom/showers facilities, and/or temporary sleeping quarters. 
    Truck Terminal: An area and building where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractor and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis, and which may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment. 
    Use: The purposes for which land or buildings are or may be occupied in a zoning district. 
    Utility Distribution or Transmission Lines: Facilities which serve to distribute and transmit electrical power, gas and water, including but not limited to electrical transmission lines, gas transmission lines, telephone lines and metering stations, whether operated by the City or private utility company. 
    Variance: An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the Zoning Ordinance to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district, which may be granted by the City's Board of Adjustment. 
    Veterinarian Clinic: An establishment where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment (also see "Kennels") and that may have indoor and/or outdoor kennels or pens. 
    Vibration: A periodic displacement of the earth measured in inches. 
    Warehouse, Miniature or Self-Storage: Small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the storage of items, and does not include the conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units. 
    Warehouse, Storage and Distribution Center: Building or facility used for the storage and distribution of wholesale items/products. 
    Wastewater Treatment Plant: A facility designed for the collection, removal, treatment, and disposal of waterborne sewage generated within a given service area. 
    Wedding Chapel, Commercial: An establishment that primarily provides the facilities and services for weddings on a commercial basis. This definition does not include churches and similar congregations where weddings are an ancillary use. 
    Welding or Machine Shop: Shops where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and other wood- and metal-working machines are used such as blacksmith, tinsmith, welding, and sheet metal shops; plumbing, heating, and electrical repair shops; and overhaul shops. 
    Wholesale: The sale of goods in quantity, usually for resale. 
    Wine and vinous liquor: The product obtained from the alcoholic fermentation of juice of sound ripe grapes, fruits, berries, or honey, and includes wine coolers. 
    Wrecking or Salvage Yard: A lot upon which inoperable vehicles are located for the purpose of obtaining parts for recycling or resale, or the outdoor use of any lot for the sale, storage, display, dismantling, demolition, abandonment, or discarding of junk (see Junk). 
    Xeriscaping: Landscaping technique that reduces water consumption for supplementary watering and encourages the use of native plant species. 
    Yard: An open space at grade between the principal building(s) and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance. 
    Yard, Front: The open, unoccupied space located in front of the front elevation of the principal building(s), calculated as the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the front elevation of the principal building(s) (Figure 7. Front Yards). 

    Yard, Rear: The open, unoccupied space located behind the rear elevation of the principal building(s), calculated as the minimum horizontal distance between the rear property line and the rear elevation of the principal building(s) (Figure 8. Rear Yards). 

    Yard, Side: The open, unoccupied space located on either side of the principal building(s), calculated as the minimum horizontal distance between the side property line and the side elevation of the principal building(s) (Figure 9. Side Yards). 

    Zoning District: A designated area within the City for which boundaries have been established by the City and for which governing regulations, including without limitation, height, area, and use regulations, have been established for all properties located within the designated boundaries of the district. 
    Zoning District Map: The official map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of the Zoning Ordinance (See Section 1.4 Zoning District Map and Section 1.5 Zoning District Boundaries). 
(Ord. No. 2017-03-03,  2.01, 3-27-17) 
ARTICLE 4. - ZONING PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 

Section 4.1 - Nonconforming Uses and Structures 
4.1.1   Nonconformities
    Any lawful Use of a property or structure existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in this Ordinance shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use or structure. 
4.1.2   Nonconforming Uses
A.  If no structural alterations (except those required by law or ordinance) are made, a nonconforming use may be extended throughout a building. A Nonconforming Use of a building may not be changed to another Nonconforming Use of any kind. 
B.  The right of a Nonconforming Use to continue shall be subject to such regulations as to the maintenance of the premises and conditions of operation as the City may reasonably require for the protection of adjacent property. 
4.1.3   Nonconforming Structures
A.  A Nonconforming Structure may continue to be occupied and may be maintained, repaired, or altered provided such action does not create an additional nonconformity or increase the amount, size, or area of the existing nonconformity. 
B.  If fifty (50) percent or more of the improvement's appraised value, as determined by the most recent appraisal records of the Wise County Appraisal District, of a Nonconforming Structure is destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, then the Structure may be rebuilt only in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
C.  If less than fifty (50) percent of the improvement's appraised value, as determined by the most recent appraisal records of the Wise County Appraisal District, of a Nonconforming Structure is destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, then the Structure may be reconstructed as it was before the partial destruction but only to its original dimensions and floor area, and provided that such reconstruction is completed within one (1) year (i.e., three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days) following the event that caused the partial destruction. If reconstruction is delayed by contested insurance claims, litigation, or some other similar cause, then the one-year reconstruction period may be extended by the Board of Adjustment (BOA) for an additional one (1) year period following the conclusion of such delaying event. 
D.  Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the upgrading, strengthening, repair or maintenance of any part of any Structure, conforming or nonconforming, that is declared unsafe or uninhabitable by the Building Official, unless such repairs or maintenance equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the Structure's appraised value, as determined by the most recent appraisal records of the Wise County Appraisal District. 
4.1.4   Amortization of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
A.  Initiation of Compliance Case. Only the City Council, by majority vote, may request that the Board of Adjustment consider establishing a compliance date for a Nonconforming Use. 
B.  Public Hearing Process. Upon receiving a request from the City Council under A above, staff shall schedule the First Public Hearing before the BOA. The BOA may establish a compliance date only after holding two (2) separate public hearings. Each public hearing shall be at least thirty (30) days apart, but no more than ninety (90) days apart. 
(1)  First Public Hearing. The BOA shall hold a public hearing to determine whether continued operation of the Nonconforming Use will have an adverse effect on nearby properties. If, based on the evidence presented at the public hearing, the BOA determines that continued operation of the Use will have an adverse effect on nearby properties, it shall schedule a second public hearing to establish a compliance date for the Nonconforming Use; otherwise, it shall not. In determining whether the continued operation will have an adverse effect on nearby properties, the Board shall consider the following factors: 
(a)  The character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  The degree of incompatibility of the Use with the Zoning District in which it is located. 
(c)  The manner in which the Use is being conducted. 
(d)  The hours of operation of the Use. 
(e)  The extent to which continued operation of the Use may threaten public health or safety. 
(f)  The environmental impacts of the Use's operation, including but not limited to the impacts of noise, glare, dust, and odor. 
(g)  The extent to which public disturbances and nuisances may be created or perpetuated by continued operation of the Use. 
(h)  The extent to which traffic or parking problems may be created or perpetuated by continued operation of the Use. 
(i)  Any other factors the BOA in its discretion determines relevant to the issue of whether continued operation of the Use will adversely affect nearby properties. 
(2)  Second Public Hearing. 
(a)  At the second public hearing to set the date for compliance, the BOA shall, in accordance with the law, provide the compliance date for the Nonconforming Use under a plan whereby the owner's actual investment in the use before the time that the use became nonconforming, can be amortized. A definite time period shall be set. The following factors shall be considered by the BOA in determining a reasonable amortization period: 
(i)  The owner's capital investment in structures, fixed equipment, and other assets (excluding inventory and other assets that may be feasibly transferred to another site) located on the property before the time the use became nonconforming. 
(ii)  Any costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of a compliance date, including demolition expenses, relocation expenses, termination of leases, and discharge of mortgages. 
(iii)  Any return on investment since inception of the use, including net income and depreciation. 
(iv)  The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net income and depreciation. 
(v)  A reasonable wind-up period for the nonconforming use. 
(b)  If the BOA, at the first public hearing, requests financial documentation and/or records from the owner relating to the factors listed under (a) above, the owner shall provide said documents and/or records at least thirty (30) days before the second public hearing. If the owner does not provide the requested documentation, the BOA is authorized to make its determination of a compliance date based upon any reasonably available public records as well as public testimony at the hearing. Failure by owner to provide the requested financial documents and records shall not prevent the BOA from setting a compliance date. 
C.  Ceasing Operations. If the BOA establishes a compliance date for a Nonconforming Use, the Nonconforming Use shall cease operations on that date and it may not operate thereafter unless it becomes a conforming Use. 
D.  Finality of Decisions. 
(1)  Decisions that cannot be Immediately Appealed. A decision by the BOA that the continued operation of a Nonconforming Use shall have an adverse effect on neighboring property and the BOA's decision to schedule a second public hearing to establish a compliance date are not final decisions and cannot be immediately appealed. 
(2)  Decision to Deny a Request to Establish a Compliance Date. A decision by the City Council to deny a request to establish a compliance date is final unless appealed to state court within ten (10) calendar days in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(3)  Decision Setting a Compliance Date. A decision by the BOA setting a compliance date is final unless appealed to state court within ten (10) calendar days in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
4.1.5   Abandonment of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
A.  If a Nonconforming Use or Structure is abandoned as set forth in Subsection B of this Section, any future use of the premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, as amended, and with all other applicable City codes or ordinances that are in effect at the time the Use is resumed or the Structure is re-occupied. 
B.  A Nonconforming Use or Structure shall be deemed "abandoned" in the following circumstances, except as specifically provided otherwise in this Ordinance: 
(1)  The Use ceases to operate for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days; 
(2)  The Structure remains vacant for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days with all or some of the utilities disconnected, or with delinquent utility payments for all or some of the utilities; or 
(3)  In the case of a Temporary Building, the Temporary Building is moved from the premises for any length of time, except as provided herein. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Nonconforming Use or Structure shall not be deemed "abandoned" for a period of up to one (1) year on properties that are for sale or lease, provided the owner is actively promoting the sale or lease and there is evidence of continual use of signs, advertising or listings. 
D.  Normal cessation of a Use, or temporary discontinuance for purposes of maintenance and rebuilding after damage or destruction, as authorized in this Section, shall not be included in calculating the period of discontinuance. 
4.1.6   Moving of Nonconforming Structure or Building
    No Nonconforming Structure or Building shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, or to any other location or lot, unless every portion of such Nonconforming Structure or Building is in compliance with all the regulations of the zoning district wherein the Nonconforming Structure or Building is to be relocated. Such Nonconforming Structure or Building relocation shall conform to all applicable City codes or ordinances in effect at the time of relocation. 
4.1.7   Right to Proceed Preserved
    Nothing contained in this Section is intended to alter any rights that may have accrued to proceed under prior regulations, pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 43, or Chapter 245. 
Section 4.2 - Planning and Zoning Commission 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission is established in the City Charter, Chapter XI, Planning and Zoning. 
Section 4.3 - Board of Adjustment (BOA) 
    The Board of Adjustment or "BOA," is established in the City Charter, Chapter XI, Board of Adjustment (see Ordinance #2006-01-08). Pursuant to the Charter, the BOA has the authority set forth in the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and such other authority as provided by Ordinance. The BOA has such other authority as is specifically set forth in this Ordinance. 
4.3.1   Members, Terms of Office
A.  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) regular members, who shall be appointed by a simple majority vote of the City Council, and shall operate in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
B.  The City Council shall provide for the appointment of up to four (4) alternate members to serve in the absence of one (1) or more of the regular Board members on an alternating basis such that all alternate members have equal opportunities to serve on the BOA. The Planning Director shall determine which alternate will serve if an alternate is needed. 
C.  Regular BOA members and alternate members shall serve for a term of two (2) years, and expiration of terms shall be staggered so that an overlapping of terms occurs (for example, in any two-year period, the terms of two (2) regular members and at least one (1) alternate member shall expire during one of those years, and the terms of three (3) regular members and at least one (1) alternate member shall expire during the second year). 
D.  Any vacancy on the BOA (both regular and alternate members) shall be filled for the unexpired term via appointment by a simple majority vote of the City Council for the remainder of the term. 
E.  Members of the BOA, both regular and alternate, may be removed from office for cause as found by the City Council on a written charge, and after a public hearing, by a simple majority vote of the City Council. Failure to attend three (3) consecutive scheduled meetings shall be deemed as neglect and cause for removal from office, unless such absences were due to unusual circumstances beyond the member's control such as sickness of the member or someone within the member's immediate family. Absences may be excused by a simple majority vote of the Board or of the Council. 
F.  The members of the BOA (and alternate members, as needed) shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Board, shall serve without compensation at the pleasure of the Council, and shall not hold any other office or position with the City while serving on the BOA. 
G.  The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from among its membership, and each officer shall hold office for two (2) years or until replaced by a simple majority vote of the Board. The Planning Director's designee shall serve as Secretary to the Board of Adjustment, and shall keep minutes of all meetings held by the Board. Minutes shall indicate the vote of each member on each question, or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. All records and files herein provided for shall be official records of the City, and shall be filed in the BOA's office. 
H.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to make the rules, regulations and bylaws for its own governance, which shall conform as nearly as possible to those governing the City Council and the provisions of this Section. The Board's rules, regulations and bylaws shall be subject to approval by City Council. 
4.3.2   Meetings
    Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson or Planning Director and at such other times as the BOA may determine necessary. All meetings of the BOA shall be open to the public, and minutes shall be kept of all proceedings at BOA meetings. Four (4) members of the BOA shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The presiding officer or acting presiding officer may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
4.3.3   Authority of Board of Adjustment
A.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority, subject to the standards established in Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and those established herein, to exercise powers and to perform duties including the following: 
(1)  Appeals to Decisions. Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance in accordance with 4.3.5 Appeals to the Board of Adjustment; 
(2)  Variances and Special Exceptions. Authorize, in specific cases, a Variance or Special Exception (see 4.3.5 Appeals to the Board of Adjustment and 4.3.7 Special Exceptions) from the terms of this Ordinance if the variance or special exception is not contrary to the public interest and if, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done; and 
(3)  Reverse, Affirm, or Modify. In exercising its authority under this Section, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination, and for that purpose the Board has the same authority as the Planning Director. 
B.  The concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment is necessary to: 
(1)  Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official; 
(2)  Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the BOA is required to act under this Zoning Ordinance; 
(3)  Authorize a variance from a provision of this Zoning Ordinance; or 
(4)  Hear and decide special exceptions to a provision of this Zoning Ordinance (see 4.3.7 Special Exceptions). 
4.3.4   Limitations on Authority of Board of Adjustment
A.  Except as expressly provided in this Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment may not grant a variance authorizing a use other than those permitted in the Zoning District for which the variance is sought. 
B.  The Board of Adjustment shall have no power to grant or modify any Use provisions authorized under these regulations. 
C.  The Board of Adjustment shall have no power to grant a zoning amendment or change. 
4.3.5   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment
A.  Appeals Defined. An appeal refers to an allegation of error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance. Authority 
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify an administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and may correct the order, requirement, decision or determination. 
B.  Procedure for Appeal. 
(1)  Any of the following persons may appeal to the Board of Adjustment a decision made by an administrative official: 
(a)  A person directly aggrieved by the decision; or 
(b)  Any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City affected by the decision. 
(2)  A person appealing shall file with the Board of Adjustment and the official from whom the appeal is taken a written Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The Notice of Appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days after the decision has been rendered. Upon receiving the Notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers constituting the record of action that is appealed. There shall be no fee for the filing of an appeal. 
(3)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the Board of Adjustment facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the Board of Adjustment or a court of appropriate jurisdiction on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown. 
(4)  A person appealing may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. 
(5)  The BOA shall decide the appeal within ninety (90) calendar days after the date the written request (i.e., Notice of Appeal) is filed with the City. 
(6)  The person appealing shall bear the burden of proof to establish the basis for his/her appeal. 
4.3.6   Variances
A.  Variance Defined. A Variance is the authority to depart from the application of development standards such as dwelling unit size, setbacks, height, parking, and similar regulations to prevent unnecessary hardships. 
B.  Authority. 
(1)  The Board of Adjustment may authorize a Variance from the regulations of this Ordinance when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and that substantial justice may be done. 
(2)  In granting a Variance, the BOA shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary for, or desirable to, the public interest. 
C.  Criteria for Granting a Variance. 
(1)  Minutes. Findings of the Board of Adjustment, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the Board of Adjustment meeting at which such variance is granted. 
(2)  Findings of Undue Hardship. 
(a)  In order to grant a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall make findings that an undue hardship exists, using the following criteria: 
(i)  Literal enforcement of the controls will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in the development of the affected property; and 
(ii)  The situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor is it a situation generally affecting all or most properties in the same zoning district; and 
(iii)  The relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; and 
(iv)  The granting of a variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of these regulations. 
(b)  Financial hardship alone is not an "undue hardship" if the property can be used, meeting the requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(3)  Self-Inflicted Hardship. A variance shall not: 
(a)  Be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship; 
(b)  Be based solely upon economic gain or loss; 
(c)  Permit or allow any person a privilege or advantage in developing a parcel of land not permitted or allowed by this Ordinance to other parcels of land in the same particular zoning district; or 
(d)  Result in undue hardship upon another parcel of land. 
4.3.7   Special Exceptions
A.  Special Exception Defined. A Special Exception is differentiated from a variance because a Special Exception is a form of relief permitted expressly by this Ordinance under specified conditions, a finding of hardship is not required before it may be granted, and a Special Exception is only allowed for those circumstances and in those cases as set forth in C(2) and as otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance. 
B.  Authority. The Board of Adjustment is authorized to hear and decide a Special Exception to the zoning regulations which is not permitted by right in a particular Zoning District because of potential adverse effect, but which if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment. Special Exceptions may only be considered and granted by the BOA if expressly authorized by C(2), and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of this Ordinance. 
C.  Criteria for Granting a Special Exception. 
(1)  Requests for a Zoning Special Exception. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception in accordance with this Ordinance upon written request of the property owner. 
(b)  The Planning Director shall process and review special exception applications. 
(2)  Circumstances for which Special Exceptions are Authorized. When in the Board of Adjustment's judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially injured, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing and subject to conditions and safeguards as the BOA determines appropriate, authorize the following special exceptions to the regulations herein established: 
(a)  Nonconforming Uses or Structures. 
(i)  Permit the reconstruction or enlargement of a Nonconforming Structure or the expansion of a Nonconforming Use. Any enlargement of a Nonconforming Structure shall conform to the existing standards in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(ii)  Permit such modification of the height, yard, area, coverage and parking regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land which differs from other parcels in the district by being of such restricted area, shape, or slope that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification. 
(b)  Residential Setback Encroachments. For existing single-family residential and duplex (two-family) structures that were legally constructed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment may authorize a Special Exception for any Structure that was constructed over a setback line established by this Ordinance. 
(c)  Off-Street Parking Requirements. The Board of Adjustment may grant a Special Exception to the requirements of Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations of this Ordinance when the BOA determines: 
(i)  That the size and shape of the lot to be built on is such that off-street parking provisions could not be complied with, and the proposed use will not create undue traffic congestion in the adjacent streets, or 
(ii)  That the use can share parking with other adjacent uses upon provision of a shared parking study and a shared parking agreement. 
(d)  Fencing-Front and Side Building Lines. The Board of Adjustment may grant a Special Exception to allow fencing within a front or side Building Line under the following conditions: 
(i)  Requests for front and side yard fences that do not meet the requirements of Section 7.1 Area Regulations of this Ordinance. 
(ii)  If approved by the Board of Adjustment, any fencing must also meet the following conditions: 
  Regardless of the type or height of fence constructed pursuant to this subsection, access for public safety services shall be maintained. Owners assume all liability for any losses incurred when the responding public safety services remove any impediment (e.g., fencing, locks, chains, animals). 
  Fencing shall be structurally sound and kept in an attractive state and in good repair at all times. 
  Front yard fencing shall not be sight-proof either by construction or ornamentation and at all times shall allow clear vision while backing onto a street. 
  Fencing shall contain at least one (1) gate with an unobstructed clear width of three (3) feet at all times. If an archway is placed above the gate, then it shall retain a clearance of no less than seventy-eight (78) inches at all times. 
  If additional right-of-way or sight triangles are required by the City, the property owner shall dedicate these prior to issuance of a fence permit. 
  Fence gates shall be constructed in such a manner so as to avoid vehicles having to remain in the paved right-of-way while the gate is being opened and closed. 
  Fencing shall not obscure or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire connection. 
  Fencing shall not be located in the street right-of-way. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to determine the property boundaries. In the event the fence is constructed in the right-of-way, it shall be the property owner's responsibility to move the fence. 
  In the event there is not at least twelve (12) feet between the right-of-way line and the edge of paving, the fencing shall be set back at least twelve (12) feet from the edge of paving. 
(3)  Conditions Imposed. In granting Special Exceptions under this Section, the Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions as are necessary to protect adjacent property owners and to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare, including but not limited to conditions specifying the period during which a nonconforming use may continue to operate or exist before being brought into conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
4.3.8   Procedures for Variances and Special Exceptions
A.  Application and Fee. An application for a Variance or Special Exception to the Board of Adjustment shall be made in writing using forms prescribed by the City, and shall be accompanied by an application fee in accordance with the Council adopted fee schedule, a required plan, and any other additional information as may be requested in order to properly review the application. There is no filing fee for a Variance or Special Exception filed by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City affected by the decision. 
B.  Review and Report by the City. The Planning Director shall visit the site where the proposed Variance or Special Exception will apply and the surrounding area, and shall report his findings to the Board of Adjustment. 
C.  Notice and Public Hearing. 
(1)  The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing for consideration of the Variance or Special Exception request. 
(2)  Notice shall be published in the official local newspaper before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day prior to the public hearing. Written notice of the public hearing for a Variance or Special Exception shall also be sent to all owners of property, as indicated by the most recently approved City tax roll, that is located within the area of application and within two hundred (200) feet of any property affected thereby, said written notice to be sent before the tenth (10th) calendar day prior to the date such hearing is held. Such notice shall be served by using the last known address as listed on the most recently approved tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the regular United States mail. 
D.  Action by the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall not grant a Variance or Special Exception unless it finds, based upon compelling evidence provided by the applicant, that each of the conditions in Section 4.3 Board of Adjustment (BOA) has been satisfied. The Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions, limitations and safeguards as it deems appropriate upon the granting of any Variance or Special Exception as is necessary to protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare. Violation of any such condition, limitation or safeguard shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
E.  Burden of Proof. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof to establish the facts that justify a Variance, a Special Exception, an Appeal, or any other action in his/her favor by the BOA. 
F.  Waiting Period. No appeal to the BOA for the same or a related Variance or Special Exception on the same piece of property shall be allowed for a waiting period of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days following an unfavorable ruling by the BOA unless other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the one hundred eighty (180) calendar day waiting period, been changed or acted upon by the BOA or the City Council so as to alter the facts and conditions upon which the previous unfavorable BOA action was based. Such changes of circumstances shall permit the re-hearing of a Variance or Special Exception request by the BOA, but such circumstances shall in no way have any force in law to compel the BOA, after a hearing on the matter, to grant a subsequent Variance or Special Exception request. Any subsequent Variance or Special Exception request shall be considered entirely on its own merits and on the specific circumstances related to the subject property. 
G.  Timeliness of Application for Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy. After a favorable BOA action on a Variance or Special Exception request, the applicant shall apply for a building permit or a Certificate of Occupancy, as applicable to his/her particular situation, within 180 calendar days following the date of BOA action, unless the BOA specifies a longer time period in the minutes of its action. If the applicant fails to apply for a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy, as applicable, within the 180 calendar day time frame, then the Variance or Special Exception shall be deemed to have expired, and all rights thereunder shall be terminated. Such termination shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal, and such subsequent appeal shall be subject to the same regulations and requirements for hearing as herein specified for the original Variance or Special Exception request. 
4.3.9   Finality of Decisions, Judicial Review
A.  Final and Binding. All decisions of the Board of Adjustment are final and binding and may not be appealed to the City Council. 
B.  Petition. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Adjustment may present a verified petition to a court of appropriate jurisdiction that states that the decision of the BOA is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) calendar days after the date the BOA's decision is filed in the office of the Secretary to the BOA. Subject to the provisions of Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, only a court of appropriate jurisdiction may reverse, affirm or modify a decision of the Board of Adjustment. 
Section 4.4 - Amendments to Zoning Ordinance and Districts 
4.4.1   Declaration of Policy and Review Criteria
A.  The City declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development of land, buildings, and structures as a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community. Therefore, no change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts except: 
(1)  To correct any error in the regulations or map; 
(2)  To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality; 
(3)  To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or manner of conducting business; or 
(4)  To change the property to uses in accordance with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  In making a determination regarding a requested zoning change, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned, and their relationship to the general area and to the City as a whole; 
(2)  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area; 
(3)  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the City, and any special circumstances which may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development; 
(4)  The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change; 
(5)  How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are likely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved; 
(6)  Any other factors that will substantially affect the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare; and 
(7)  Whether the request is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
4.4.2   Application
A.  Consideration of a change or amendment in any Zoning District boundary line may be initiated only by the owner of the real property (or his/her authorized agent to affect a change to his/her property), by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or by the City Council on its own motion. 
B.  Consideration of an amendment to the provisions of this Ordinance may be initiated only by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by the City Council on its own motion. 
C.  Each application for zoning, rezoning, Specific Use Permit (SUP), Planned Development (PD), or for an amendment to a provision(s) of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be made in writing on an application form available in the Planning Director's office, and shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee as established by ordinance adopted by the City Council. 
D.  The Planning Director is hereby authorized to develop application forms requiring pertinent information from the applicant. During the review process, the Planning Director may require an applicant to provide such additional information and documentation necessary for a full review of the application. 
E.  The application shall be delivered to the City at least forty (40) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission for which consideration is requested by the applicant. 
F.  Payment of all delinquent taxes and City fees of any kind due and owing that are attributable to the subject property shall be required as set forth in Section 4.5.2B. as a condition precedent to submission of an application for zoning under this Article. 
4.4.3   Official Filing Date, Completeness of Application, Expiration of Application
    The following shall apply to any application, including without limitation Concept Plans and Site Plans submitted in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
A.  Official Filing Date. The time period established by state law or this Zoning Ordinance for processing or deciding an application shall commence on the official filing date. The official filing date for a required plan application is the date the application is received by the City. 
B.  Determination of Completeness. 
(1)  Every required plan application shall be subject to a determination of completeness within ten (10) business days by the Planning Director for processing the application. The determination of completeness shall be made in writing and provided to the applicant within ten (10) business days after the date the application is filed with the City. 
(2)  No required plan application shall be accepted by the Planning Director for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  The incompleteness of the required plan application shall be grounds for denial of the application. 
(4)  A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(5)  If the required plan application is determined to be complete, the application shall be acted upon in the proper manner as prescribed by this Zoning Ordinance. 
(6)  If the required plan application is determined to be incomplete, the notification shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state the date the application will expire in accordance with this Section if the documents or other information is not provided. 
(7)  A required plan application shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11th) business day after the application has been received if the applicant has not otherwise been notified in writing that the application is incomplete. 
C.  Expiration of Application. The required plan application shall expire on the forty-fifth (45th) calendar day after the date the application is filed with the City and shall be returned to the applicant if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's technical requirements relating to the form and content of the required plan application; 
(2)  The City provides to the applicant, not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date the application is filed, written notice of the failure that specifies the necessary documents or other information, and the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided; and 
(3)  The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the time provided in the notification. 
D.  If the required plan application is resubmitted after a notification of incompleteness, the timeframe for a determination of completeness described in this Section shall begin on the date of resubmission of the required plan application. 
4.4.4   Notice of Public Hearing
A.  Public Hearing for Zoning Changes Involving Real Property. 
(1)  For zoning and rezoning requests involving real property (including PD and SUP requests), the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall hold at least one public hearing on each zoning application, as required in Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(2)  Notice of the public hearing to occur before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City before the tenth (10th) calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(3)  Notice of the public hearing to occur before the City Council shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(4)  Written notice of the public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall also be sent to all owners of real property, as indicated by the most recently approved City tax roll, that is located within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed. Written notice shall be sent before the tenth (10th) calendar day before the hearing date. Such notice shall be served by using the last known address as listed on the most recently approved tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the regular United States mail. If written notice as required is not sent before the tenth (10th) calendar day prior to the date of the hearing, then the hearing must be delayed until this notice requirement is met. If the property within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change is proposed is located in territory annexed to the City and is not included on the most recently approved City tax roll, notice shall be given in the manner provided by this Section. 
B.  Public Hearing for Zoning Ordinance Amendments. For proposed amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the City before the tenth (10th) calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing. Notice of the City Council hearing shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the City before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing. Changes in the Ordinance which do not affect zoning district boundaries (i.e., which do not involve specific real property) do not require written notification to individual property owners. 
C.  Separate Public Hearings-Planning and Zoning Commission Public Hearing(s) and City Council Public Hearing(s). The City may, at its option, publish the required zoning change notifications in conformance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code for public hearings for the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council at the same time. Such notifications shall be published ten (10) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing and fifteen (15) days prior to the City Council public hearing. 
D.  Joint Public Hearings-Planning and Zoning Commission Public Hearing(s) and City Council Public Hearing(s). The City Council may hold a joint public hearing on a zoning, rezoning or Zoning Ordinance amendment request along with the Planning and Zoning Commission, but the City Council shall not take action on the request until it has received a final recommendation from the Commission. Notification for a joint public hearing shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the joint public hearing in the official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing. In accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, the City Council shall prescribe any other necessary methods of notification for joint public hearings. 
4.4.5   Failure to Appear
    Failure of the applicant or his/her authorized representative to appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council for more than one (1) hearing without an approved delay by the Planning Director shall constitute sufficient grounds for the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council to find that the applicant has withdrawn the application and take action to table or deny the application unless the Planning Director is notified in writing by the applicant at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the hearing. 
4.4.6   Commission Consideration and Recommendation
A.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall function in accordance with Section 4.2 Planning and Zoning Commission of this Ordinance and with applicable provisions in the City's Code of Ordinances, City Charter, and State law. 
B.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may, on its own motion or at the applicant's request, table its decision/recommendation for not more than sixty (60) calendar days from the time the public hearing was first opened. Such tabling shall specifically state the time period of the tabling by citing the meeting date whereon the request will reappear on the Commission's agenda, and further notice in the newspaper and to surrounding property owners shall not be required. 
C.  When the Commission is ready to act upon the zoning request, it may recommend approval of the request as it was submitted by the applicant, approval of the request subject to certain conditions, or disapproval of the request. The request shall then be forwarded to the City Council for public hearing. The Commission may recommend more restrictive conditions than were requested in the original application and included in the advertised and written notice. In no case, however, may a Use, area requirement or restriction that is considered less restrictive or a less restrictive Zoning District than was requested in the original application and included in the advertised and written notice be recommended. 
D.  If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of the zoning change request, it shall provide reasons to the applicant for the denial, if requested by the applicant. The Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson shall inform the applicant of the right to receive reasons for the denial. The recommendation of denial shall then be forwarded to the City Council for public hearing. 
4.4.7   City Council Authority and Consideration
A.  The City Council, after receiving a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and after public hearings required by law, may amend, supplement, or change the regulations of this Ordinance or the boundaries of the Zoning Districts on the Zoning Map in accordance with the parameters set forth in this Section. If the boundary is increased, a new public hearing shall be required. 
B.  After consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission, all zoning applications shall be automatically forwarded to the City Council for a public hearing following appropriate public hearing notification as prescribed in this Section. 
C.  After a public hearing is held before the City Council regarding the zoning application, the City Council may: 
(1)  Approve the request in whole or in part; 
(2)  Modify and approve the request to any more restrictive conditions than were requested in the original application and included in the advertised and written notice. In no case, however, may a proposed Zoning District boundary be increased, or may a use, area requirement or restriction that is considered less restrictive or a less restrictive Zoning District than was requested in the original application and included in the advertised and written notice be approved; 
(3)  Deny the request in whole or in part; or 
(4)  Table the application to a future meeting. 
D.  For zoning and rezoning requests involving real property (including PD and SUP requests), a favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council shall be required to approve any change in zoning when a written protest signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of either (1) the area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change; or (2) the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending two hundred (200) feet from the area, has been filed with the City Secretary, and meets all requirements of Section 211 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
E.  A vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council is required to overrule a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission that a proposed change to a regulation or boundary be denied. 
4.4.8   Administration and Enforcement
A.  Authority to Enforce the Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Director shall be authorized by the City Council to administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the Planning Director finds upon observation or knowledge, or upon receipt of a complaint, that the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall have the authority to immediately investigate or to order the investigation of, and when necessary, give written notice or require that written notice be given to the person(s) responsible to cease or correct such violation(s) immediately or within a time frame required by ordinance or State law. Notice may be delivered in person, by certified mail, or by another means of written communication to the owner, occupant, or other person in control or possession of the property where the violation is occurring. The Planning Director shall have the right to enter upon any business premises during regular business hours for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises that may be necessary to carry out the duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance. The Planning Director shall request permission of a residence owner or person having control of a residence to enter upon residential premises for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises that may be necessary to carry out the duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance. If the owner of a residence or person in control of a residence refuses permission to make such inspection or if an inspection of a business is needed after hours or while not open to the public, then appropriate City Staff may work with the City Attorney to obtain a warrant or other legal authorization to make such inspections. 
B.  Stop Work Orders. Whenever any building or construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, the Planning Director shall have the authority to order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the property owner or on the contractor doing the work or causing such work to be done, or by posting notice on the construction site itself. Upon such notice, all such work shall stop until authorized in writing by the City to proceed with such work. Failure to immediately stop work as provided herein shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance, subject to all penalties allowed by this Ordinance and State law. 
4.4.9   Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses
A.  Action Dependent on Fees Paid. Until all applicable taxes, application fees, charges and review expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any zoning, rezoning or development application or on any appeal. 
B.  Fee Schedule. The City Council shall determine and adopt fees that it determines reasonable and necessary as a result of the costs of administering the provision of this Zoning Ordinance. The amount and nature of the fees and costs assessed shall be at the discretion of the City Council and established by separate ordinance. 
Section 4.5 - Building Permits, Certificates of Occupancy and Completion 
4.5.1   Building Permits Required
    No Building or other Structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by the Building Official. A building permit shall not be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Adjustment in the form of a Variance or as otherwise provided in this Ordinance. Subject to the foregoing, a building permit shall not be issued until the property is properly zoned for the intended use, the property is platted in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance, all appropriate plans have been approved by the City, all applicable ordinances have been met, and all fees have been paid. 
4.5.2   General Requirements
A.  Required Site Plan. 
(1)  Applicability. Submission and approval of a Site Plan shall be required for all development within all Zoning Districts and in accordance with all applicable City ordinances. An application for approval of a Site Plan may be submitted by the owner of real property or a designated representative (hereinafter "Applicant"). 
(2)  Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy. 
(a)  Building Permit Issuance. Site Plans shall be submitted in conjunction with a building permit application. The City shall not issue a building permit until a Site Plan, , and all other required engineering/construction plans are first approved by the City. 
(b)  Certificate of Occupancy Issuance. The City shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy until all construction and development conforms to the Site Plan and engineering/construction plans, as approved by the City. 
(c)  Payment of Taxes and Fees. All required taxes and fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy. 
(3)  Extent of Area that should be Included within a Site Plan. When the overall development project is to be developed in phases, the area included within the Site Plan shall include only the portion of the overall property that is to be developed/constructed for the phase submitted for review and approval. 
(4)  Procedures and Submission Requirements for Site Plan Approval. All Site Plans shall be prepared in accordance with the adopted building codes by a qualified civil engineer, land planner, architect and/or surveyor, if required, and shall clearly show in detail how the site will be constructed, including without limitation, paving, buildings, landscaped areas, and utilities. To ensure the submission of adequate information, the City is hereby empowered to adopt, maintain and distribute a separate list of specific requirements that are necessary for an Applicant to submit in order for the City to review an application for compliance with this Ordinance as well as other local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(5)  Review and Approval of a Site Plan. 
(a)  City Staff Review and Approval of Site Plans. 
(i)  Upon official submission of an application for Site Plan approval, the City shall review the application. Specifically, the Planning Director, City Engineer, Fire Marshal, and Building Official, as well as other City staff members deemed appropriate by the Planning Director shall review the Site Plan. Determination of application completeness, notice in writing to applicant of missing documents and information shall be in accordance with this Section. 
(ii)  Site Plans shall be evaluated to ensure that all developments are, to the best extent possible, constructed according to the City's codes and ordinances. 
(iii)  Following City staff review, the Planning Director shall approve, approve subject to certain conditions, or deny approval of the Site Plan. 
(b)  Site Plan Appeal Process. 
(i)  An applicant may appeal the denial or the conditional approval of a Site Plan by the Planning Director to the Planning and Zoning Commission by filing a written notice of appeal. Such written notice shall be filed in the office of the Planning Director no later than ten (10) calendar days after the date upon which the Site Plan was denied or conditionally approved. Appeals of denials of related permits for failure to meet the regulations contained in the adopted building, fire, or other codes shall be processed in accordance with the procedures contained in those codes. 
(ii)  The notice of appeal shall set forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the appeal. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider and make a determination on the appeal at a public meeting held no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the date upon which the notice of appeal was filed in the office of the Planning Director. 
(iii)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may affirm, deny or amend the decision of the Planning Director by a simple majority vote. 
(iv)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may also, where appropriate, remand the Site Plan application back to the Planning Director for reconsideration if it believes that there is a compelling reason to do so (such as the introduction of significant new facts or testimony, etc.). 
(6)  Amendments/Modifications to the Approved Site Plan. 
(a)  Amendments/Modifications. It is recognized that final architectural and engineering design may necessitate changes in the approved Site Plan. Upon official re-submission of a complete application, the City shall review the application. Specifically, the Planning Director, City Engineer, Fire Marshal, and/or Building Official, as well as other City staff members deemed appropriate by the Planning Director, shall review the amended/modified Site Plan. Following City staff review, the Planning Director shall have the authority to approve amendments/modifications to an approved Site Plan (except for Site Plans/Concept Plans pertaining to Planned Development Districts). 
(b)  Appeal Process for Site Plan Amendment/Modifications. An applicant may appeal the denial or the conditional approval of a Site Plan Amendment/Modification in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section. 
(7)  Effect of Review/Approval. Upon approval of a Site Plan or a Site Plan Amendment/Modification , building permits may be issued and shall be considered authorization to proceed with construction of the site provided all other required City approvals are obtained (such as final plat, engineering plans, etc.), and all applicable taxes and fees are paid pursuant to this Section. 
(8)  Validity, Expiration, and Reinstatement of Site Plan or Site Plan Amendment/ Modification. Validity, expiration, and reinstatement of Site Plan or Site Plan Amendment/ Modification shall be governed by the regulations contained in Section 2.3 Vested Rights and Review Procedure of this Ordinance in accordance with State law. 
B.  Payment of all Indebtedness Attributable to the Subject Property. No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent assessments, or any other fees, delinquent debts or obligations or who is otherwise indebted to the City, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property shall be allowed to submit any application for any type of rezoning, building permit, or plan review for that property until an arrangement satisfactory to the City has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, fees, etc. have been paid, or that other arrangements satisfactory to the City have been made for payment of all obligations. 
C.  Submission and Review of Applications. All applications shall be submitted, reviewed for completeness and approved in accordance with provisions in this Section. 
D.  Supplemental Requirements. The City's staff may require other information and data for specific required plans. 
4.5.3   Revocation or Expiration of Building Permit
    Failure of Permit Holder or any of his agents, representatives or contractors to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, use or maintain any Building, Structure or Premises in conformance with the approved plans upon which a building permit was issued when (1) such failure constitutes a violation of any provision of this Ordinance and (2) Applicant fails to make corrections upon proper notice, shall render such building permit voidable. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to revoke any such permit by giving written notice of such revocation to the Permit Holder or his agent or representative. Upon such notice of revocation, all use or work upon such Building, Structure or Premises shall be immediately discontinued until such Building, Structure or Premises shall be brought into conformance with the approved plans and with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. Expiration of building permits shall be in accordance with the City's Building Codes. 
4.5.4   Certificate of Occupancy
A.  Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be made to the Building Official. If the proposed Use is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable City ordinances, the Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued after the application for same has been made, all fees paid, and all required inspections are completed and approved by the Building Official. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for each of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and Use of a nonresidential Building hereafter erected or structurally altered; 
(2)  A change in Use of an existing Building to a Use of a different classification. 
(3)  A change in business name, business owner, tenant or property owner. 
B.  No such Use, or change of Use, shall take place until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Official. The application fee(s) for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be as set forth by ordinance of the City Council. 
C.  A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the Building Official's office. 
D.  Procedure for New or Altered Buildings. Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a new Building or for an existing Building which is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such Building. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued after the Building Official orders the Building or Structure inspected and finds no violations of the provisions of this Ordinance or other applicable regulations. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official after the erection or alteration of a Building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with this Ordinance and all applicable laws and regulations. 
E.  Contents of Certificate of Occupancy. Every Certificate of Occupancy shall contain the following: 
(1)  The Building permit number; 
(2)  The address of the Building; 
(3)  The name and address of the owner; 
(4)  A description of that portion of the Building for which the Certificate of Occupancy is issued; 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the Building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the City's Building Codes for the Occupancy and division of Occupancy, and for the Use which the proposed occupancy is classified; 
(6)  The name of the Building Official (or designee); 
(7)  The edition of the Building Code under which the permit and occupancy are issued; 
(8)  The Use(s) and Occupancy allowed; 
(9)  If an automated sprinkler system is provided and whether the sprinkler system is required; 
(10)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit; 
(11)  The maximum number of persons/occupants; and 
(12)  The issue date of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
F.  Posting of Certificate of Occupancy. The Certificate of Occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises on a location approved by the Building Official and shall not be removed except by the Building Official. 
G.  Revocation of Certificate of Occupancy. The Building Official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a Certificate of Occupancy issued under the provisions of this Ordinance whenever the Certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the Building, Structure, or land, or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the building code and other codes adopted by the City, and any amendments thereto. 
H.  Improvements across Property Lines. 
(1)  Common Land Ownership. In cases of common land ownership when the City determines that replatting is not appropriate, the construction of improvements (e.g., parking, fire lanes, retention ponds) may be authorized by the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council to extend across property lines of land under common ownership and an easement is granted on the adjacent property where the construction of utilities is proposed. 
(2)  Revocation or Certificate of Occupancy or Review of Parking Requirements. The City is authorized to revoke a Certificate of Occupancy or review parking requirements in the event that one of the parcels is sold to a different owner. 
4.5.5   Completion of Buildings in Progress
    Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated Use of a Building, the foundation for which has been completely constructed as of the effective date of this Ordinance, and the remaining construction of which shall have been completed within one (1) year (i.e., three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days) following the effective date of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 5. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 5.1 - Zoning Districts Established 
    The City is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. The Use, height, area regulations, and other standards, as set out herein apply to each district. The districts established herein shall be known as: 
5.1.1   Established Districts
Table 1. Zoning Districts 
Primarily Residential Districts SF-1, Single-Family Residential District SF-2, Single-Family Residential District TH, Townhouse Residential District 2F, Two-Family Residential District MF, Multiple-Family Residential District MHD, Manufactured Home District Primarily Nonresidential Districts C-O, Office District C-1, Restricted Business District C-1A, Decatur Square Business District C-2, Thoroughfare Business District LI, Light Industrial District HI, Heavy Industrial District Special Districts CD, Convention Overlay District H, Historic Overlay District BC, Business Corridor Overlay District PD, Planned Development District SUP, Specific Use Permit  
5.1.2   SF-1, Single-Family Residential District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-1, Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide for development of primarily detached single family residences for the purpose of large lot subdivisions of one-half (1/2) acre or greater and for lots in residential areas that are rural in nature. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. Two and one-half (21/2) stories (see 7.1.1D. Height Regulations for additional height requirements). 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Thirty feet (30'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Five feet (5') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, but not to exceed fifteen feet (15'). 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Fifteen feet (15'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: One-Family Dwelling Detached: One-half (1/2) acre (twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet). 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: One-Family Dwelling Detached: One hundred feet (100'). 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: One-Family Dwelling Detached: One hundred feet (100'). 
(3)  Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit: Fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet. 
(4)  Maximum Lot Coverage: Twenty-five percent (25%), including main Structure and Accessory Buildings. 
(5)  Parking Regulations: 
(a)  A minimum of two (2) enclosed off-street parking spaces are required behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure. 
(b)  See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for additional requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. 
(1)  Recreational vehicles, travel trailer or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
(2)  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on parcels of one (1) or more acres. 
(3)  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, etc.). 
(4)  Single-family homes with side entry garages where lot frontage is only to one (1) street shall have minimum of thirty feet (30') from the door face of the garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. 
(5)  The elimination of a garage space by replacing a garage door with a building wall shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Site plan approval in accordance with 4.5.2A. Required Site Plan shall be required for all allowed non-residential uses (e.g., school, church, child care center). 
(7)  Other regulations as established in Article 7. Development Standards. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  No retail or wholesale sales activity shall be conducted. 
(2)  No activity shall be conducted that causes or creates abnormal noise, smoke, dust, obvious gases, odor, vibrations, electrical interference or radiation beyond the property line. 
5.1.3   SF-2, Single-Family Residential District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-2, Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide for development of primarily detached single-family residences on lots of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Two and one-half (21/2) stories (see 7.1.1D. Height Regulations for additional height requirements). 
(2)  Roof Projections, including without limitation, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks, water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires may extend for an additional height not to exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof line. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Five feet (5') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, but not to exceed fifteen feet (15'). 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: One-Family Dwelling Detached: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: One-Family Dwelling Detached: Fifty feet (50'). 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: One-Family Dwelling Detached: Seventy feet (70'). 
(3)  Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit: One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(4)  Maximum Lot Coverage: Thirty-five percent (35%). 
(5)  Parking Regulations: 
(a)  A minimum of two (2) enclosed off-street parking spaces are required behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure. 
(b)  See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for additional requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. 
(1)  Recreational vehicles, travel trailer or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
(2)  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on parcels of one (1) or more acres. 
(3)  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, etc.) 
(4)  Single-family homes with side entry garages where lot frontage is only to one street shall have minimum of thirty feet (30') from the door face of the garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. 
(5)  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Site plan approval in accordance with 4.5.2A. Required Site Plan shall be required for all allowed non-residential uses (e.g., school, church, child care center). 
(7)  Other regulations as established in Article 7. Development Standards. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  No retail or wholesale sales activity shall be conducted. 
(2)  No activity shall be conducted that causes or creates abnormal noise, smoke, dust, obvious gases, odor, vibrations, electrical interference or radiation beyond the property line. 
5.1.4   TH, Townhouse Residential District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The TH, Townhouse Residential District is intended to provide for the development of primarily detached single-family residences on lots of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size, or attached single-family residences on lots of not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per dwelling unit in size. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Three and one-half (31/2) stories, not to exceed forty-five feet (45') (see 7.1.1D. Height Regulations for additional height requirements). 
(2)  All other detached buildings, including detached living units, shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or 35' in height. 
(3)  Roof Projections, including without limitation, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks, water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires may extend for an additional height not to exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof line. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Five feet (5') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, but not to exceed fifteen feet (15'). 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: See 7.1.1F(8). 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width per Dwelling Unit: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Fifty feet (50'). 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Twenty feet (20'). 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: One hundred feet (100'). 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: One hundred feet (100'). 
(3)  Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit: 
(a)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: One thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. 
(b)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: One thousand four hundred fifty (1,450) square feet. 
(4)  Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy percent (70%). 
(5)  Parking Regulations: 
(a)  A minimum of two (2) enclosed off-street parking spaces are required behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure. 
(b)  See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for additional requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. 
(1)  One-Family Detached structures located within this District shall comply with all regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling structures located in the SF-2, Single-Family Residential District. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  No retail or wholesale sales activity shall be conducted. 
(2)  No activity shall be conducted that causes or creates abnormal noise, smoke, dust, obvious gases, odor, vibrations, electrical interference or radiation beyond the property line. 
5.1.5   2F, Two-Family Residential District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The 2F, Two-Family Residential District is intended to provide for the development of primarily duplex style two-family housing, as well as some townhomes and single family dwellings. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Two (2) stories (see 7.1.1D. Height Regulations for additional height requirements). 
(2)  Maximum allowed height of a Single Family Detached dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for One-Family Detached dwelling structures located in the SF-2, Single-Family Residential District. 
(3)  Maximum allowed height of a Single Family Attached dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for One-Family Attached Dwelling structures located in the TH, Townhouse Residential District. 
(4)  Roof Projections, including without limitation, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks, water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires may extend for an additional height not to exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof line. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Five feet (5') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, but not to exceed fifteen feet (15'). 
(c)  Minimum Side Yard One-Family Dwelling Attached: Shall comply with the side yard regulations for One-Family Attached Dwelling structures located in the TH, Townhouse Residential District. 
(d)  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(iii)  Two-Family Dwelling: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width per Dwelling Unit: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Seventy feet (70'). 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Thirty-five feet (35'). 
(iii)  Two-Family Dwelling: Seventy feet (70'). 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Seventy feet (70'). 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Seventy feet (70'). 
(iii)  Two-Family Dwelling: Seventy feet (70'). 
(3)  Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit: 
(a)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(b)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: One thousand four hundred fifty (1,450) square feet. 
(c)  Two-Family Dwelling: Six hundred (600) square feet, plus an additional two hundred (200) square feet per additional bedroom. 
(4)  Maximum Lot Coverage: Forty percent (40%). 
(a)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Thirty-five percent (35%). 
(b)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Seventy percent (70%). 
(c)  Two-Family Dwelling: Forty percent (40%). 
(5)  Parking Regulations: 
(a)  A minimum of two (2) enclosed off-street parking spaces are required behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure. 
(b)  See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for additional requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. One-Family Detached and One-Family Attached structures located within this District shall comply with all regulations for One-Family Detached and One-Family Attached Dwelling structures located in the applicable SF-2, Single-Family Residential District or TH, Townhouse Residential District. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  No retail or wholesale sales activity shall be conducted. 
(2)  No activity shall be conducted that causes or creates abnormal noise, smoke, dust, obvious gases, odor, vibrations, electrical interference or radiation beyond the property line. 
5.1.6   MF, Multiple-Family Residential District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The MF, Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to provide for development of Multi-Family Dwellings, Single Family Attached Dwellings, Single Family Detached Dwellings, and Two Family Dwellings. This District serves as a buffer between nonresidential development or heavy automobile traffic and a medium or low density residential development. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Maximum allowed height for multi-family structures shall be the lesser of forty-five feet (45') or three (3) stories, provided that one (1) additional foot for a third story shall be added to the width and depth of side and rear yards when the multi-family use abuts a nonresidential use. 
(2)  Maximum allowed height for Accessory Structures in this District shall be the lesser of fifteen feet (15') or one (1) story. 
(3)  Maximum allowed height of a Single Family Detached dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling structures located in the SF-2, Single-Family Residential District. 
(4)  Maximum allowed height of a Single Family Attached dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for One-Family Attached Dwelling structures located in the TH, Townhouse Residential District. 
(5)  Maximum allowed height of a Two-Family dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for Two-Family Dwelling structures located in the 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
(6)  Roof Projections, including without limitation, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks, water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires may extend for an additional height not to exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof line. 
(7)  See 7.1.1D. Height Regulations for additional height requirements. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Five feet (5') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, but not to exceed fifteen feet (15'). 
(i)  When adjacent to a Residential Use, the side yard shall be a minimum of sixty feet (60'). 
(ii)  Interior building separation is regulated by E(2) below. 
(c)  Minimum Side Yard One-Family Dwelling Detached: Shall comply with the side yard regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling structures located in the SF-2, Single-Family Residential District. 
(d)  Minimum Side Yard One-Family Dwelling Attached: Shall comply with the side yard regulations for One-Family Attached Dwelling structures located in the TH, Townhouse Residential District. 
(e)  Minimum Side Yard Two-Family Dwelling: Shall comply with the side yard regulations for Two-Family Dwelling structures located in the 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
(f)  Minimum Rear Yard: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Ten feet (10'). 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Ten feet (10'). 
(iii)  Two-Family Dwelling: Ten feet (10'). 
(iv)  Multi-Family: Fifteen feet (15'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(iii)  Two-Family Dwelling: Three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750) square feet. 
(iv)  Multi-Family Two Stories: Two thousand one hundred (2,100) square feet per unit. 
(v)  For each Additional Unit on each Additional Story over Two: Six hundred (600) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width per Dwelling Unit. 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Fifty feet (50') per Dwelling Unit. 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Thirty-five feet (35') per Dwelling Unit. 
(iii)  Two-Family Dwelling: Thirty-five feet (35') per Dwelling Unit. 
(iv)  Multi-Family: Seventy feet (70'). 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Seventy feet (70'). 
(ii)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Seventy feet (70'). 
(iii)  Two-Family Dwelling: Seventy feet (70'). 
(iv)  Multi-Family: One hundred feet (100'). 
(3)  Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit. 
(a)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(b)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: One thousand four hundred fifty (1,450) square feet. 
(c)  Two-Family Dwelling: Six hundred (600) square feet, plus an additional two hundred (200) square feet per additional bedroom. 
(d)  Multi-Family: Six hundred (600) square feet, plus an additional one hundred fifty (150) square feet per additional bedroom. 
(4)  Maximum Lot Coverage. 
(a)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Thirty-five percent (35%). 
(b)  One-Family Dwelling Attached: Seventy percent (70%). 
(c)  Two-Family Dwelling: Forty percent (40%). 
(d)  Multi-Family: Fifty percent (50%). 
(5)  Parking Regulations: See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. 
(1)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 4:1. 
(2)  Building Separation: A minimum separation of fifteen feet (15') shall be required between one-story buildings. A minimum separation of twenty feet (20') shall be required for a two-story building adjacent to a one-story building. A minimum separation of twenty-five feet (25') shall be required for a three-story building adjacent to a one-story, two-story or three-story building. 
(3)  Maximum Density: Twenty-one (21) dwelling units per acre. 
(4)  Where Inner Courts exist, the faces of all opposite walls in such Courts shall be a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet apart, and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such Court area for a distance greater than five (5) feet or one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the Court width. 
(5)  No parking area, storage area, or required open space for one Building shall be computed as being the open space, yard or area requirements for any other dwelling or other use. 
(6)  No single wall or side of any Multiple Family Dwelling Structure shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in length and space shall be provided between all structures per (2) above to assure reasonable access for fire-fighting equipment. 
(7)  No single structure designed or erected for Multiple Family occupancy shall contain more than six thousand (6,000) square feet per floor, and each structure shall be spaced in relation to other structures and provide the required yards and open space as required by the City of Decatur, Texas Design Standards, and other applicable City ordinances. 
(8)  No balcony or porch, or any portion of the Building may extend into a required side yard, except that a roof may overhang such side yard not to exceed four (4) feet. 
(9)  The front door of each Dwelling Unit shall be no more than one-hundred-fifty (150) feet from a fire lane (measured by an unobstructed pathway, or route, for fire hoses). 
(10)  Boats, campers, trailers, and other recreational vehicles shall be prohibited unless oversize parking areas are provided as part of the approved Site Plan. This parking area shall not be used to meet the minimum parking requirements and shall not be visible from a public street. 
(11)  Recreational vehicles, travel trailer or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
(12)  Open storage is prohibited. 
(13)  Accessory Structures shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.6 Accessory Structure Regulations. 
(14)  Site plan approval in accordance with Subsection 4.5.2A shall be required for all allowed non-residential uses (e.g., school, church, child care center). 
(15)  One-Family Detached, One-Family Attached, and Two-Family structures located within this District shall comply with all regulations for One-Family Detached, One-Family Attached, and Two-Family Dwelling structures located in the applicable SF-2, Single-Family Residential District, TH, Townhouse Residential District, or 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
(16)  Other regulations as established in Article 7. Development Standards. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  No retail or wholesale sales activity shall be conducted. 
(2)  No activity shall be conducted that causes or creates abnormal noise, smoke, dust, obvious gases, odor, vibrations, electrical interference or radiation beyond the property line. 
5.1.7   MHD, Manufactured Home District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The MHD, Manufactured Home District is intended to provide for the placement of HUD-Code Manufactured Homes on approved lots. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Two (2) stories for permanent buildings. 
(2)  Twenty feet (20') in height maximum for all manufactured homes. 
(3)  The average height of the structure's frame above ground elevation, measured at ninety (90) degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet (3'). 
(4)  Maximum allowed height of a Single Family Detached dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling structures located in the SF-2, Single-Family Residential District. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Five feet (5') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, but not to exceed fifteen feet (15'). 
(i)  Where the MHD, Manufactured Home District abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum ten (10) foot side yard shall be provided on the adjacent to the Residential District. 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Fifteen feet (15'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(ii)  Manufactured Home Dwelling: Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Fifty feet (50'). 
(ii)  Manufactured Home Dwelling: Forty feet (40'). 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 
(i)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Seventy feet (70'). 
(ii)  Manufactured Home Dwelling: Seventy feet (70'). 
(3)  Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit: 
(a)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(b)  Manufactured Home Dwelling: One thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. 
(4)  Maximum Lot Coverage: 
(a)  One-Family Dwelling Detached: Thirty-five percent (35%). 
(b)  Manufactured Home Dwelling: Sixty percent (60%). 
(5)  Parking Regulations: 
(a)  A minimum of two (2) enclosed off-street parking spaces are required behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure. 
(b)  See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for additional requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. 
(1)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for the MHD, Manufactured Home District: 1:2. 
(2)  One-Family Detached Dwellings shall comply with all regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling structures in the SF-2, Single-Family Residential District. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  No retail or wholesale sales activity shall be conducted. 
(2)  No activity shall be conducted that causes or creates abnormal noise, smoke, dust, obvious gases, odor, vibrations, electrical interference or radiation beyond the property line. 
5.1.8   C-O, Office District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The C-O, Office District is intended to provide for the development of primarily a professional or administrative office buildings. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Three (3) stories. 
(2)  Roof Projections, including without limitation, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks, water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires may extend for an additional height not to exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof line. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Zero feet (0'). 
(i)  Where a commercial, retail, or other nonresidential use abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum ten (10) foot side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to the Residential District. 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: N/A. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: N/A. 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: N/A. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 1:2. 
(4)  Parking Regulations: See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. N/A. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  No exchange of goods or sales shall be conducted on the property other than that associated with snack bars, cigar stands and other similar incidental activities. 
(2)  No merchandise other than samples shall be displayed, and all merchandise shall be stored and displayed within a building and not visible from outside of the building. 
5.1.9   C-1, Restricted Business District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The C-1, Restricted Business District is intended to provide for the development of primarily low-intensity retail and service uses usually near existing residential areas. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Maximum allowed height for all nonresidential structures shall be three (3) stories. 
(2)  Maximum allowed height of a Single Family Detached dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling structures located in the SF-2, Single-Family Residential District. 
(3)  Maximum allowed height of a Single Family Attached dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for One-Family Attached Dwelling structures located in the TH, Townhouse Residential District. 
(4)  Maximum allowed height of a Two Family dwelling shall comply with the height regulations for Two-Family Dwelling structures located in the 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Zero feet (0'). 
(i)  Where a commercial, retail, or other nonresidential use abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum ten (10) foot side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to the Residential District. 
(c)  Minimum Side Yard for residential dwelling structures shall comply with the side yard regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling, One-Family Attached Dwelling, and Two Family Dwelling structures located in the applicable SF-2, Single-Family Residential District, TH, Townhouse Residential District, or 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
(d)  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: 
(i)  Minimum Lot Area for residential dwelling structures shall comply with the lot area regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling, One-Family Attached Dwelling, and Two Family Dwelling structures located in the applicable SF-2, Single-Family Residential District, TH, Townhouse Residential District, or 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
(ii)  Minimum Lot Area for nonresidential structures: N/A. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: 
(i)  Minimum Lot Width for residential dwelling structures shall comply with the lot area regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling, One-Family Attached Dwelling, and Two Family Dwelling structures located in the applicable SF-2, Single-Family Residential District, TH, Townhouse Residential District, or 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
(ii)  Minimum Lot Width for nonresidential structures: N/A. 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: N/A. 
(i)  Minimum Lot Depth for residential dwelling structures shall comply with the lot area regulations for One-Family Detached Dwelling, One-Family Attached Dwelling, and Two Family Dwelling structures located in the applicable SF-2, Single-Family Residential District, TH, Townhouse Residential District, or 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
(ii)  Minimum Lot Depth for nonresidential structures: N/A. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for nonresidential structures: 1:2. 
(4)  Parking Regulations: See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. Residential dwelling structures shall comply with all regulations for One-Family Detached, One-Family Attached, and Two-Family Dwelling structures located in the applicable SF-2, Single-Family Residential District, TH, Townhouse Residential District, or 2F, Two-Family Residential District. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  No wholesale sales shall be conducted in the C-1, Restricted Business District. 
(2)  No merchandise or equipment shall be stored or displayed outside of a building. 
(3)  In the C-1, Restricted Business District, all products shall be sold and all services rendered inside a building, except that banks and savings and loan establishments may have drive-up service. 
(4)  No noise, smoke, radiation, vibration or concussion, heat or glare shall be produced that is perceptible outside of a building and no dust, fly ash or gas that is toxic, caustic or obviously injurious to humans or property shall be produced. 
5.1.10   C-1A, Decatur Square Business District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The C-1A, Decatur Square Business District is intended to provide for and strengthen the development of the mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented nature of the existing nine-block historic downtown area that surrounds the courthouse. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Three (3) stories. 
(2)  Roof Projections, including without limitation, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks, water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires may extend for an additional height not to exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof line. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Zero feet (0'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Zero feet (0'). 
(i)  Where a commercial, retail, or other nonresidential use abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum ten (10) foot side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to the Residential District. 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Zero feet (0'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: N/A. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: N/A. 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: N/A. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 2:1. 
(4)  Parking Regulations: See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. Residential uses allowed within the C-1A, Decatur Square Business District shall be restricted to the upper floors as loft apartments and nonresidential uses shall be allowed on any floor that does not include a residential use. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  Wholesale offices and sample rooms shall be permitted in the C-1A, Decatur Square Business District. 
(2)  No merchandise or equipment shall be stored or displayed outside of a building. 
(3)  No noise, smoke, radiation, vibration or concussion, heat or glare shall be produced that is perceptible outside of a building and no dust, fly ash or gas that is toxic, caustic or obviously injurious to humans or property shall be produced. 
5.1.11   C-2, Thoroughfare Business District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The C-2, Thoroughfare Business District is intended to provide for development of a mixture of relatively high intensity general retail and service uses usually oriented to major thoroughfares, and includes high density Multi-Family Dwelling units greater than four (4) family units. Compatible uses include office, retail, some types of commercial and entertainment uses which should generally be located along high-volume thoroughfares. The characteristics of each development site should be designed in such a manner as to create an attractive appearance from the thoroughfare. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  Maximum allowed height for nonresidential structures shall be twenty (20) stories, provided that one (1) additional foot for each story above two (2) stories shall be added to the width and depth of side and rear yards when the nonresidential use abuts any residential use. 
(2)  Height regulations for allowed Multi-Family structures shall comply with the height regulations for Multi-family structures located in the MF, Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(3)  Roof Projections, including without limitation, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks, water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires may extend for an additional height not to exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof line. 
D.  Area Regulations for Nonresidential Uses. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(i)  Gasoline service station pump islands may be located up to eighteen feet (18') from the front property line. 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Zero feet (0'). 
(i)  Where a commercial, retail, or other nonresidential use abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum ten (10) foot side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to the Residential District. 
(c)  Minimum Side Yard for Multi-Family structures shall comply with the side yard regulations for Multi-Family structures located in the MF, Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(d)  Minimum Rear Yard. 
(i)  Multi-Family: Fifteen feet (15'). 
(ii)  Nonresidential: Ten feet (10'). 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: 
(i)  Multi-Family Two Stories: Two thousand one hundred (2,100) square feet per unit. 
(ii)  Multi-Family for each Additional Unit on each Additional Story over two (2): Six hundred (600) square feet. 
(iii)  Nonresidential: N/A. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: 
(i)  Multi-Family: Seventy feet (70'). 
(ii)  Nonresidential: N/A 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 
(i)  Multi-Family: One hundred feet (100'). 
(ii)  Nonresidential: N/A. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 2:1. 
(a)  Multi-Family: 4:1. 
(b)  Nonresidential: 2:1. 
(4)  Parking Regulations: See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for requirements for applicable Nonresidential Use development. 
E.  Special Regulations. 
(1)  Drive-up or drive-in service is permitted at any nonresidential establishment. 
(2)  All manufacturing, storage of materials and assembly of products as permitted shall be located entirely within a totally enclosed building or screened to the height equal to the materials stored outside, unless an SUP is granted and specifies otherwise. 
(3)  No noise, smoke, radiation, vibration or concussion, heat or glare shall be produced that is perceptible outside of a building, and no dust, fly ash or gas that is toxic, caustic or obviously injurious to humans or property shall be produced. 
(4)  Recreational vehicles, travel trailer or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
(5)  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing. 
(6)  Open storage is prohibited as the primary use. Incidental storage is allowed but must be screened from view of public right-of-way. 
(7)  Multi-family Structures located within this District shall comply with all regulations for Multi-family Structures located in the MF, Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(8)  Site plan approval in accordance with 4.5.2A. Required Site Plan shall be required for all allowed non-residential uses (e.g., school, church, child care center). 
(9)  Other regulations as established in Article 7. Development Standards. 
5.1.12   LI, Light Industrial District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The LI, Light Industrial District is intended to provide primarily for the development of light industrial and heavy commercial uses. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. Any height not prohibited by other ordinances. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Zero feet (0'). 
(i)  Where a commercial, retail, or other nonresidential use abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum twenty (20) foot side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to the Residential District. 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'). 
(i)  Where a commercial, retail, or other nonresidential use abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum twenty-five (25) foot rear yard shall be provided adjacent to the Residential District. 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: N/A. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: N/A. 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: N/A. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 1:1. 
(4)  Parking Regulations: See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. N/A. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  Noise. 
(a)  At no point at the bounding property line of any use in the LI, Light Industrial District, HI, Heavy Industrial District, or an industrial PD, Planned Development District shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant exceed the decibel limits specified in the Octave Band groups designated in Table 2. 
Table 2. Maximum Permissible Daytime* Noise Limits 
Octave Band (cps) Decibel Band Limit (db re 0.0002 microbar) 37-75 86 75-150 76 150-300 70 300-600 65 600-1,200 63 1,200-2,400 58 2,400-4,800 55 4,800-9,600 53 A Scale 65  
Note: "A Scale" levels are provided for monitoring purposes only and are not applicable to detailed sound analysis. 
(b)  The following corrections shall be made to the table of octave band-decibel limits in determining compliance with these noise level standards: 
(i)  Subtract seven (7) db when noise is present at nighttime. 
(ii)  Subtract seven (7) db when noise contains strong pure-tone components or is impulsive; that is, when meter changes at ten (10) decibels or more per second. 
(iii)  Add ten (10) db when noise is present for not more than: 
  One-half (1/2) minute in any one-half (1/2) hour period; 
  One (1) minute in any one (1) hour period; 
  Ten (10) minutes in any two (2) hour period; or 
  Twenty (20) minutes in any four (4) hour period. 
(c)  Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter or octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
(2)  Smoke and Particulate Matter. 
(a)  No operation or use shall cause, create or allow the emission for more than three (3) minutes in any one (1) hour of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the property line are: 
(i)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7118. 
(ii)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in (i) above except that, when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the outside atmosphere, the standards in (i) and this (ii) shall not apply. 
(iii)  The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed 0.5 pounds per acre of property within the plant site per any one (1) hour. 
(iv)  The open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter, or which involves dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage, or sand blasting shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four (4) grains per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of air. 
(3)  Odorous Matter. 
(a)  No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located. 
(b)  The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by the enforcing officer. The method and procedures as specified by American Society for Testing Materials ASTM-D1391 entitled Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres shall be used and a copy of ASTM-D1391 is hereby incorporated into this Ordinance by reference. 
(4)  Fire and Explosive Hazard Material. 
(a)  No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the City's Fire Department. 
(b)  The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of the City's Fire Code. 
(5)  Toxic and Noxious Matter. No operation or use shall emit a concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located of toxic or noxious matter which will exceed ten (10) percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the Texas State Department of Health in Threshold Limit Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3 as amended, a copy of which all subsequent amendments thereto is hereby incorporated by reference and is on file in the office of the City's Building Inspector. 
(6)  Vibration. No operation or use shall at any time create earthborn vibrations which, when measured at the bounding property line of the source of the operation, exceed the limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified: 
Table 3. Maximum Permissible Displacement Limits 
Frequency (cps) Displacement (inches) 0-10 0.0010 10-20 0.0008 20-30 0.0005 30-40 0.0004 40 and over 0.0003  
(7)  Open Storage. No open storage of materials or commodities shall be permitted except as an accessory use to a main use and which is located in a building. No open storage operation shall be located in front of the main building and no storage use shall constitute a wrecking, junk, or salvage yard, except when such is approved with development and operation standards as a Specific Use Permit. 
5.1.13   HI, Heavy Industrial District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The HI, Heavy Industrial District is intended to provide primarily for the development of heavy industrial uses. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. Any height not prohibited by other ordinances. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five feet (25'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Zero feet (0'). 
(i)  Where a commercial, retail, or other nonresidential use abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum twenty (20) foot side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to the Residential District. 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'). 
(i)  Where a commercial, retail, or other nonresidential use abuts upon a District boundary line dividing such District from a Residential District, a minimum twenty-five (25) foot rear yard shall be provided adjacent to the Residential District. 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: N/A. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: N/A. 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: N/A. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 1:1. 
(4)  Parking Regulations: See Section 7.3 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations for requirements. 
E.  Special Regulations. N/A. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
(1)  Noise. At no point at the bounding property line of any use in the LI, Light Industrial District, HI, Heavy Industrial District, or an industrial PD, Planned Development District shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant exceed the decibel limits specified in the Octave Band groups designated in Table 4. 
Table 4. Maximum Permissible Daytime* Noise Limits 
Octave Band (cps) Decibel Band Limit (db re 0.0002 microbar) 37-75 86 75-150 76 150-300 70 300-600 65 600-1,200 63 1,200-2,400 58 2,400-4,800 55 4,800-9,600 53 A Scale 65  
Note: "A Scale" levels are provided for monitoring purposes only and are not applicable to detailed sound analysis. 
(a)  The following corrections shall be made to the table of octave band-decibel limits in determining compliance with these noise level standards: 
(i)  Subtract seven (7) db when noise is present at nighttime. 
(ii)  Subtract seven (7) db when noise contains strong pure-tone components or is impulsive; that is, when meter changes at ten (10) decibels or more per second. 
(iii)  Add ten (10) db when noise is present for not more than: 
  One-half (1/2) minute in any one-half (1/2) hour period; 
  One (1) minute in any one (1) hour period; 
  Ten (10) minutes in any two (2) hour period; or 
  Twenty (20) minutes in any four (4) hour period. 
(b)  Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter or octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
(2)  Smoke and Particulate Matter. 
(a)  No operation or use shall cause, create or allow the emission for more than three (3) minutes in any one (1) hour of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the property line are: 
(i)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7118. 
(ii)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in (i) above except that, when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the outside atmosphere, the standards in (i) and this (ii) shall not apply. 
(iii)  The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed 0.5 pounds per acre of property within the plant site per any one (1) hour. 
(iv)  The open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter, or which involves dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage, or sand blasting shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four (4) grains per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of air. 
(3)  Odorous Matter. 
(a)  No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located. 
(b)  The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by the enforcing officer. The method and procedures as specified by American Society for Testing Materials ASTM-D1391 entitled Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres shall be used and a copy of ASTM-D1391 is hereby incorporated into this Ordinance by reference. 
(4)  Fire and Explosive Hazard Material. 
(a)  No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the City's Fire Department. 
(b)  The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of the City's Fire Code. 
(5)  Toxic and Noxious Matter. No operation or use shall emit a concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located of toxic or noxious matter which will exceed ten (10) percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the Texas State Department of Health in Threshold Limit Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3 as amended, a copy of which all subsequent amendments thereto is hereby incorporated by reference and is on file in the office of the City's Building Inspector. 
(6)  Vibration. No operation or use shall at any time create earthborn vibrations which, when measured at the bounding property line of the source of the operation, exceed the limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified: 
Table 5. Maximum Permissible Displacement Limits 
Frequency (cps) Displacement (inches) 0-10 0.0010 10-20 0.0008 20-30 0.0005 30-40 0.0004 40 and over 0.0003  
(7)  Open Storage. No open storage of materials or commodities shall be permitted except as an accessory use to a main use and which is located in a building. No open storage operation shall be located in front of the main building and no storage use shall constitute a wrecking, junk, or salvage yard, except when such is approved with development and operation standards as a Specific Use Permit. 
Section 5.2 - Special Districts 
5.2.1   CD, Convention Overlay District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The CD, Convention Overlay District is intended to provide for development of land within an established area around the Decatur Civic Center, as shown in Figure 10. Convention District Boundary. This area is a highly visible and heavily traveled gateway into the City, and is the site of one of the City's most valuable assets, the Civic Center. The purpose of the CD, Convention Overlay District is to establish a set of development standards that require development within the district to be consistent with the design, architecture, aesthetics, and character of the Civic Center in order to prevent the establishment of incompatible uses and of structures with inconsistent design, architecture, aesthetics and character. The overall purpose of the CD, Convention Overlay District and the regulations contained herein is to promote and maintain a convention activity identity and environment. The requirements of the CD, Convention Overlay District shall be in addition to the underlying base zoning district requirements. 

B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. Height shall be as required by the underlying base district. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: 
(a)  Minimum Front Yard: Seventy-five feet (75'). 
(b)  Minimum Side Yard: Zero feet (0'), or ten feet (10') when adjacent to a Residential Use. 
(c)  Minimum Rear Yard: Twenty-five feet (25') when adjacent to a Residential Use. 
(2)  Size of Lots: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area: N/A. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width: N/A. 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth: N/A. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): N/A 
(4)  Parking Regulations: Parking shall be as required by the underlying base district. 
E.  Special Regulations. 
(1)  Roofs: A Structure shall not have a flat roof on one hundred percent (100%) of such Structure, and pitched roofs shall be compatible with the 4:12 pitch of the Decatur Civic Center where visible from State Highway 380 or other right-of-way. 
(2)  Exterior Facade: Structures shall have a one-hundred percent (100%) stone or brick masonry exterior. Any proposed variation in either material or percentage of stone or brick masonry shall be presented to the City Council for approval. 
(3)  Driveway Spacing: Driveway spacing shall comply with access management guidelines of the State of Texas, shall be divided to separate ingress and egress, and shall be landscaped. 
(4)  Entrances: Primary entrances shall be to the rear and to the sides of a Structure, and secondary entrances fronting [State Highway] 380 shall be similar in aesthetics to primary entrances. 
(5)  Parking and Walkways: Parking shall be placed on the side or rear of a Structure with access via shared drives when practicable. Walkways shall be provided from all parking lots to facilitate pedestrian access to Structures. 
(6)  Parking Lot Lighting: Lighting provided in all parking lot areas shall be sufficient to provide security; provided however, that lighting adjacent to a Residential District shall be designed to minimize illumination across the property line. 
(7)  Street Lighting: Street lighting shall be provided throughout the property using thematic fixtures compatible with the Civic Center; details of such fixtures shall be provided in the construction drawings. 
(8)  Parking Lot and Entry Landscaping: Landscaping shall also be provided for the interior parking lot. Trees shall be planted within a landscaped island within each parking lot to attain a minimum average density of one (1) shade tree (minimum two and one-half-inch (2.5?) caliper) for each fifteen (15) parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. All entries to the property shall be landscaped. 
(9)  Street Trees: Minimum street trees shall be provided at a rate of one (1) tree per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage along rights-of-way. 
(10)  Utilities: All utilities, whether constructed as a result of new development or as a result of replacing or upgrading existing utilities, shall be placed underground. 
(11)  Open storage is prohibited. 
(12)  Other regulations as established in Article 7. Development Standards. 
F.  Performance Standards. Standards shall be as required by the underlying base district. 
5.2.2   H, Historic Overlay District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The H, Historic Overlay District is established to regulate future development within the historic corridor of the City of Decatur. The standards required within the H, Historic Overlay District are intended to preserve and enhance the unique historical character of the City. The purpose of the H, Historic Overlay District is to require development within the district to be consistent with the design, architecture, aesthetics, and character of the historic buildings in the corridor and to prevent the establishment of incompatible uses and of structures with inconsistent design, architecture, aesthetics and character. The overall purpose of the H, Historic Overlay District and the regulations contained herein is to promote and maintain a historic identity and environment. The requirements of the H, Historic Overlay District shall be in addition to the underlying base zoning district requirements. 
The H, Historic Overlay District is designated as the lots, tracts, and parcels of land that are located adjacent to and within two hundred (200) feet of the following Street Rights-of-Way: 
(1)  Walnut Street from Business 81/287 North to Business 81/287 South. 
(2)  Main Street from Business 81/287 North to Business 81/287 South. 
(3)  State Street from Pecan Street to Mill Street. 
(4)  Trinity Street from Pecan Street to Mill Street. 
If any portion of a lot, tract, or parcel is located within two hundred (200) feet from one (1) of the above referenced Street Rights-of-Way, the entire limits of the property shall be considered to be located within the H, Historic Overlay District. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. Height shall be regulated by the requirements for the underlying zoning district. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: Size of yards shall be regulated by the requirements for the underlying Zoning District. 
(2)  Size of Lots: Size of lots shall be regulated by the requirements for the underlying Zoning District. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): N/A. 
(4)  Parking Regulations: Parking shall be as required by the underlying base district. 
E.  Special Regulations. 
(1)  Development Standards. All new development and redevelopment located within the H, Historic Overlay District shall comply with the following development standards: 
(a)  Building Exteriors. All non-residential building exteriors which are both facing on and visible from North US Highway 81/287 Business, South US Highway 81/287 Business, Walnut Street, Main Street, State Street, Pecan Street, Mill Street and Trinity Street shall be constructed of masonry material or wood, exclusive of windows, doors, fascias, and roofs. Alternative construction materials which are demonstrated to be critical to the architectural theme of the structure may be used upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval of the City Council. 
(2)  Applications. Each application for zoning or development within the H, Historic Overlay District shall be accompanied by an elevation drawing of the structure depicting the appearance of the building exterior. 
F.  Performance Standards. Standards shall be as required by the underlying base district. 

5.2.3   BC, Business Corridor Overlay District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The purpose of the BC, Business Corridor Overlay District is to protect and enhance the appearance of the Decatur business corridor area, promote the unique character of the City, protect and enhance property values within the corridor, and to prevent the establishment of incompatible types of development within the corridor. The requirements of the BC, Business Corridor Overlay District, shall be in addition to the underlying base zoning district requirements. 
The BC, Business Corridor Overlay District is designated as all lots, tracts, and parcels of land which are located within three hundred (300) feet of the following Street Rights-of-Way: 
(1)  FM 51 south of US 81/287 to the City Limits; and 
(2)  Business 380 west of Business 81/287 to the City Limits. 
If any portion of a lot, tract, or parcel is located within three hundred (300) feet from one of the above referenced Street Rights-of-Way, the entire limits of the property shall be considered to be located within the BC, Business Corridor Overlay District. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in this district are outlined in Section 6.1 Use Chart. 
C.  Height Regulations. Height shall be regulated by the requirements for the underlying zoning district. 
D.  Area Regulations. 
(1)  Size of Yards: Size of yards shall be regulated by the requirements for the underlying Zoning District. 
(2)  Size of Lots: Size of lots shall be regulated by the requirements for the underlying Zoning District. 
(3)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): N/A. 
(4)  Parking Regulations: Parking shall be as required by the underlying base district. 
E.  Special Regulations. All development and redevelopment located within the BC, Business Corridor Overlay District shall comply with the following development standards: 
(1)  All non-residential building exteriors which are facing FM 51 South or Business 380 West shall be constructed of masonry material or wood, exclusive of windows, doors, fascias, and roofs. Alternative construction materials which are demonstrated to be critical to the architectural theme of the structure or that possess the esthetic appearance of masonry material or wood may be used upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval of the City Council. 
(2)  Each application for zoning or development shall be accompanied by an elevation drawing of the structure demonstrating appearance of the building exterior. 
(3)  All non-fuel dispensing permanently ground mounted mechanical equipment located in front and side yards shall be screened from view with wood or masonry landscaping sufficient in height and density to screen equipment. 
(4)  All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from any immediate and adjacent public right-of-way. 
F.  Performance Standards. Standards shall be as required by the underlying base district. 

5.2.4   PD, Planned Development District
A.  General Purpose and Description. The purpose of the PD, Planned Development District is to provide a district which accommodates planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units. Examples include office parks, retail/commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments having a mixture of housing options (e.g., single-family, multi-family, duplex [two-family], etc.), or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated as integral land use units either by a single owner or a combination of owners. This zoning district shall be permitted for tracts of land fifteen (15) acres or more in area. 
A PD, Planned Development District may be used to permit new or innovative land use concepts not permitted by other Zoning Districts in this Ordinance, to ensure the compatibility of land uses, and to allow for the adjustment of changing market demands to meet the current needs of the community by meeting one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide for a superior design on lots or buildings; 
(2)  To provide for increased recreation and open space opportunities for public use and enjoyment; 
(3)  To provide amenities or features that would be of special benefit to the property users or to the overall community; 
(4)  To protect or preserve natural amenities and environmental assets such as trees, creeks, ponds, floodplains, slopes, viewscapes, or wildlife habitats; 
(5)  To protect or preserve existing historical buildings, structures, features or places; 
(6)  To provide an appropriate balance between the intensity of development and the ability to provide adequate supporting public facilities and services; and 
(7)  To meet or exceed the standards of this Ordinance. 
B.  Required Elements of a Requested PD District. The ordinance granting a PD district shall include at a minimum the following elements: 
(1)  A general statement citing the reason for the PD request; 
(2)  A statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD District granted therein; 
(3)  Regulatory requirements developed by any of the following methods: 
(a)  Referencing the requirements of an existing Zoning District; 
(b)  Referencing the requirements of an existing Zoning District and showing amendments to that existing district; or 
(c)  Creating original requirements that are similar in nature to those listed in an existing Zoning District; 
(4)  Generally, a listing of the following regulatory requirements developed based on one (1) of the aforementioned methods: 
(a)  Permitted uses; 
(b)  Supplemental Use Regulations; 
(c)  Area Regulations; 
(d)  Fences, Screening and Buffering Regulations; 
(e)  Landscaping Requirements; 
(f)  Outdoor lighting; 
(g)  Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations; 
(h)  Performance Regulations; 
(i)  Accessory Structure Regulations; and 
(j)  Any base Zoning District standards that apply 
(5)  A legal description and accompanying map showing the area to be included in the proposed PD District; and 
(6)  An approved Concept Plan meeting the requirements of this Ordinance. 
C.  Concept Plan for PD District. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the Concept Plan is to ensure that a development project is in compliance with all applicable city ordinances and guidelines prior to the approval of the PD District. 
(2)  Extent of area that should be included in a Concept Plan. The area included within the Concept Plan shall include the entire portion of the overall property that is to be rezoned and included in the new PD District. 
(3)  Procedures and submission requirements for Concept Plan Approval. All Concept Plans shall be prepared by a qualified civil engineer, land planner, architect or surveyor, and shall clearly show with sufficient detail how the area will be developed and the uses to be allowed. To ensure the submission of adequate information, the Planning Director is hereby empowered to adopt, maintain and distribute a separate list of specific requirements that is deemed necessary for an Applicant to submit in order for the City to review the Concept Plan application for compliance with this Ordinance, as well as other local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(4)  Review and Approval of a Concept Plan. 
(a)  City Staff Review of Concept Plans. 
(i)  Upon official submission of an application for Concept Plan approval, the City shall review the application. Specifically, the Planning Director, City Engineer, Building Official and such other City Staff as deemed appropriate by the Planning Director, shall review the Concept Plan prior to the Concept Plan for the PD District being forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Determination of application completeness, notice to applicant in writing of missing documents and information shall be in accordance with 4.4.3 Official Filing Date, Completeness of Application, Expiration of Application. 
(ii)  Concept Plans shall be evaluated to ensure that all developments are, to the extent practicable, planned according to the City's codes and ordinances. 
(iii)  Following City staff review, and following discussions regarding necessary revisions, the Applicant shall resubmit additional copies of the corrected Concept Plan to the Planning Director. 
(iv)  Upon determination that all necessary information has been provided, the Planning Director shall then submit the corrected Concept Plan and other required elements of the PD District to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(v)  If the corrected version is not resubmitted within the required time period in the written notice to the Applicant, the Planning Director shall forward the original plan application to the Commission. 
(vi)  A corrected Concept Plan that is incomplete or is otherwise not ready for consideration shall be subject to denial. 
(b)  Planning and Zoning Commission Review of Concept Plans and Other Required Elements of the PD District. 
(i)  All Concept Plan applications shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission in conjunction with the PD application. 
(ii)  The Planning Director shall schedule consideration of the Concept Plan and PD application on the next regular agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission for which the notice and posting requirements of State law may be satisfied. 
(iii)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the Concept Plan and PD application and shall recommend to the City Council approval, approval subject to certain conditions, or denial of the Concept Plan and PD application. 
(c)  City Council Review of and Action on Concept Plans and PD Applications. 
(i)  All Concept Plan applications shall be reviewed by the City Council after review and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission in the same manner as a Rezoning. 
(ii)  The Planning Director shall schedule consideration of the Concept Plan and PD application on the next regular agenda of the City Council for which state law notice and posting requirements may be satisfied. 
(iii)  The City Council shall review the Concept Plan and PD application and shall approve, approve subject to certain conditions, or deny approval of the Concept Plan and PD application. 
(5)  Revisions to the Approved Concept Plan and PD Application. 
(a)  Amendments/Modifications. 
(i)  Submission materials and requirements for approval of an Amended Concept Plan, or text amendments, for a PD district shall be as determined necessary and appropriate by the Planning Director. Failure of an Applicant to provide materials determined necessary and appropriate by the Planning Director shall be grounds for denial. 
(ii)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the Revised Concept Plan and/or PD application and provide a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council will then approve, deny, or approve the Concept Plan and/or PD application with conditions. Failure of an Applicant to provide materials determined necessary and appropriate by the Planning Director shall be grounds for denial. 
(6)  Effect of Review/Approval. Upon approval, a Concept Plan shall be considered authorization to proceed with the rezoning of the site and creation of the district provided all other required City approvals are obtained, and all applicable fees are paid pursuant to 4.5.2B Payment of all Indebtedness Attributable to the Subject Property. 
(7)  Validity, Expiration, and Reinstatement of Concept Plan. Validity, expiration, and reinstatement of Concept Plan shall be governed by the regulations contained in Section 2.3 Vested Rights and Review Procedure of this Ordinance in accordance with State law. 
5.2.5   SUP, Specific Use Permit
A.  General Description and Purpose. The uses listed under the various zoning district classifications set forth in this Ordinance as uses allowed with an approved Specific Use Permit are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district, and therefore require additional review and regulation to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. 
B.  Consideration for Compatibility. With consideration given to setting, physical features, compatibility with surrounding land uses, traffic, and aesthetics, certain Uses requiring a Specific Use Permit may locate in an area where they will be compatible with existing or planned land uses generally allowed within a Zoning District. 
C.  Review and Approval Authorities. 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial for each Specific Use Permit Application. 
(2)  Upon receipt and consideration of the recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council shall review each case on its own merit, apply the criteria set forth in this Section and other related factors deemed necessary and appropriate given the facts and circumstances presented, and, if appropriate, authorize said use by granting a Specific Use Permit for the use. The City Council shall have the discretion to impose conditions in addition to those recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission or to alter or remove such recommended conditions if the City Council determines such action to be necessary and appropriate to ensure compatibility or ensure protection of public health, safety, and welfare. 
D.  Application and Site Plan Required. 
(1)  Application and public hearing procedures for a Specific Use Permit shall be completed in the same manner as an Application for Rezoning. A Site Plan shall be included with the application. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may require additional information or drawings including but not limited to building floor plans, operating data and expert evaluation or testimony concerning the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed as it determines necessary and appropriate to evaluate the application. 
E.  Specific Uses Permit Regulations and Procedures. 
(1)  Compatibility Considerations. 
(a)  The City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission in considering any request for Specific Use Permit may only approve such request after they have determined that the use or uses allowed will not be detrimental to the adjacent properties or to the City as a whole. 
(b)  The Planning Director, City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission may require from the applicant any plans, information, operational data, and expert evaluation concerning the location, function, and characteristics of the proposed use or buildings as in their sole discretion, they determine necessary and appropriate to evaluate the application for a Specific Use Permit. 
(c)  The City Council when evaluating a Specific Use Permit, and the Planning and Zoning Commission when making a recommendation concerning a Specific Use Permit, may establish conditions and regulations, in addition to those of the base zoning district, necessary to protect the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the neighborhood and/or the City. Furthermore, the use shall be in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and general objectives of the City. The conditions imposed may include but shall not be limited to any one (1) or more of the following as a condition for granting continuation of a SUP: 
(i)  Paving of streets, alleys, and sidewalks, 
(ii)  Means of ingress and egress to public streets, 
(iii)  Provisions for drainage, 
(iv)  Adequate off-street parking, 
(v)  Protective screening, landscaping, and open space, 
(vi)  Area or security lighting, 
(vii)  The locations and heights of structures, 
(viii)  Architectural compatibility of buildings, 
(ix)  Hours of operation, 
(x)  Intensity of the use, and 
(xi)  Adequate traffic circulation required to contain all stacking activity on the site. 
(2)  Imposed Conditions for Approval. 
(a)  In granting a Specific Use Permit, the City Council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the owner or occupant of the property as a condition precedent to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Official for use of the building on such property. 
(b)  All special conditions shall be set forth in writing in the SUP, and shall be in addition to all other requirements of the zoning district and ordinances of the City. 
(3)  Enlargement, Modification, Structural Alteration or Change. 
(a)  A Building, premise, or land used under a Specific Use Permit may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise changed and used provided the changes do not: 
(i)  Increase the height of structures, including antenna support structures; 
(ii)  Increase building square footage from its size at the time the original Specific Use Permit was granted by greater than ten (10) percent; 
(iii)  Reduce the distance between a building or noise-generating activity on the property and an adjacent, off-site residential use. This provision shall not apply should the property and the residential use be separated by a major thoroughfare depicted on the City's Thoroughfare Plan; or 
(iv)  Reduce the amount of pervious coverage or landscaping as indicated on the previously approved Site Plan. 
(b)  All enlargements, modifications, structural alterations, or changes that are not allowed shall require the approval of a Specific Use Permit. Antennas may be placed on an antenna support structure that is already permitted by an existing Specific Use Permit without approval of a separate Specific Use Permit subject to approval of a Final Plat and Site Plan for the property if appropriate. Modifications shall not increase the height of the antenna. 
(4)  Board of Adjustment Exclusion. The Board of Adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse, or modify any decision, determination, or ruling with respect to the specific land use designated by any Specific Use Permit. 
(5)  Zoning Map. 
(a)  When the City Council grants a Specific Use Permit, the Zoning Map shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditional and limited uses, and such amendment is to indicate the appropriate zoning district for the approved use and prefixed by an "S" designation; 
(b)  Specific Use Permits granted shall be indicated by numerical designation on the Zoning District Map; and 
(c)  Specific Use Permits shall be issued to the property. 
(6)  Amend or Rescind a Specific Use Permit. After providing the required notice and public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may take action to amend or rescind a Specific Use Permit if one (1) or more of the following occur: 
(a)  There is a violation and conviction of any of the provisions of this Ordinance that occurs on the property for which the Specific Use Permit is granted; 
(b)  The building, premises, or land use authorized by the Specific Use Permit is enlarged greater than ten (10) percent (as noted in (3)(a)(ii) above), modified, structurally altered, or otherwise changed in violation of the terms of the Specific Use Permit and/or this Ordinance; 
(c)  No activity or progress has occurred on the property for a period of two (2) years or longer. 
(d)  Violation and correction of any provision of the terms or conditions of a Specific Use Permit, for which ten (10) days written notice of violation has been provided to the owner or occupant, and which violation is not remediated in accordance with the written notice. One (1) or more incidents of recurrence of the same violation(s) for which a correction was rendered within a calendar year period shall be cause for revocation of a SUP without additional notice to the Owner or Occupant, other than notice of date and time of public hearing pursuant to this Section; 
(e)  Ad valorem taxes on the property are delinquent by more than six (6) months; or 
(f)  The Specific Use Permit was obtained by fraud or with deception. 
(7)  Existing Specific Use Permits. A list of existing Specific Use Permits granted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance is provided in Table 6. 
Table 6. List of Existing SUPs 
SUP Case Number Street Address Land Use SUP2010-03 0 Hwy 380 Learning Center/Daycare SUP2006-04 2000 S FM 51 Mental Health Use SUP2005-02 600 S US Highway 81-287 Private Club SUP2005-01(REVOKED) 2010 W US Highway 380 Private Club ZC2002-17 1801 S Hwy 287 Private Club SUP2010-05 201 E Thompson Nursing Home SUP2006-02 603 N Trinity Center Services in SF-2 SUP2007-02(REVOKED) 301 N Hwy 287 Private Club SUP2007-03 116 S State Loft Apartment In A C1-A SUP2006-03 0 Reeves Nursing Home SUP2007-01 1510 S FM 51 Private Club ZC1993-06 800 S Miller Multiple Family Visitors ZC1991-01 805 S College Learning Center/Daycare ZC1989-07 1705 S Hatcher Learning Center/Daycare SUP2010-02 113 N State Private Club SUP2012-01 109 N State Private Club SUP2006-01 201 W Main Private Club ZC2002-35 2708 S FM 51 Private Club ZC2002-02 500 W Walnut Restaurant-Residential SUP2010-04 106 N Trinity Private Club SUP2005-03 201 N Us Highway 81-287 Private Club SUP2013-01 401 N Us Highway 81-287 Private Club SUP2014-02 300 Devereaux Nursing Home SUP2014-01 902 Preskitt Funeral Home  
ARTICLE 6. - USE REGULATIONS 

Section 6.1 - Use Chart 
6.1.1   Conformance with the Use Chart
    The use of land and/or buildings shall be in accordance with those listed in the following Use Chart. No land or building shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or converted other than for those uses specified in the zoning district in which it is located. The legend for interpreting the permitted uses in the Use Chart is: 
  Designates use permitted in the Zoning District indicated. 
   (Blank) Designates use prohibited in the Zoning District indicated. 
S  Designates use may be permitted by a Specific Use Permit. 
6.1.2   Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements
Table 7. Permitted Use Chart 
Type Use SF-1 SF-2 TH 2F MF MHD C-O C-1 C-1A C-2 LI HI PD CD Primary Residential Uses Dwelling, Accessory S S S S S S S S Dwelling, Single Family, Detached         Dwelling, Single Family, Attached       Dwelling, Two Family     Dwelling, Multiple Family    Manufactured Home   Boarding or Rooming House S   Bed and Breakfast Inn S S S S S S S S S  Hotel or Motel S      Loft Apartments   S Caretaker or Security Guard Housing          Educational, Institutional & Special Uses Art Gallery or Museum S      Assisted Care or Living Facility S S S S S   Cemetery or Mausoleum S S S S S S S S    Child-Care: Foster Family Home (Independent)      Child-Care: Foster Group Home (Independent) S S S S S Child-Care: Licensed Child Care Center S S S S S S S S S S Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Home S S S S S S Child-Care: Listed Family Home S S S S S S Child-Care: Registered Child-Care Home S S S S S S Church, Other Place of Worship, or Rectory               College or University     Community Center, Public or Community/Social Building               Community Home        Day Camp S S S S S    Fairground or Exhibition Area     Fraternal Organization or Civic Club Lodge S       Hospital, Acute Care S       Hospital, Chronic Care S S S     Philanthropic Institutions S S S S S S S      Library, Public S S S S S S       Monastery or Convent S S S S S S       Municipal Facility or Use          Rehabilitation Care Home S S S S     Rehabilitation Care Institution     School, Business or Vocational S S       School, Elementary or Secondary         S      Utility, Accessory and Incidental Uses Accessory Building             Antenna Tower  Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial (see 6.2.2) ) S S S S S  Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Non-Commercial (see 6.2.2)               Antenna, Stealth (see 6.2.2)         Electrical Generating Plant S    Electrical Substation S S S S S S       Field or Construction Office, Temporary Subject to Approval and Control by Building Inspector Home Occupation        Local Utility Distribution Lines              Public Agency Building, Shop, Yard, or Facility S S S S S S      Public Safety Building             Swimming Pool, Private             Wastewater Treatment Plant S    Telephone Line and Exchange, Switching or Relay Station             Utility Distribution or Transmission Lines             Water Reservoir, Water Pumping Station or Well             Water Treatment Plant S     Recreational and Entertainment Uses Amusement, Commercial, Outdoor S     S Amusement, Commercial, Indoor      S Golf Course, Commercial     Golf Course, Private Country Club S S  S S S       S Golf Course, Public/Municipal             S Health Club, Indoor S  S   S Park or Playground, Private S S  S         S Park or Playground, Public       S        Playfield or Stadium, Private        Playfield or Stadium, Public       S      Private Club for Alcohol Sales S S S S S S  Recreational Vehicle Campground    Stable, Commercial S    Theater, Drive-In, Outdoor     Theater or Playhouse, Indoor        Transportation Related Uses Airport, Landing Field, or Heliport S     Bus Station or Terminal     S Hauling Company     Motor or Railroad Freight Terminal    Parking Lot, Heavy Load Vehicle S S     Parking Lot or Structure, Commercial S S S     Railroad Passenger Station  S     Railroad Track or Right-of-Way               Railroad Team Track    Automobile and Related Service Uses Automobile Accessories and Parts, New Retail Sales       Automobile Accessories and Parts, Used Retail Sales       Automobile Dealer, Primarily New Sales S S     Automobile Dealer, Primarily Used Sales S S     Automobile Repair, Major     Automobile Repair, Minor S S     Automobile Wash, Full-Service or Detail Shop     Automobile Wash, Self-Service S     Convenience Store, without Gasoline Sales      Wrecking or Salvage Yard S S S Retail and Service Type Uses Antique Shop       Appliance Service and Repair       Bakery, Retail       Beer and Wine Sales (Off Premises Consumption Only) S S  S S Convenience Store S S     S Custom Personal Service Shop        Custom Reprographics, Letter, or Sign Shop       Funeral Home S S     Home Improvement Center      Laundromat or Washeteria, Self Service S      Offices, Professional and General Business        Pawn Shop S     Permanent Makeup Application (Secondary Use) S S S  Restaurant or Cafeteria S       Restaurant, with Drive-in Service S      Restaurant, with Drive-Thru Service     Retail Stores, General       Sale of Alcoholic or Mixed Beverages in Restaurants by Food and Beverage Certificate Holders Only S S  S S Sale of Alcoholic or Mixed Beverages for On-Premises Consumption S S  S S Sale of Alcoholic Beverages for Off-Premises Consumption; Liquor (Package) Store S S  S S Studio, Art or Dance       Tattoo or Body Piercing Studio  Thrift or Secondhand Store      Tool and Machinery Rental     Wedding Chapel S       Agricultural Type Uses Animal Shelter S    Farm, Ranch, Crops, or Orchard      Hatchery, Poultry (Commercial) S Nursery S     Veterinarian Clinic or Kennels, Indoor Pens Only S S    Veterinarian Clinic or Kennels, Outdoor Pens S    Commercial Type Uses Bakery, Wholesale     Boat, Motorcycle, or ATV Sales (New)     Building Materials Sales      Cabinet and Upholstery Shop     Clothing Manufacture or Light Compounding or Fabrication S S   Contractors Shop, Outside Storage Yard S   Dairy Plant    Feed Store and Grain Store or Farm Supply Store     General Commercial Facility     Heavy Machinery Sales and Service S     Laboratory, Scientific or Research S     Laundry Plant, Commercial    Paint Shop     Petroleum Distribution or Storage S   Plumbing Shop     Office Warehouse Showroom S   Outside Storage and/or Sales S    Trailer Rental or Sales     Warehouse, Miniature or Self-Storage     Natural Resource Storage and Extraction Mining or Storage of Mining Wastes S S  Petroleum and Natural Gas Extraction               Quarry S S S  Special Industrial Processes Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant, Temporary Temporary Plant by Resolution of City Council Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant, Permanent S S Landfill or Dump Area S S Industrial Products Storage   Meat Packing Plant S S Smelter or Refinery S S Welding or Machine Shop S    General Manufacturing and Industrial Uses Light Manufacturing or Industrial Uses    Heavy Manufacturing or Industrial Uses    
(Ord. No. 2017-03-03,  2.02, 3-27-17) 
6.1.3   Classification of New/Unlisted Uses
    It is recognized that new types of land use will arise in the future, and forms of land use not presently anticipated may seek to locate in the City. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use in the Use Chart shall be made as follows: 
A.  Initiation. 
(1)  A property owner, City department, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the City Council may propose zoning amendments to regulate new and previously unlisted uses in accordance with this Ordinance. 
(2)  An application for the addition of a new or unlisted use shall be submitted to the Planning Director and shall contain a statement of facts providing all information necessary for the evaluation of the proposed use and the determination of the proper designation, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  The nature of the use and whether the use involves dwelling activity, sales, services, or processing; 
(b)  The type of product sold or produced under the use; 
(c)  Whether the use has enclosed or outside storage and the amount and nature of the storage; 
(d)  Anticipated employment typically anticipated with the use; 
(e)  Transportation requirements; 
(f)  The nature and time of occupancy and operation of the premises; 
(g)  The off-street parking and loading requirements; 
(h)  The amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic materials and vibration likely to be generated; 
(i)  The requirements for public utilities such as sanitary sewer and water and any special public services that may be required; and 
(j)  Impervious surface coverage. 
B.  Standards for new and unlisted uses may be interpreted by the Planning Director as being the same or similar to those of a similar use based upon the information provided by the applicant. 
C.  If the Planning Director determines that the requested use does not fall within one (1) of the existing zoning district classifications, the Planning Director shall submit the request to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration as an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to the procedures established herein. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the City Council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. 
D.  The City Council shall approve or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its findings. If approved, the new or unlisted use shall be added in the use charts of the Zoning Ordinance according to Section 4.4 Amendments to Zoning Ordinance and Districts. 
Section 6.2 - Supplemental Use Regulations 
6.2.1   Manufactured Home Parks, Recreational Vehicle Parks, and Campgrounds
    Manufactured Home Parks, RV Parks, and Campgrounds shall be not less than three (3) acres nor greater than thirty-five (35) acres in area. 
6.2.2   Antenna Uses
A.  Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial. 
(1)  All commercial antennae and antenna support structures allowed by a SUP shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Antenna support structures shall be setback a distance equal to or greater than the tower's height measured from the property lines. 
(b)  Antenna support structures shall be constructed to support at least two (2) carriers. 
(c)  Antenna facilities shall be screened by a six (6) foot masonry screening wall or a six (6) foot ornamental fence with living screen. 
(2)  An antenna located on an existing antenna support structure is permitted by right if the structure remains in conformance with the previously approved site plan. 
B.  Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Non-Commercial. All antenna and/or antenna support structures shall be attached to a building. 
C.  Antenna, Stealth. 
(1)  Commercial Stealth Antennas are permitted by right in the Residential Districts only as a secondary use when the primary use on the lot is a church, school, athletic stadium or field, or public utility structure. 
(2)  Commercial Stealth Antennas are permitted by right in the Nonresidential Districts. 
(3)  Approval of a Listed Commercial Stealth Antenna. The Director may approve a request to install a stealth antenna when the proposed stealth antenna is of a type that is specifically listed in the definition of Antenna, Stealth. 
(4)  Approval of an Unlisted Commercial Stealth Antenna. For commercial stealth antenna requests of a type that are not specifically listed in this definition, the Planning & Zoning Commission may determine if a proposed commercial antenna is a stealth antenna or not when considering Site Plan approval for the proposal. 
6.2.3   Home Occupations
    A Home Occupation shall meet the following standards to maintain the residential character of the neighborhood while providing opportunities for home-based businesses. 
A.  Uses allowed as Home Occupations shall include the following: 
(1)  Office of an accountant, architect, attorney, engineer, realtor, minister, rabbi, clergyman, counselor, or similar professions; 
(2)  Office of a salesman or manufacturer's representative, provided that no retail or wholesale transactions or provision of services may be personally and physically made on premises; 
(3)  Author, artist, sculptor; 
(4)  Dressmaker, seamstress, tailor, milliner; 
(5)  Music/dance teacher, tutoring, or similar instruction, provided that no more than three (3) pupils may be present at any one (1) time; 
(6)  Swimming lessons or water safety instruction, provided that a maximum of six (6) pupils may be present at any one (1) time; 
(7)  Home crafts, such as weaving, model making, etc.; 
(8)  Repair shop for small electrical appliances, cameras, watches, or other small items, provided that items can be carried by one (1) person with no special equipment, and provided that no internal combustion engine repair is allowed; 
(9)  Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Home, Child-Care: Listed Family Home, or Child Care: Registered Child-Care Home; 
(10)  Barbershop, beauty salon, or manicure studio, provided that no more than one (1) customer is served at any one (1) time; and 
(11)  Community home and other residential care facilities that qualify as a community home under the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act, Chapter 123 of the Texas Human Resources Code and as amended, provided such facilities meet the requirements set out within this Ordinance. 
B.  Home Occupations shall be conducted entirely within the main building. 
C.  Home Occupations shall not produce any alteration or change in the exterior appearance of the residence which is inconsistent with the typical appearance of a residential dwelling. The following acts are prohibited in relation with or as a result of a Home Occupation and is not an exhaustive list but is intended as illustrative of actions that violate the standards for conducting a Home Occupation: 
(1)  No external evidence of the occupation shall be detectable at any lot line or beyond, including advertising, signs, smoke, dust, noise, fumes, glare, vibration, or electrical disturbance beyond the property line shall be allowed. 
(2)  No exterior storage of material, equipment, vehicles, and/or supplies used in conjunction with the Home Occupation shall be allowed. 
(3)  No storage of hazardous materials for business purposes shall be allowed on the premises. 
(4)  The Home Occupation shall not have a separate entrance. If an accessory building is permitted, it may have a separate entrance. 
(5)  Not more than two (2) patron- or business-related vehicles shall be present at any one (1) time, and the proprietor shall provide adequate off-street parking for such vehicles. 
(6)  A maximum of one (1) commercial vehicle, capacity one (1) ton or less, may be used or parked on the property in connection with the Home Occupation. The commercial vehicle shall not be parked on the street. 
(7)  The Home Occupation shall not require regular or frequent deliveries by heavy load delivery trucks or vehicles in excess of one and one-half (11/2) tons. 
(8)  Outdoor merchandise shall not be offered or displayed for sale on the premises. Sales incidental to a service shall be allowed; and orders previously made by telephone or at a sales party may be filled on the premises. 
(9)  No traffic shall be generated by a Home Occupation in greater volumes than normally occurs in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking shall be accommodated within the off-street parking provided for the residence (i.e., the driveway or garage) and along the street frontage of the lot, except as prohibited by Subsection (6) above. 
(10)  The Home Occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes. 
(11)  Only one (1) Home Occupation per home shall be allowed. 
(12)  The Home Occupation shall have no employees who are not an occupant of the residence. This shall not include the coordination or supervision of employees who do not regularly visit the house for purposes related to the business. 
(13)  The address of the Home Occupation shall not be included in any classified advertisement, yellow pages listing, or other advertisement. 
(14)  The Home Occupation shall not offer a ready inventory of any commodity for sale, except as specifically listed under A above. 
(15)  The Home Occupation shall not accept clients or customers before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. This limitation on hours of operation shall not apply to authorized childcare Home Occupations. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for outdoor activities. 
(16)  Except as expressly allowed by and in accordance with this Ordinance and other applicable City Ordinances, outdoor activities such as play areas shall be prohibited unless such activities are screened from neighboring property and public rights-of-way. 
D.  Appeal of the Planning Director's Home Occupation Determination. If the applicant disagrees with the determination of the Planning Director, the applicant may appeal to the BOA. 
E.  Any Home Occupation that was legally in existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance and that is not in full conformity with these provisions shall be deemed a legal Nonconforming Use. 
F.  Determination of a Home Occupation Use Not Specifically Listed. The Planning Director shall determine whether a proposed use not specifically listed is appropriate as a Home Occupation. The Planning Director shall evaluate the proposed Home Occupation in terms of its impact on neighboring property, its similarity to other allowed and prohibited uses, and its conformance with the regulations herein. 
6.2.4   Outdoor Storage Performance Standards
    Outdoor storage, which is differentiated from outdoor sales (refer to Article 3. Definitions): 
A.  Shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) percent of the total lot area. 
B.  Shall be prohibited in C-1A, Decatur Square Business District. 
C.  Shall be permitted in the LI, Light Industrial District and HI, Heavy Industrial District. 
D.  Shall be located behind the front building line and observe all setback requirements for the main structure or building. 
E.  Shall be visually screened from any public street or adjacent property with a minimum six (6) foot solid wall or fence. 
F.  Temporary Storage Containers: 
(1)  Temporary storage units and similar portable storage containers shall be prohibited in C-O, Office District, C-1, Restricted Business District, C-1A, Decatur Square Business District, and C-2, Thoroughfare Business District, except in accordance with Subsection (3) below. 
(2)  Units shall be allowed in the LI, Light Industrial District and HI, Heavy Industrial District provided they do not occupy required parking or loading areas, are behind required setbacks and are not contained in a front or side setback adjacent to a street. 
(3)  Units may be used in all nonresidential districts on a temporary basis during construction while a valid permit exists. If the business is closed or limited during construction, the containers may occupy required parking. 
(4)  Units may be located in the front yard, or in the side yard forward of the midpoint of the lot depth, for a period not to exceed four (4) days. 
(5)  Units may be placed in the rear yard, or in the side yard behind the midpoint of the lot depth, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(a)  Exception: receptacles used in conjunction with a home renovation are not included in this rear yard regulation. 
6.2.5   Outdoor Sales
A.  Outdoor Sales/Display. Outdoor retail sales, excluding those uses in Section 6.1 Use Chart with normal Outdoor Sales such as automobile sales lots, which involve the outside display of merchandise and seasonal items (refer to the Article 3. Definitions), that have a display area greater than thirty (30) percent of the Gross Floor Area of the principal Building shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Shall not be placed/located more than thirty (30) feet from the main building in C-1, Restricted Business District and C-2, Thoroughfare Business District, and not more than twelve (12) feet from the main building in C-1A, Decatur Square Business District. 
(2)  Shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are required by this Ordinance for the primary use(s) of the property. 
(3)  Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in any way. 
(4)  Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. 
(5)  All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner. 
B.  Temporary Seasonal Sales and Events. 
(1)  Shall be allowed in the C-1, Restricted Business District and C-2, Thoroughfare Business District, and the special districts. 
(2)  May occupy the parking spaces that are required by this Ordinance for the primary use(s) of the property for seasonal sales on a temporary basis only, which is a maximum of thirty (30) days per display of seasonal materials and a maximum of two (2) displays per calendar year, provided parking is adequate and not overloading the streets or adjacent properties. 
(3)  Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in any way. 
(4)  Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. 
(5)  All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner. 
(6)  All items shall be displayed no longer than six (6) months. 
6.2.6   Recreational Vehicles, Travel Trailers, and Motor Homes
    Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for nonresidential purposes, except for seasonal or temporary events. 
6.2.7   Small Wind Energy Systems
A.  Systems are permitted only on lots one (1) acre or larger. 
B.  Systems are permitted only in the rear yard. 
C.  The minimum setback from any property line, overhead utility line, or public right-of-way shall be a distance equal to the vertical distance from the ground to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point. 
6.2.8   Sale of Alcoholic Beverages
A.  Prohibited sales. The sale of alcoholic beverages is not allowed in areas zoned for residential use, including but not limited to PD planned development districts approved exclusively for residential uses. Except as otherwise specifically allowed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission or as otherwise provided herein, no alcoholic beverages may be sold within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public school or private school, or public hospital. Measurement of such distance shall be in accordance with the terms of this section and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. 
B.  Permits. 
Fees established. The annual permit fee for issuing a license or permit to operate, conduct, and maintain a business establishment selling alcoholic beverages in the City is: 
(1)  For stores with beer and wine sales for off-premises consumption only, and, except as specifically exempted herein, for locations with mixed beverage permits, the permit holder shall pay a fee equal to one-half (1/2) of the state fee for such license and permit in effect at the time of the initial permit application or renewal for the annual permit, as applicable. Such fee shall be in addition to any applicable fee for a food and beverage certificate. 
(2)  Exemption. A mixed beverage permit is exempt from the payment of the fee imposed by this subsection during the three-year period following the issuance of the permit as specified in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(3)  Payment of fees/Term. The permit fee shall be collected when the application for such permit is submitted. This permit shall be valid only for one year (365 days) from the date of its issuance, and if issued during the calendar year, the fee shall be collected in full without reduction and shall be renewed by the applicant annually thereafter during the time that such applicant is engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages within the city. Permit applications shall be filed with the planning and zoning coordinator. 
C.  Zoning compliance required. No permit shall be granted under the terms of this section unless the location at which the business is sought to be established and maintained is a permitted use under the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city as of or after the effective date thereof. 
D.  Business hours. It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or deliver any beer, wine, or liquor, except within those hours as prescribed in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, including but not limited to chapter 105 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. 
E.  Compliance required. Compliance with city codes and ordinances is required for on-premises sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages as follows: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage sales for off-premises consumption (beer and wine only). A building utilized for the retail sale of beer and/or wine for off-premises consumption only shall be inspected and shall comply with all applicable local regulations, including but not limited to building codes, fire codes, plumbing codes, electrical codes and ordinances. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverage sales for off-premises consumption-liquor (package) store. The following provisions shall be required for liquor (package) stores: 
(a)  A liquor (package) store shall not have walk-up window access, and shall not have drive-through or drive-up access. 
(b)  A liquor (package) store shall operate in premises that are not physically completely separate from any other business and the exterior design of the store shall show evidence of coordination with contextual influences of neighboring properties in regard to building setbacks, orientation, and relationship of structures to each other and to the street. The layout of the site shall respect and build upon the arrangement of buildings, open spaces and landscape elements of adjacent sites. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverage sales for on-premises consumption in conjunction with a restaurant use. A restaurant utilized for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be inspected and shall comply with all applicable local regulations, including but not limited to building codes, fire codes, plumbing codes, electrical codes and ordinances. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption-bar or tavern. A bar or tavern shall be inspected and shall comply with all applicable local regulations, including but not limited to building codes, fire codes, plumbing codes, electrical codes and ordinances. The following additional provisions shall be required for bars or taverns: 
(a)  A bar or tavern shall not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet to any property used exclusively for religious or educational purposes. The method of measurement shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. A hotel shall not be considered a residential use for the purpose of this section. 
(b)  The city council shall have full discretion to approve or deny an SUP application for a bar or tavern and may impose any reasonable condition deemed necessary by the council, including SUP expiration provisions, business name and signage, and change of ownership requirements to ensure community health, safety and welfare in approving a bar or tavern. 
F.  Procedures prior to issuance of permit. Before any certification from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission or other documentation of approval is signed by the city representative, such certificate or documentation shall be submitted to the planning and zoning coordinator to assure: 
(1)  That the application complies with all provisions of this and all applicable ordinances; 
(2)  That a SUP application is officially filed with the payment of applicable fees; 
(3)  That proof is submitted that a representative of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission has approved the submittal of an application for license; and 
(4)  That the chief of police/director of public safety has reviewed the SUP application. 
G.  Additional development conditions/waivers. The City Council may attach additional development conditions, or grant specific waivers to applicable code requirements, to the specific use permit that the council, in its discretion, determines are appropriate for buffering, safety, security, and compatibility for and to adjacent properties. 
H.  Specific use permit (SUP). 
(1)  SUP required. Except as specifically provided herein, no persons shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale, distribute or engage in any other activity for which a permit or license is required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code within the city without first obtaining a specific use permit to do so from the city. All of the provisions of the specific use permit procedure shall apply as per the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended. In the event of a conflict between the general regulations governing specific use permits and the provisions contained in this section, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(2)  SUP application. In order for a person to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages, a formal application for a SUP shall be filed with the planning and zoning coordinator with the appropriate fee established by the city. The planning and zoning coordinator shall process the application by submitting to the planning and zoning commission for their review and recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval. The city council will consider and approve or disapprove the granting of a SUP for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Specific use permits and applications in existence as of March 27, 2017. Any existing SUP for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption for which the SUP was either issued, or for which an application was received, prior to March 27, 2017 and such SUP has not expired, or said application has not been approved by the city council, said establishment shall not sell alcoholic beverages such that the gross receipts from alcohol sales exceed 50 percent all gross receipts from all sales by the establishment. A new SUP must be granted by the city council in compliance with the requirements of this section in order to increase any alcohol-to-food-sales ratio for on-premises alcohol sales for any existing establishment and for any unapproved SUP where an active application has been submitted. 
I.  Criteria and processing of SUP. The following general conditions apply to all specific use permits (SUP) allowing the sale of any alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The applicant must design and operate the establishment for which an SUP is sought in such a manner that the proposed use or actual use of the premises shall not substantially increase traffic congestion or create overcrowding in the establishment or in the immediately surrounding area. 
(2)  The applicant must comply with applicable licensing and permit provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended from the date of the issuance of the SUP by the city council. 
(3)  As required, the applicant shall bear the burden of showing that the establishment does not exceed the limitation on gross receipts from the sales of alcoholic beverages applicable to its license and SUP. The applicant shall maintain accounting records of the sources of its gross revenue and allow the city to inspect such records during reasonable business hours. 
(4)  The applicant shall demonstrate that the granting of the SUP would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and/or welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(5)  The applicant shall, at all times, provide an adequate number of employees for security purposes to adequately control the establishment premises to prevent incidents of drunkenness, disorderly conduct and raucous behavior. The applicant shall consult with the chief of police/director of public safety who shall act in an advisory capacity to determine the number of qualified employees necessary to meet his/her obligation hereunder. 
(6)  The establishment shall provide adequate parking spaces to accommodate its employees and patrons. Provided however, the number of parking spaces shall never be less than those required for similar uses in that zoning district where the establishment is located. 
(7)  The applicant shall operate the establishment in such a manner as to prevent excessive noise, dirt, litter and odors in the establishment and in the surrounding area and operate the establishment in such a manner as to minimize disturbance to surrounding property owners and in compliance with all applicable city ordinances and state laws. 
(8)  Unless specified as a condition of approval by the city council for an SUP, a specific use permit issued for any alcoholic beverage sales under this section shall automatically expire upon a change in use of the property, change of ownership to the property and/or business and/or upon the revocation, termination or expiration of the certificate of occupancy. 
(9)  All specific use permits issued under this section shall be further conditioned that the same may be discontinued if the use for which the SUP was granted ceases to be operated at the permitted location for a minimum period of six (6) continuous months, or as otherwise provided for the revocation of SUPs, as outlined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended. 
J.  Denial of SUP. The city council may deny an SUP if it affirmatively determines that the issuance of such SUP: 
(1)  Is incompatible with the surrounding uses or property; or 
(2)  Is detrimental or offensive to the neighborhood or contrary to the health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; or 
(3)  Is found to be in noncompliance with any city ordinances, including without limitation failure to comply with any one (1) or more of the provisions of this section. 
K.  Methods for determining distance measurement. 
(1)  Church or public hospital. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(2)  Public or private school. The measurement of distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a public or private school shall be: 
(a)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(b)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth (5th) story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
L.  Exception to distance requirements. Upon receipt of a request, the planning and zoning commission will consider and make a recommendation to the city council to consider an exception to reduce the distance requirement contained in this section and the city council shall take final action on such recommendation based upon the criteria specified herein below: 
(1)  A planning and zoning commission recommendation to reduce the distance requirement and final action of the city council to allow such reduction shall be based upon the following. Upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the city council may allow an exception upon proof by the applicant that he/she meets the following criteria: documented approval from surrounding property owners within the distance requirements for which the exception is sought; proof of preliminary approval from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission; a determination by council that the enforcement of the regulations in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public; and after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of such regulation, the council determines that the exception is in the best interest of the community. 
(2)  The city council shall have the authority to grant an exception under this section for temporary special events after review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. For such events, both the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall consider: hours of the event, impact on surrounding area; estimated number of participants; personal and property security; duration and other health, safety and welfare considerations as deemed appropriate and necessary by the city council. 
(3)  No exception may be granted hereunder except after a public hearing for which notice has been given to owners of real property within three hundred (300) feet (or one thousand (1,000) feet if applicable) of the location of the proposed business or of the proposed location for temporary special event. Such notice must be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing. 
M.  Possession or consumption prohibited in certain areas. 
(1)  Athletic fields, parks, cemeteries, or public areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open alcoholic beverage container or consume any alcoholic beverage in any city-owned or controlled athletic field and all parking lots servicing such athletic fields except as specifically approved by the city council, ordinance, or city council approved policy which governs such conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open alcoholic beverage container or consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code in any city-owned or controlled park, including reserved area(s) within any park, playground, recreation center, cemetery or any other area in the city-owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation, including all planted expressways, all parking lots servicing parks and public areas, parkways, triangles, and traffic islands maintained by the city except as specifically approved by the city council, ordinance, or city council approved policy which governs such conduct. 
(2)  Schools and school activities. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container or consume any alcoholic beverage on a public street, public alley, or public sidewalk within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of a facility that is a public or private school, including a parochial school, that provides all or any part of pre-kindergarten through twelfth grade in the buildings or on the grounds of any public school in the city limits or at any school-related activity conducted within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03-03,  2.03, 3-27-17) 
ARTICLE 7. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Section 7.1 - Area Regulations 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no Building or Structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in the district in which it is located unless it is in conformity with all the minimum area regulations herein specified. 
7.1.1   Residential Lot Dimensions
    Residential lot dimensions shall be in accordance with Table 8. Residential District Area Regulations. 
A.  Lot Dimensions. 
(1)  A lot having less area, width, or depth than herein required which was an official Lot of Record at the time of passage of this Ordinance may be used for a one-family dwelling, and no lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in size below the minimum requirements set forth herein unless a Special Exception is granted. 
(2)  A Special Exception to the requirements of this Section may be granted when an infill lot is unable, under reasonable means, to meet the area, width or depth requirements of this Section. 
(a)  Requests for a Special Exception. Application for a Special Exception to Subsection (1) above shall be made to the BOA. 
(b)  Notation of Conditions. If a special exception is granted the condition imposed on the development by the exception shall be noted on either the building permit or plat associated with the original request. 
B.  Lot Coverage. 
(1)  The maximum percentage of any lot area which may hereafter be covered by the main building and all accessory buildings and the maximum ratio of floor area to the total area of the lot or tract on which a building is located shall be in accordance with Table 8. Residential District Area Regulations. 
(2)  When an existing single-family residential building, on the effective date of this Ordinance has a greater percentage of a lot covered or a higher floor area ratio than herein prescribed, such building coverage shall be considered conforming. 
(3)  In SF-1, Single-Family Residential District, SF-2, Single-Family Residential District, 2F, Two-Family Residential District and MF, Multiple-Family Residential District, the main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the mid-point on one (1) side lot line with the mid-point of the opposite side lot line. 
C.  Building Placement. Where a yard or building line has been established by a plat approved by the City and such line requires a greater or lesser yard or building line than is prescribed by this Ordinance for the district in which the yard or building line is located, the required yard or building line shall comply with the requirements so established by such plat. 
D.  Height Regulations. 
(1)  In measuring the height of a building, the following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio and television towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, flagpoles, and parapet walls not exceeding four (4) feet in height (see Figure 13. Building Height). 
(2)  In the districts where the height of buildings is restricted, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks may extend for an additional height not to exceed forty (40) feet above the average grade line of the building. Water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires, may be erected to three (3) stories in height in residential areas restricted to two (2) stories in height, provided that one (1) additional foot shall be added to the width and depth of side and rear yards for each foot that such structures exceed two (2) stories in height. 
(3)  The height for the first story shall be considered to be fifteen (15) feet in height, and the height of the second story and other subsequent stories shall be considered to be twelve feet (12) in height. The definition of a story does not include parapets, gables and other normal roof structures. In cases where the site has a significant slope, the height of a building shall be measured from a point representing the average slope from opposite sides of the building. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
E.  Floor Area Ratio Calculations. The maximum FAR permitted by this Ordinance is calculated by dividing the gross square footage of the building(s) to the net (after right-of-way dedication) area of the lot (measured in square feet). Any below grade mechanical rooms, parking garages, or other non-occupied areas shall not be included in the gross square footage of the building(s) for the purposes of this calculation. 

Table 8. Residential District Area Regulations* 
SF-1, Single-Family Residential District SF-2, Single-Family Residential District TH, Townhouse Residential District 2F, Two-Family Residential District MF, Multiple-Family Residential District MHD, Manu- 
factured Home District Minimum Front Yard Setback 30' 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' Minimum Side Yard Setback 10% or 5' 10% or 5' See 7.1.1F(8) 10% or 5' 10% or 5' 10% or 5' Minimum Rear Yard Setback 15' 10' 10' 10' 15' 15' Minimum Lot Area One-Family Dwelling Detached 21,780 sf 5,000 sf 5,000 sf 5,000 sf 5,000 sf 5,000 sf One-Family Dwelling Attached 2,000 sf 2,000 sf 2,500 sf Two-Family Dwelling 2,500 sf 3,750 sf Three-Family Dwelling 3,750 sf Multi-Family Two Stories 2,100 sf Multi-Family Over Two Stories Add'l 600 sf Manufactured Home Dwelling 3,500 sf Minimum Lot Width One-Family Dwelling Detached 100' 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' One-Family Dwelling Attached 20' 35' 35' Two-Family Dwelling 35' 35' Multi-Family Two Stories 100' Multi-Family Over Two Stories 100' Manufactured Home Dwelling 40' Minimum Lot Depth One-Family Dwelling Detached 100' 70' 70' 70' 70' 70' One-Family Dwelling Attached 70' 70' 70' Two-Family Dwelling 70' 70' Multi-Family Two Stories 100' Multi-Family Over Two Stories 100' Manufactured Home Dwelling 70' Maximum Height** 21/2 stories 21/2 stories 31/2 stories, not to exceed 45'. All other detached buildings, including detached living units, shall not exceed 21/2 stories or 35' in height. 2 stories 3 stories Permanent buildings may be 2 stories in height. Residential manu- 
factured homes may be 20 feet in height. The avg. height of the MH frame above ground elevation, measured at 90 to the frame, shall not exceed 3'. Maximum Lot Coverage 25% 35% 70% 40% 50% 60% Maximum FAR 4:1 1:2  
* See 5.1.1 through 5.1.13 for additional and more detailed regulations for each District. 
**Unless otherwise noted in D. Height Regulations 
Table 9. Nonresidential District Area Regulations* 
C-O, Office District C-1, Restricted Business District C-1A, Decatur Square Business District C-2, Thorough- 
fare 
Business District LI, Light Industrial District HI, Heavy Industrial District Minimum Front Yard Setback 25' 25' 0' 25' 25' 25' Minimum Side Yard Setback 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' Minimum Rear Yard Setback 10' 10' 0' 10' 10' 10' Minimum Lot Area n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Minimum Lot Width n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Minimum Lot Depth n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Maximum Heights** 3 stories 3 stories 3 stories 20 stories Any height not prohibited by other ordinances Any height not prohibited by other ordinances Maximum Lot Coverage n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Maximum FAR 1:2 1:2 2:1 2:1 1:1 1:1  
* See 5.1.1 through 5.1.13 for additional and more detailed regulations for each District. 
** Unless otherwise noted in D. Height Regulations 
F.  Residential Yard Measurements. 
(1)  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the closest building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. 
(2)  Eaves and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet (Figure 14. Projection into Front Yard). 
(3)  Subsurface structures may not project into the front yard greater than forty (40) inches (Figure 14. Projection into Front Yard). 

(4)  Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory buildings as permitted herein, and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features projecting into the required side yard in an amount not to exceed twelve (12) inches and roof eaves projecting into the required side yard in an amount not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches. 
(5)  Multiple family dwellings shall provide a minimum separation of fifteen (15) feet between all building walls and any side lot line, except that any such building wall not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in width may provide a separation of ten (10) feet (Figure 15. Setback Standards for Multi-Family Buildings). 
(6)  Where structures are constructed to exceed two (2) stories in height, a side yard equal to one foot for each two (2) feet of building height for all building faces or walls having openings for light, air or access shall be provided. In all districts permitting the construction of apartment buildings exceeding two (2) stories in height, a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet shall be required for any building face or wall which contains no opening for windows, light or air (Figure 15. Setback Standards for Multi-Family Buildings). 

(7)  On a corner lot used for one-family or two-family dwellings, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots platted after the effective date of this Ordinance, provided however that where one (1) street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line shown on a plat approved by the City containing a side yard of ten (10) feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall control. On corner lots, the lot width of least dimension shall be considered the front yard (Figure 16. Corner Lots). 


(8)  A one-family attached dwelling shall provide a minimum required side yard adjacent to a side street of ten (10) feet and no complex of attached one-family dwellings shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in length. A minimum required side yard of five (5) feet shall be provided at the end of each one-family attached dwelling complex so that the end of any two (2) adjacent building complexes shall be at least ten (10) feet apart (Figure 17. Side Yard Standards for Attached Single Family Dwellings). 
(9)  The minimum side yard requirements in a PD, Planned Development District shall be established on the Concept Plan which shall be made a part of the PD Ordinance. 
(10)  No side yard is specified for nonresidential use in the C-O, Office District, C-1, Restricted Business District, C-1A, Decatur Square Business District, C-2, Thoroughfare Business District, LI, Light Industrial District and HI, Heavy Industrial District except where commercial, retail or industrial or other nonresidential use abuts upon a district boundary line dividing such districts from a residential district in which event a minimum ten (10) foot side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to such residential district. 
G.  Double Frontage Yard Requirements. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one (1) street to another, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has been established along one (1) frontage, in which event only one (1) required front yard need be observed (Figure 18. Double Frontage Lot Front Yards). 

H.  Adjoining District Yard Requirements. Where the frontage on one (2) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is divided by two (2) or more Zoning Districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive District for the entire frontage (Figure 19. Front Yard Where Zoning Changes in a Block). 

7.1.2   Location of Multiple Dwellings and Buildings
A.  Only one (1) main building for one-family, two-family or multiple-family use with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a Lot unless such structures are on an approved Site Plan. 
B.  Each dwelling shall face or front upon a public street, or approved place, other than an alley, which means of access shall have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet. 
C.  Where a Lot is used for residential, retail, commercial or industrial purposes, or a combination of same, or for a combination of retail and dwelling purposes and is part of a Planned Development District or an approved Site Plan, more than one (1) main building may be located upon the Lot, but only when such buildings conform to all the landscaping, parking and density requirements applicable to the uses and districts. 
D.  No parking area, storage area, or required landscaping for one (1) building shall be computed as being the landscaping, yard or area requirements for any other use. 
Section 7.2 - Awnings in the C-1A, Decatur Square Business District 
7.2.1   Awnings or Canopies Required

    Within the C-1A, Decatur Square Business District, all new development and redevelopment projects shall be required to utilize an awning or canopy. 
7.2.2   Extending beyond Property Line
    The awning or canopy may overlap the sidewalk but shall not extend more than five (5) feet beyond the property line. 
7.2.3   Design
    The awning or canopy may be structural, cantilevered or shed roof and may be made of canvas, metal or similar material. All canvas and similar materials must be maintained in good condition at all times. 
Section 7.3 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations 
    The minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in the following schedule. 
Table 10. Minimum Requirements for Parking Space Configuration, Arrangement, Size, and Circulation 
A B C D E F Parking Angle (in degrees) Stall Width (in feet) Stall Depth (in feet) Aisle Width for One-Way Traffic (in feet) Aisle Width for Two-Way Traffic (in feet) Curb Length Per Car (in feet) Parking Lot Width (curb-to-curb, in feet) 30 9.0 17.0 12.0 24.0 18.0 37.5 45 9.0 19.0 13.0 24.0 12.7 46.5 60 9.0 21.0 18.0 24.0 10.4 65.5 90 9.0 19.0 24.0 24.0 9.0 62.0  
7.3.1   Off-Street Parking

    All parking shall be off-street and all vehicle maneuvering on the subject parcel shall not occur on the street or right-of-way. The space shall not be located within a public street or alley, nor shall head-in parking adjacent to a public street or alley, wherein the maneuvering is done on a public street or alley, be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking requirements for any use. 
7.3.2   Off-Street Parking Provisions
A.  Residential Districts. 
(1)  All required vehicle parking shall be on a concrete or asphalt paved surface. 
(2)  All driveways and approaches to parking spaces shall be on a concrete or asphalt paved surface. 
(3)  No required parking space, garage, carport, or other automobile storage space shall be used for the storage of any Heavy Load Vehicle (see Article 3. Definitions). 
(4)  Additional parking shall be required in accordance with this Section for any recreational uses, clubhouse, office, sales offices and other similar accessory structures and uses. 
B.  Nonresidential and Multi-Family Districts. 
(1)  All parking areas shall be constructed of the same material as the adjoining street, or of concrete. All parking areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, streets, or alleys by a wall, fence, curbing, or other protection device. 
(2)  Covered Parking and Density Bonuses. 
(a)  An increase in density of a total of up to twenty-four (24) units per acre is permitted when at least fifty (50) percent of the required parking spaces are constructed as covered or enclosed spaces. 
(b)  An increase in density of a total of up to twenty-six (26) units per acre is permitted when one hundred (100) percent of the required parking spaces are constructed as covered or enclosed spaces. 
(3)  No parking space may be located closer than six (6) feet from any building or closer than two (2) feet from any side or rear lot line. 
(4)  For safety and fire-fighting purposes, access through to adjacent nonresidential parking areas shall be provided in accordance with 7.3.9 Fire Lanes. 
(5)  All off-street parking, driveways, maneuvering, and loading areas shall be designed in accordance with Figure 21. References for Table 10 and Table 10. Minimum Requirements for Parking Space Configuration, Arrangement, Size, and Circulation, shall be paved with a concrete or asphalt surface, and shall be curbed in accordance with the City's parking lot paving requirements. 
(6)  For new construction only, all vehicle maneuvering shall take place on-site. No public right-of-way shall be used for backing or maneuvering into or from a parking space (except business locations in the downtown area that are already in existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance), or for circulation within the parking lot. 
(a)  All entrances into parking lots shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width, or a maximum of forty (40) feet in width. 
(b)  Divided entrances into parking lots shall have a minimum ingress lane of eighteen (18) feet wide, a minimum landscaped median width of five (5) feet for an unbroken distance of at least one hundred (100) feet, and a minimum egress lane of twenty-two (22) feet wide. All divided entrances shall be a maximum of forty-five (45) feet in width. 
(7)  In all nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts, the perimeter of all parking lots and driveways shall be provided with concrete curbs. Parking shall not be permitted to encroach upon the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Refuse storage facilities placed in a parking lot shall not be located in a designated parking or loading space. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies and ease of egress from the site without having to back up further than twenty (20) feet and without having to go the wrong way in a traffic aisle. 
(9)  Parking space(s) for persons with disabilities and other associated provisions (e.g., clear and unobstructed pathways into building, crosswalks across parking lots, etc.) shall be provided according to building codes, State laws, and requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(10)  Designated parking and loading areas shall not be used for the repair, storage, dismantling or servicing (except for normal maintenance of a private vehicle) of vehicles or equipment, or for the storage of materials or supplies, or for any other use in conflict with the designated parking and loading areas (i.e., advertising or outside storage of raw materials). 
(11)  At no time after initial approval of the parking area layout shall changes be made in the location and number of provided spaces without written City approval of a revised plan. 
(12)  A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring at least eight (8) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long that has direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility and that does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area. An escape lane of at least eight (8) feet in width and with negotiable geometric design shall be provided to allow vehicles to get out of the stacking lane if necessary. Off-street stacking requirements for drive-through facilities shall be as follows: 
(a)  For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces. One (1) escape lane shall be provided. 
(b)  For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of five (5) spaces shall be provided for the first vehicle stop, and two (2) spaces shall be provided for each additional vehicle stop (order/pick-up windows, etc.). One escape lane shall be provided from the beginning of the stacking lane to the first vehicle stop. 
(c)  For a full-service car wash, each vacuum or gas pump lane shall be provided with a minimum of four (4) stacking spaces. For the finish/drying area, adequate vehicle stacking and storage space shall be provided to keep finished vehicles out of circulation aisles, access easements, fire lanes, streets, etc. 
(d)  For each automated self-service (drive-through/rollover) car wash bay, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay itself, shall be provided. One (1) stacking space shall be provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window-drying and other detailing. 
(e)  For each wand-type self-service (open) car wash bay, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay itself, shall be provided. One (1) stacking space shall be provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window-drying and other detailing, unless a separate area/shade structure is provided (outside of circulation aisles) for these activities. 
(f)  For automobile quick-lube type facilities, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces shall be provided for each service bay in addition to the service bay itself. 
(g)  For all other types of land use that provide drive-up service, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces for each service window shall be provided. 
(13)  Dead-end parking areas shall be avoided if possible. If dead-end parking is necessary, then it shall be designed such that it is no more than forty-five (45) feet in length, unless adequate turnaround space is provided. A minimum hammerhead back-up space of at least fifteen (15) feet shall be provided at the end of any dead-end parking area. 
(14)  All parking structures shall conform to the construction and design standards of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(15)  A parking analysis and tabulation shall be required on the Site Plan for each development and shall be a part of the Site Plan submittal. Each analysis shall include an explanation of applicable parking requirement, and as a minimum shall include occupancy classification type, building square footages, and number of employees, total parking spaces required, total parking spaces provided, required and provided Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessible spaces, and required and provided ADA van accessible spaces. When the Director of Public Works, or designee determines necessary, an additional traffic impact study may be required to determine the impacts of a development on the off-site public street system. 
C.  Off-Street Loading Facilities. All retail and similar nonresidential structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or tract. All drives and approaches shall provide space and clearances to allow for the maneuvering of trucks off-street. Each site shall provide a designated on-site maneuvering area for trucks (see Figure 22. Truck and Vehicle Maneuvering). 

(a)  Off-street loading space may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck berth within the structure. Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten (10) feet by seventy-five (75) feet, and such spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with Table 11. 
(b)  For normal retail, commercial sales service or industrial use buildings and establishments, off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Table 11. 
Table 11. Retail, Commercial, and Industrial Off-Street Loading Facilities 
Square feet of gross floor area in structure Minimum required spaces or berths 0 to 5,000 None 5,000 to 15,000 1 15,000 to 40,000 2 40,000 to 65,000 3 65,000 to 100,000 4 Each Additional 50,000 1 Additional  
(c)  For hotels, office buildings, restaurants and similar establishments, off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Table 12. 
Table 12. Hotel, Office, and Restaurant Off-Street Loading Facilities 
Square feet of gross floor area in structure Minimum required spaces or berths 0 to 10,000 None 10,000 to 50,000 1 50,000 to 100,000 2 100,000 to 200,000 3 Each Additional 50,000 1 Additional  
D.  Loading docks for any establishment which customarily receives goods between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and is adjacent to a residential use or district shall be designed and constructed so as to minimize the effects of the noise of the operation on adjacent residences. Other screening/buffering alternatives may be approved on the applicable required Concept or Site Plan provided that the City makes a finding that the method of screening/buffering will be adequate to minimize the impact on nearby residences. 
E.  Below grade loading docks are required to have operational sump pumps or other approved drainage. 
F.  Kindergartens, elementary schools, day care, and similar child training and care establishments shall provide one (1) paved off-street pedestrian loading and unloading space for an automobile on a through, "circular" drive for each ten (10) students cared for (excluding child care in a residence). An additional lane shall also be required to allow pass-by or through traffic to move while automobiles waiting or parked to pick up children occupy loading/unloading areas. 
G.  Loading spaces that are adjacent and easily accessible to several buildings or uses, including buildings and uses on separate lots, shall be allowed to satisfy the loading requirements for the individual buildings or uses. 
H.  Below grade loading docks are required to have operational sump pumps or other approved drainage. 
7.3.3   Parking Requirements Based upon Use
    The following parking requirements shall apply for all districts with the exception of C-1A, Decatur Square Business District. 
A.  Residential Use Parking Schedule. 
(1)  SF-1, Single-Family Residential District: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(2)  SF-2, Single-Family Residential District: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(3)  TH, Townhouse Residential District: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(4)  2F, Two-Family Residential District: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(5)  MF, Multiple-Family Residential District: Two and one-quarter (21/4) spaces for each dwelling unit in apartments, two (2) spaces for all other dwelling units. 
(6)  MHD, Manufactured Home District: Two (2) spaces for each mobile home space. A minimum parking area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per manufactured home space shall be provided in a common area for storage of boats or vehicles in excess of two (2) per manufactured home space, and for visitors' vehicles, to minimize on-street parking and to facilitate the movement of emergency vehicles into and through the park. 
B.  Nonresidential Use Parking Schedule. Compliance with the following minimum parking space regulations shall be required: 
(1)  Bank, Savings and Loan or Similar Financial Establishments: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Bed and Breakfast: One (1) space per guest room in addition to the requirements for a normal residential use. 
(3)  Bowling Alley: Six (6) spaces for each lane. 
(4)  Churches: One (1) space for each three (3) seats in the main sanctuary in addition to the requirements for other uses such as classrooms, offices, gymnasiums, and similar ancillary uses. 
(5)  Clinics or Doctors' Offices: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area (minimum of five (5) spaces). 
(6)  Commercial Amusement, Indoor: Standalone: One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet; In-line/strip style: One (1) space per two hundred and fifty (250) square feet. 
(7)  Commercial Amusement, Outdoor: Twenty (20) spaces plus one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(8)  Assisted Living or Acute Care Living Facility: One (1) space for each three (3) beds. 
(9)  Convenience Store with or without Gasoline Sales: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of Floor Area. Parking in front of pump stations shall be counted towards the required parking, however a minimum of six (6) parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the main building. 
(10)  Golf Course: Minimum of thirty (30) spaces. 
(11)  High School, College or University: One (1) space for each classroom, laboratory or instruction area plus one (1) space for each one and one-half (11/2) students accommodated in the institution. 
(12)  Hospitals: One (1) space for every two (2) beds. 
(13)  Hotel or Motel: One (1) space for each room, unit or guest accommodation, plus additional requirements specified for clubs, restaurants and other uses. 
(14)  Institutions of a Philanthropic Nature: Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(15)  Library or Museum: Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
(16)  Manufacturing, Processing or Repairing: One (1) space for each two (2) employees or one (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
(17)  Offices, General: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area (minimum five (5) spaces). 
(18)  Places of Public Assembly not listed: One (1) space for each three (3) seats provided. 
(19)  Recreational, Private or Commercial area or building (other than listed): Standalone: One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet; In-line/strip style: One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
(20)  Restaurant or Cafeteria: One (1) space for every three (3) seats under maximum seating arrangement (minimum of five (5) spaces). 
(21)  Retail or Personal Service: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area (minimum of five (5) spaces). 
(22)  Schools, Elementary or Junior High: One (1) space for each classroom plus one (1) space for each four (4) seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or other place of assembly. 
(23)  Storage or Warehousing: One (1) space for each two (2) employees or one (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
(24)  Theaters, Meeting Rooms and Places of Public Assembly: One (1) space for every three (3) seats. 
C.  Special Off-Street Parking Regulations. 
(1)  In the SF-1, Single-Family Residential District, SF-2, Single-Family Residential District, TH, Townhouse Residential District, 2F, Two-Family Residential District, MF, Multiple-Family Residential District, MHD, Manufactured Home District, C-O, Office District, C-1, Restricted Business District, and C-1A, Decatur Square Business District, no parking space, garage or carport, or other automobile storage space or structure shall be used for the storage of any truck, truck trailer or van, except panel and pickup trucks not exceeding one (1) ton capacity. 
(2)  Floor area of structure devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the off-street parking requirements of any use. 
(3)  No open parking space or surfaced area shall be located nearer than two (2) feet to the side lot line. 
(4)  No parking requirements are established for the C-1A, Decatur Square Business District. 
D.  Parking Requirements for New and Unlisted Uses. Where questions arise concerning the minimum off-street parking requirements for any use not specifically listed herein, the requirements may be interpreted by the Planning Director as those of a similar listed use. 
7.3.4   Construction Standards
    Minimum construction standards for off-street parking shall include: 
A.  Three thousand six hundred (3,600) psi reinforced concrete with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches or four (4) inches of Type "B" and two (2) inches of Type "D" HMAC. 
B.  Subgrade thickness and content shall be determined from a geotechnical report sealed by a licensed professional engineer registered in Texas provided by the developer. 
C.  Standard curb and gutter as shown in the NCTCOG standards manual shall be placed around all landscaping areas and the external boundary of the parking area. 
D.  All off-street parking areas shall be striped in accordance with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) published by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
7.3.5   Parking Access from a Public Street
A.  Entrance/exit drive(s) shall be designed and located to minimize traffic congestion or conflict within the site and with adjoining public streets. Based upon analysis by the City, if projected volumes of traffic entering or leaving a development are likely to interfere with the projected peak traffic flow volumes on adjoining streets, additional right-of-way and paving in the form of a deceleration lane, a turn lane, or other roadway improvements may be required of a developer in order to reduce such interference and to help ensure traffic safety and efficiency. The dedication of additional right-of-way or street paving may also be required, and shall be determined at the time the required plan and final plat are approved by the City. 
B.  Vehicular access to nonresidential uses shall not be permitted from alleys serving residential areas, and shall not be configured as "head-in" parking spaces that are accessed directly from the street. 
C.  Parking space configuration, arrangement, size and circulation in all districts shall be constructed according to Table 10. Minimum Requirements for Parking Space Configuration, Arrangement, Size, and Circulation and Figure 21. References for Table 10. 
7.3.6   Computing Number of Parking Spaces
    In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above uses, the following rules shall govern: 
A.  "Floor Area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. 
B.  "Seat" shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  For fixed (e.g., church pews, grandstands, benches, etc.) seating, one (1) seat equals one and three-quarters (1.75) feet of length; and 
(2)  For flexible (e.g., folding chairs, etc.) seating areas, one (1) seat equals eight (8) square feet of floor area occupied by such seating area (includes aisles). 
C.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be calculated by rounding up to the nearest whole number. 
D.  Whenever a Building or Use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten percent (10%) or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. If a building or use that was in existence prior to the effective date of this Ordinance is enlarged by more than fifty percent (50%) in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, then such Building or Use shall be required to conform with the parking requirements herein for the entire Building or Use. 
E.  For buildings which have a combination of uses within the same structure or on the same premises (such as retail, office, and other nonresidential uses), the off-street parking requirement shall be calculated as the summation of the parking requirements for each use, and no parking space for one particular use shall be allowed to count toward the parking requirement for some other use on the premises except in the case of a shared parking arrangement (see F below). 
F.  Shared parking may be allowed in the case of mixed uses (different buildings) under the following conditions: 
(1)  Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parking spaces required for a theater or other place of evening entertainment (after 6:00 p.m.), or for a church, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during evening hours. 
(2)  Shared parking shall be on the same parking lot. 
(3)  Reduction due to shared parking shall only be allowed if approved by the City on the applicable required plan (see Section 4.5 Building Permits, Certificates of Occupancy and Completion). 
(4)  To assure retention of the shared parking spaces, each property owner shall properly draw and execute an irrevocable mutual parking agreement document expressing the same and after receiving approval as required by Subsection 7.3.7, shall file this agreement in the County Real Property Records, and shall provide a copy of the filed agreement to the City prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any use that relies upon the parking agreement. 
(a)  In the event that a parking agreement is terminated, the City may revoke the Certificate of Occupancy of either use if either use lacks the required amount of parking after the agreement is terminated. 
7.3.7   Location of Parking Spaces
    In any case where any additional Parking Spaces are required and are not located on the same Lot with the Building or Use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council is required subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Except for location, all other requirements relating to off-street parking shall be met; 
B.  Such space shall be conveniently usable without unreasonable: 
(1)  Hazard to pedestrians; 
(2)  Hazard to vehicular traffic; 
(3)  Traffic congestion; or, 
(4)  Detriment to the appropriate Use of other properties in the vicinity; 
C.  A written agreement shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the City Attorney and executed by all parties concerned, assuring the continued availability of the off-street parking facility for the development it is intended to serve. 
7.3.8   Use of Required Parking Spaces in Nonresidential Districts
    Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be used only for these respective purposes and shall not be used for refuse containers, cart corrals, recycling kiosks, signs or sign support structures, telecommunications towers or support structures, storage or permanent display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials, or products for sale/lease/rent. For temporary display and outdoor sales, see 6.2.5 Outdoor Sales. 
7.3.9   Fire Lanes
    Fire lanes shall be provided in all nonresidential, multi-family, single-family, and manufactured home park developments, as required by the adopted Fire Code of the City and the Subdivision Ordinance. 
7.3.10   Special Regulations for Recreational Vehicles or Equipment
A.  Recreational vehicles shall not be located in a recreational vehicle park or campground for more than a ninety (90) calendar day time period. 
B.  An owner or tenant of a residential lot may park a recreational vehicle that they own on the same lot in accordance with City regulations. Such vehicle parking shall also meet all other required City ordinances. 
7.3.11   Parking Area Lighting
A.  To prevent nuisance situations, all parking area lighting shall be designed, shielded and operated so as not to reflect or shine on adjacent properties and shall be in accordance with all applicable City ordinances. 
B.  Nonresidential streets and driveways shall be lighted at night with a minimum intensity of two (2) foot-candles' illumination if off-street parking or loading facilities are to be used at night. 
C.  All lighting facilities shall be arranged as to reflect the illumination away from any residentially zoned property. Such lighting facilities shall distribute not more than two-tenths (0.2) of one (1) foot candle of light upon any adjacent residentially zoned property. 
D.  All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or other public way. 
Section 7.4 - Trash Receptacles/Refuse Containers 
7.4.1   Trash Receptacle Requirement
    All commercial properties shall provide a trash dumpster location that meets screening and construction requirements as designated in the City Design Standards. 
7.4.2   Trash Receptacle Access and Clearance
A.  All driveways to trash dumpsters shall be designed to accommodate the weight of a fifty-six thousand (56,000) pound G.V.W. sanitation truck. Lifting pads shall be provided in front of each trash dumpster location to accommodate the front wheels of the sanitation truck. 
B.  Access to the trash dumpster and lift pad shall be in a "straight in" manner, or other manner as approved by the Planning Director. 
C.  Trash dumpsters shall not be located directly beneath any overhead utility line less than twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
7.4.3   Required Screening
    See 7.5.2F below for refuse area screening requirements. 
Section 7.5 - Screening, Fencing, and Buffering 
7.5.1   Purpose
    To encourage the most appropriate use of land while conserving and protecting the privacy and value of adjacent permitted uses. Regulations are prescribed for the location and type of various screening devices to be used when required in the various zoning districts or in this Section in accordance with the following standards. 
7.5.2   Screening of Nonresidential and Multi-Family Areas with Screening Walls
A.  Adjacent to a Single-Family or Residential Planned Development District. In the event that multi-family and nonresidential uses side or back upon a single-family or residential PD district, or in the event that any nonresidential district sides or backs upon a multi-family district, a solid masonry wall of not less than six feet (6'), nor more than eight feet (8'), in height shall be erected in conjunction with landscaping elements on the property line separating these districts. The purpose of the screening wall is to provide a visual and protective barrier between the properties. 
(1)  Multi-Family Uses. The owner of the multi-family property shall be responsible for and shall build and maintain the required wall on the property line dividing the property from the single-family residential district. This construction requirement applies only when multi-family is adjacent to residential uses. 
(2)  Nonresidential Uses. When screening is required between nonresidential and residential uses, it shall be the responsibility of the nonresidential use to construct and maintain the screening wall. 
B.  Placement of a Screening Wall. In nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts, no wall shall be erected in any front yard or side yard which is adjacent to a public street unless the wall is required to screen the development from an adjacent residential area. If required to screen a residential area, the screening wall shall be extended out to the street right-of-way line by the developer of the non-residential or multiple-family development. The wall shall be finished on both sides in a manner and color that is compatible to the exterior finish of the non-residential or multiple-family building(s). Screening fences or walls shall be placed such that they do not impede visibility for vehicles entering or exiting the nonresidential or multi-family development, as required by this section. 
C.  Permits. All walls six (6) feet or more in height require permits. 
D.  Sight Distance and Visibility. See Section 7.5.6 for sight visibility requirements for screening walls. 
E.  Open Storage. 
(1)  In districts permitting open storage, screening shall be required for those areas used for open storage. Open storage of materials, commodities or equipment shall be screened with a minimum six-foot (6') fence or wall, and shall not be visible from the street or from adjacent property. (See definition of Outdoor Storage in Article 3. Definitions.) A six-foot (6') screening wall shall be provided and maintained at the property line adjacent to the area to be screened by one (1) or a combination of the following methods: 
(a)  Solid masonry consisting of rock, stone, or other material that is equivalent, visually and qualitatively; 
(b)  Wrought iron in conjunction with solid landscape screening; and, 
(c)  Alternate equivalent screening may be approved through the Site Plan approval process under Section 4.5.2A. 
(2)  No outside storage may exceed the height of the fence. Outside storage exceeding eight feet (8') shall require a Specific Use Permit. 
F.  Refuse Storage Areas. Refuse storage areas which are not within a screened rear service area and which are visible from a public right-of-way shall be visually screened by a minimum six-foot (6') solid masonry wall on at least three (3) sides. The fourth side, which is to be used for garbage pickup service, may provide an optional gate to secure the refuse storage area. Alternate equivalent screening methods may be approved through the Site Plan approval process, Section 4.5.2A. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies. Reinforced concrete paved areas shall be provided for refuse facilities and their approaches for loading and unloading. 
G.  Required Materials and Construction for Screening Walls. Any screening wall required under the provisions of this Section or under a Specific Use Permit, PD District, or other requirement shall be constructed of masonry, reinforced concrete, or other similar suitable permanent materials that do not contain openings. All wall openings shall be equipped with gates equal in height and screening characteristics to the wall itself. 
7.5.3   Fences in Residential Areas
A.  Location Criteria and Height. 

(1)  Any fence or wall located in a residential district shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height. 
(2)  Except as provided herein, no fence or wall shall be permitted within the required front yard of any single-family residential lot that is adjacent to a public street. No residential fence shall be closer than fifteen feet (15') to a public street except in cases where the side or rear building line of the yards on continuous corner lots adjoin, the fence may be constructed out to the property line of said side yard such that the street side yard may be included as part of the lot's back yard area. See Figure 23 for an example of continuous corner lots. 
B.  Residential Fence Materials on Single-Family Lots. Any fence shall be constructed of masonry, wrought iron, wood or other suitable permanent materials. Section 7.5.5 below provides an exception to this requirement. 
C.  Barbed Wire, Electrical, and Chain Link Fencing. Barbed wire, electrical, and/or chain link fencing that is visible from a public right-of-way is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on parcels of one (1) or more acres. 
D.  Vehicular Access Gates. Gates designed for vehicular access shall be set back from front the property line a minimum of twenty-five feet (25'). 
E.  Swimming Pool Fences. Fences around swimming pools shall comply with the City's standards. 
F.  Sight Distance and Visibility. See Section 7.5.6 for the sight visibility requirements for fences and screening walls. 
G.  Other Types of Fencing. Special purpose fencing, such as fencing around tennis courts, is permitted. 
7.5.4   Mechanical Equipment
A.  Ground Mounted Mechanical Equipment. All non-fuel dispensing permanently ground mounted mechanical equipment located in either a front or side yard shall be screened from view and shall be constructed with wood or masonry material, or a suitable alternative, that is similar to, and aesthetically compatible with, the primary structure. Alternatively, landscaping sufficient in height and density to screen equipment shall be allowed. 
B.  Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment. All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view of any adjacent public Right-of-Way. 
7.5.5   Alternative Materials and Construction
    Alternative equivalent screening may be approved through the Site Plan approval process, Section 4.5.2A. 
7.5.6   Sight Visibility
    Visual clearance shall be provided in all zoning districts so that no fence, wall, architectural screen, earth mounding or landscaping thirty (30) inches or higher above the street center line obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley, or driveway intersection as follows: 
A.  At a street intersection, clear vision must be maintained for a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet across any lot measured from the corner of the property line in both directions or as prescribed by the City's Design Standard Manual, whichever is greater. 
B.  At an intersection with an alley, this clearance must be maintained for ten (10) feet. 
C.  Shrubs and hedges that are typically less than thirty (30) inches in height at maturity, as measured from the centerline of the street, may be located in the visual clearance areas of all districts. 
D.  A limited number of single-trunk trees having a clear trunk (branching) height of at least eight (8) feet may be located within sight visibility areas provided that they are spaced and positioned such that they will not produce a visibility inhibiting, "picket-fence" effect when they attain mature size. 
Section 7.6 - Accessory Structure Regulations 
7.6.1   Accessory Buildings and Structures in Residential Districts
A.  Front Yard. Attached accessory buildings shall have a front yard not less than that required for the main building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located in the area defined as the rear yard. 
B.  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard for any detached accessory building of not less than three (3) feet from any side lot line when such detached accessory building is located in the rear of the lot (the rear of a line erected connecting the midpoints on the two (2) opposite side lot lines of any lot, tract or plot). When a detached accessory building is located in front of the line connecting the two (2) midpoints of the opposite side lot lines as herein described, such accessory building shall observe the same side yard as specified for the main building (Figure 24. Accessory Building Side Yard). 

C.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for accessory buildings not less than three (3) feet from any lot line, alley line or easement line, except that if no alley exists, the rear yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet as measured from the rear lot line. Where apartments are permitted, the main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the rear of the lot (that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint of one (1) side lot line with the midpoint of the opposite side lot line). 
7.6.2   Air Conditioning or Similar Accessory Structures
    Air conditioning compressors, cooling towers and similar accessory structures shall be subject to the regulations for all front, side or rear yards specified for accessory buildings. When such accessory structures are located in the side yard or that portion of the lot herein designated as the rear of the lot, the minimum side yard shall be three (3) feet. When such structures are located forward of the line dividing the rear of the lot from the front of the lot, the accessory structures shall be subject to the same side yard required for the main structure (Table 8. Residential District Area Regulations). 
7.6.3   Swimming Pools
A.  All swimming pools shall be located behind the front yard or front building line, whichever is farthest from front property line and in no case shall the pool proper be nearer than five (5) feet to any bounding property line of the lot or tract on which it is situated. 
B.  A private swimming pool shall not be operated as a business nor maintained in a manner to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners. 
7.6.4   Accessory Dwelling
    Accessory Dwellings may be allowed by SUP approval only. The SUP ordinance shall establish use and development standards for each accessory dwelling. 
Section 7.7 - Penalty for Violations 
7.7.1   Penalties
    Any person or corporation who shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence, violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined any sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and each and every day that the provisions of this Ordinance are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the said penalty provided for, the right is hereby conferred and extended upon any property owner owning property in any district, where such property owner may be affected or invaded, by a violation of the terms of the Ordinance, to bring suit in such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law and equity in the protection of the rights of such property owners. 
7.7.2   Other Lawful Remedies
    Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Section 7.8 - Validity 
    If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Section 7.9 - Effective Date 
    This Ordinance shall be effective as of the date of its adoption by the City Council of the City of Decatur, Texas. 
Section 7.10 - Savings/Repealing 
7.10.1   Illegal Uses
    By the passage of this Ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. 
7.10.2   Repealing
    All provisions of any ordinance in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed; but such repeal shall not abate any pending prosecution for violation of the repealed ordinance, nor shall the repeal prevent a prosecution from being commenced for any violation if occurring prior to the repeal of the Ordinance. 
Appendix C - DESIGN STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 05-01-01,  1, February 14, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as a new Appendix C to read as herein set out, at the editor's discretion. 

CHAPTER 1. - DESIGN CRITERIA 

Section 101. - General. 
    101.1 Intended use. The following Design Criteria are primarily intended for use by the Developer's Engineer. There may be special circumstances which would dictate requirements in excess of those outlined; however, in most cases, these exceptions will be apparent to the Developer's Engineer while preparing the Construction Plans and Specifications for the subdivision. 
    101.2 Maintenance. These criteria and related standards shall be maintained, modified and kept current by the City Engineer and/or Planning Director. 
    101.3 Related standards. The latest version of Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, with all amendments thereto, shall govern and shall constitute the technical specifications except as amended by the Decatur Construction Standards and is made a part thereof, but is not physically bound within this document. 
    101.4 Compliance required. All subdivision, development and new construction shall comply with all related City Ordinances, including, but not limited to, the Subdivision Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance. 
    101.5 Conformance required. The City Council and the City or its representatives shall approve no final plat, shall accept no completed improvements, shall issue no permits or rights to occupy unless and until such improvements conform to these standards herein listed and all other applicable standards as prescribed by the City of Decatur. 
    All improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, drainage ways, water and sanitary sewer lines, landscaping, buffering and green space, shall be designed, placed and constructed in accordance with the following Design Criteria and Construction Standards. 
    101.6 Flood Areas. Any land which in its natural state is subject to a one hundred-year flood or which cannot be properly drained shall not be subdivided, re-subdivided or developed until receipt of evidence that the construction of specific improvements proposed by the Developer can be expected to yield a usable building site. Thereafter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval of the plat; however, construction upon such land shall be prohibited until the specific improvements have been planned and completed. 
    101.7 Variances. Where specific topographic or other conditions make variance from these standards necessary in order to achieve the best overall design, the Planning Director upon recommendation from the City Engineer and Public Works Director may modify these standards. 
    101.8 Special Exceptions. Where the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially injured, the Planning Director, after consultation with the City Engineer, may in specific cases, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize special exceptions to the Design Criteria items in order to permit reasonable development and improvement of property where literal enforcement of these values would result in an unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 102. - Blocks. 
    102.1 Length. The length of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to property corner measured along the property line of the block face (1) of greatest distance, or (2) on which the greatest number of lots face. 
    Where no existing subdivision controls, the block length should not be less than five hundred (500) feet in length nor greater than one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet in length. However, in cases where physical barriers, property ownership, or individual usage creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length may be increased or decreased to meet existing conditions, having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety. 
    102.2 Width. The width of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to property corner measured along the property line of the block face (1) of least dimension, or (2) on which the fewest number of lots face. 
    102.3 Shape criteria. The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated, and 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions, and 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic, and 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
    102.4 Streets. Intersecting streets should be provided at such intervals as to serve traffic adequately and to meet existing streets in a safe manner as determined by the city. 
    102.5 Walkway required. Where long blocks in the vicinity of a school, park or shopping center are platted, the city may require a public walkway near the middle of long blocks or opposite a street that terminates between the streets at the ends of the block. If required, the concrete walkway shall not be less than four (4) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in width, through the block from sidewalk to sidewalk, or curb to curb, or if no street, to the property line adjacent to the school, park, or shopping center. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 103. - Lots. 
    103.1 Design. Lot design shall provide adequate width, depth, and shape to provide open area, to eliminate overcrowding and to be appropriate for the location of the subdivision for the type of development and use contemplated and in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Decatur. 
    103.2 Width. No lot shall have less width at the building line than is required by the Zoning Ordinance. 
    103.3 Building lines. Building lines shall be shown on all lots in the subdivision but shall not be less restrictive than the Zoning Ordinance. 
    103.4 Side lines. All side lines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines, except where a variation to this rule will provide a better street and lot layout. 
    103.5 Front yard. The shorter dimension across a residential lot, adjacent to a street, shall designate the front yard orientation of the lot, unless otherwise specified on the face of the plat. 
    103.6 Adequate size. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
    103.7 Frontage. Every lot shall have frontage on, and access to, a public street. 
    103.8 Double frontage. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
    103.9 Access limits. Residential lots shall not have direct access onto thoroughfare streets, and direct access from residential lots shall be permitted on collector streets only where design conditions do not permit any other possibility. 
    103.10 Large lots. Where the area is divided into larger lots than for normal urban building sites, and in the opinion of the city, any or all of the tracts are susceptible of being re-subdivided, the original subdivision shall be such that the alignment of future street dedications may conform to the general street layout in the surrounding area so that the larger tracts may be later subdivided in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the minimum standards specified by the Zoning Ordinance. 
    103.11 Markers. Lot markers shall be iron pins not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and no less than eighteen (18) inches long and shall be set flush with the ground at each lot corner. 
    103.12 Corners. All lot corners shall be set prior to the acceptance of the public improvements and shall be marked in a way that is traceable to the responsible registrant or associated employer. 
    103.13 Control monuments. A minimum of two (2) four-inch  four-inch  eighteen-inch concrete monuments with one-half-inch  eighteen-inch reinforcing rebar may be required to be placed in easily accessible locations, such as street intersections or point of curvatures and may be required to be placed below back of curb for monument protection. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 104. - Easements. 
    104.1 Utility easements. Utility easements shall be provided on subdivision plats when the following criteria indicate that an easement is required: 
1.  Where not adjacent to a public right-of-way, easements at least fifteen (15) feet wide for utility construction, service and maintenance shall be provided where necessary in locations approved by the city, and 
2.  Easements at least fifteen (15) feet wide for utility construction, service and maintenance shall be provided for lots which have frontage along state highways, and 
3.  Easements of at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines and along side lot lines, where necessary, for utilities such as electric, telephone and gas, and 
4.  Easements having greater width dimensions may also be required along or across lots where engineering design or special conditions make it necessary for the installation of utilities outside public right-of-ways. 
    The following statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument: 
UTILITY EASEMENT RESTRICTION: 
    Any public utility, including the City of Decatur, shall have the right to remove all or part of any building, fences, trees, shrubs, other growths or improvements which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of the easements shown on the plat; and any public utility, including the City of Decatur, shall have the right at all times of ingress and egress to and from and upon said easements for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, inspection, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. 
    104.2 Fire lane easement. Emergency access and fire lane easements shall be provided in locations required by the Fire Marshal of the Decatur Fire Department. These easements shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet [twenty-four (24) feet when parking is located on both sides of the easement] and a minimum height clearance of fourteen (14) feet. Any emergency access and fire lane easement more than one hundred (100) feet in length shall either connect at each end to a dedicated public street or be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of eighty (80) feet with an additional distance of ten (10) feet on all sides clear of permanent structures. These easements shall be paved in accordance with these Design Standards and shall be maintained by means of a Home Owner's Association, the property owner granting the easement or other means as approved by the city. 
    104.3 Public open space easement. A fifteen-foot  fifteen-foot triangular public "open space" easement is required on corner lots at the intersection of an alley and a street. 
Local Collector Thoroughfare Local 1 1 2 Collector 1 2 2 Thoroughfare 2 2 3  
    A triangular public open space easement (POSE) is required on corner lots at the intersection of two (2) streets in accordance with the table above: 
1.  Type 1 POSE = 20'  20' 
2.  Type 2 POSE = 25'  25' 
3.  Type 3 POSE = 45'  45' 
    The following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument or on the face of the plat: 
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE EASEMENT RESTRICTION: 
    No structure, object or plant of any type may obstruct vision from a height of thirty (30) inches to a height of ten (10) feet above the top of the curb, including, but not limited to buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in the public open space easement as shown on the plat. 
    104.4 Drainage easement. Drainage easement requirements are as follows: 
1.  Easements for storm drainage facilities shall be provided at locations containing proposed or existing drainageways. 
2.  Storm drainage easements of fifteen (15) feet minimum width shall be provided for existing and proposed enclosed drainage systems. Easements shall be centered on the systems. Larger easements, where necessary, shall be provided as directed by the City Engineer. 
3.  Storm drainage easements shall be provided for emergency overflow drainageways of sufficient width to contain within the easement stormwater resulting from a one hundred-year frequency storm less the amount of stormwater carried in an enclosed system of a capacity required by the City of Decatur. 
4.  No construction or filling without the written approval of the City of Decatur shall be allowed within a drainage easement, and then only after detailed engineering plans and studies show that no flooding will result, that no obstruction to the natural flow of water will result and subject to all owners of the property affected by such construction becoming a party to the request. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor elevations shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the one hundred-year flood elevation. 
    The following statement of restriction shall be placed in the dedication instrument of the subdivision plat: 
DRAINAGE EASEMENT RESTRICTION: 
    No construction or filling, without the written approval of the City of Decatur, shall be allowed within a drainage easement, and then only after detailed engineering plans and studies show that no flooding will result, that no obstruction to the natural flow of water will result; and subject to all owners of the property affected by such construction becoming a party to the request. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor elevations shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the one hundred-year flood elevation. 
    104.5 Floodway Easement. Floodway easement requirements are as follows: 
1.  Floodway easements shall be provided along natural drainageways and lakes or reservoirs. Floodway easements shall encompass all areas beneath the water surface elevation of the base flood, plus such additional width as may be required to provide ingress and egress to allow maintenance of the banks and for the protection of adjacent property as determined and required by the City Engineer. 
2.  Existing creeks, lakes, reservoirs or drainage channels traversing along or across portions of this addition will remain as an open channel at all times and will be maintained by the individual owners of the lot or lots that are traversed by or adjacent to the drainage courses along or across said lots. 
3.  The City of Decatur will not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of said drainageways or for the control of erosion. 
4.  Each property owner shall keep the natural drainage channels traversing or adjacent to his property clean and free of debris, silt or any substance which would result in unsanitary conditions, and the city shall have the right of ingress and egress for the purpose of inspection and supervision of maintenance work by the property owner to alleviate any undesirable conditions which may occur. 
    The natural drainage channel, as is the case of all natural drainage channels, are subject to storm water overflow and natural bank erosion to an extent that cannot be definitely defined. The City of Decatur shall not be liable for damages of any nature resulting from the occurrence of these natural phenomena, nor resulting from a failure of any structure(s) within the natural drainage channels. The natural drainage channel crossing each lot is shown by the floodway easement line as shown on the plat. 
    The following statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument of the subdivision plat: 
FLOODWAY EASEMENT RESTRICTION: 
    No construction, without the written approval of the City of Decatur, shall be allowed within a floodway easement, and then only after detailed engineering plans and studies show that no flooding will result, that no obstruction to the natural flow of water will result; and subject to all owners of the property affected by such construction becoming a party to the request. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor elevations shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the one hundred-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 105. - Alleys. 
    No alleys shall be allowed in any new development. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 106. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks shall be required in all new subdivisions as follows: 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed for all lots adjoining dedicated streets, along major thoroughfares where lots do not adjoin the street, across power line easements and in other areas where pedestrian walkways are necessary. 
2.  Sidewalks shall be constructed in all parking areas to assure safe pedestrian access from parking spaces to structures. 
3.  Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed so as to assure uninterrupted connections between all pedestrian walkways. 
4.  Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed to minimize pedestrian and automobile conflicts in order to provide the safest pedestrian access possible. 
5.  Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed so as to connect with existing pedestrian walkways and to assure connection with future pedestrian walkways. 
6.  Sidewalks shall be constructed either one (1) foot from the property line within the street right-of-way or within a dedicated sidewalk easement and shall extend along the street frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends. Lots requiring landscaping shall put trees between the sidewalk and the street. 
7.  Sidewalks along existing thoroughfares or streets so designated by the Master Plan shall be no less than four (4) feet in width. 
8.  Sidewalks abutting screening walls, parking areas or fences shall be five (5) feet in width. 
9.  Sidewalk construction may be delayed until development of lots, but in locations not adjacent to lots and across bridges and culverts, the sidewalk shall be constructed with the other improvements to the subdivision. 
10.  Routing to clear poles, trees or other obstacles shall be subject to approval by city development staff. 
11.  The plat or construction plans shall show the location of all proposed sidewalks and shall state at what stage of the project they will be constructed. 
12.  All sidewalks shall conform to ADA requirements. 
13.  Barrier free ramps should be provided for access to the street. The following specifications shall apply: 
i)  Ramp to be four (4) feet in width. 
ii)  Ramp to be constructed with minimum three thousand (3,000) psi twenty-eight-day strength concrete. 
iii)  Ramp concrete thickness shall be the same as the street (six-inch normal residential). 
iv)  No. 3 bars shall be used for reinforcement (twenty-four-inch on centers). 
v)  Curb return shall match existing curb height of the street and taper to the connecting walk with a one-foot radius. 
vi)  Street shall be blocked out (maximum twelve (12) inches) and dowels installed. 
vii)  Saw joints shall be made one and one-half-inch minimum depth and sealed with silicone joint sealant material. 
viii)  Subgrade shall be prepared to a minimum depth of six (6) inches. 
ix)  At no time shall the walk running parallel to the street be altered. 
x)  Surface of walk may be coarse and ribbed to provide extra traction. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 107. - Landscape design. 
    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage low maintenance landscaping, water conservation and tree preservation while providing guidelines for minimum landscaping throughout the city. 
    Single-family residential landscaping. These standards apply to new detached and attached single-family residential developments. These standards may be met by saving existing trees on the site or planting new trees from the recommended list. Lot size designations apply to the zoning classification(s) of the subdivision rather than to each individual lot. In the case of PD developments, landscaping will be in accordance with lot sizes designated within the approved PD design. 
(a)  One (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) provided for all single-family residential lots less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet. 
(b)  Two (2) shade trees (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) provided for all single-family residential lots of eight thousand (8,000) square feet to less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(c)  Three (3) shade trees (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) provided for all single-family residential lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more. 
    A tree survey shall be required with preliminary plats, final plats with construction plans, and with individual building permit applications for single-family residential development (new lots). 
    All required trees must be planted prior to request for final building inspection of dwelling units. 
    Multi-family landscaping requirements. These standards apply to new multi-family zoning developments. Those uses located on the square with no on-premise parking are exempt from this ordinance. These standards may be met either by saving existing trees on the site, or planting new trees from the recommended list. 
(a)  A ten-foot linear landscape strip is to be provided adjacent to all public and private streets, exclusive of right-of-way. The landscape strip will include one (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) for every fifty (50) linear feet of street frontage. 
(b)  Where parking lots and drives abut the landscape strip along a street right-of-way, a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs will be provided to screen those areas from the street. The shrubs must be a minimum of a ten-gallon size at planting with a minimum mature height of three (3) feet. Shrubs will be planted according to the spacing recommended for their species. The screening will extend along the entire street frontage of the parking lot, exclusive of driveways and visibility clips. A landscape berm may be provided in lieu of the screening hedge. The berm must be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches above the average grade of the street and parking lot curbs with a slope not to exceed 3:1. 
(d)  Landscaping will also be provided for the interior parking areas. Trees will be planted in each parking lot to attain a minimum average density of one (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) for each fifteen (15) parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. Interior parking lot landscaping will include an overall percentage of greenery, in addition trees, as outlined below. 
Total Parking Area Interior Landscape Area 0-24,999 square feet 5% 25,000-49,999 square feet 8% 50,000 square feet and larger 10%  
(e)  To calculate the total parking area and the subsequent percentage of required interior lot landscaping, total the square footage of parking spaces, planting islands, curbed areas and all interior driveways and aisles. Landscaped areas located contiguous to the parking lot may be used to meet the interior landscaping requirement. Landscaped areas located outside and away from the parking lot may not be used to meet the interior landscaping requirement. 
(f)  The required landscaping for parking lots shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout the parking lot, although adjustments may be approved by the Planning Director where the shape or size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees or other natural constraints reasonably prevent such distribution. 
(g)  All landscaped areas, including the permeable areas and drip lines around trees and planting beds used for visual screening which abut any parking lot or vehicular travel area, shall be protected with curbs sufficient to protect them from vehicular intrusion. 
    An automatic irrigation system is required for all landscaping. Irrigation systems shall be designed and installed with rain sensors and low gallonage, low angle nozzles in such a way as to avoid water overflow into the street. A freeze sensor shall be placed in each controller to prevent the irrigation system from activating to create unsafe spillage on roads and/or sidewalks. 
    Office, retail & commercial landscaping requirements. These standards apply to new office, retail and commercial developments. Those uses located on the square with no on-premise parking are exempt from this ordinance. These standards may be met either by saving existing trees on the site, or planting new trees from the recommended list. 
(a)  A ten-foot linear landscape strip is to be provided adjacent to all public and private streets, exclusive of right-of-way. The landscape strip will include one (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) for every fifty (50) linear feet of street frontage. 
(b)  Where parking lots and drives abut the landscape strip along a street right-of-way, a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs will be provided to screen those areas from the street. The shrubs must be a minimum of a ten-gallon size at planting with a minimum mature height of three (3) feet. Shrubs will be planted according to the spacing recommended for their species. The screening will extend along the entire street frontage of the parking lot, exclusive of driveways and visibility clips. A landscape berm may be provided in lieu of the screening hedge. The berm must be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches above the average grade of the street and parking lot curbs with a slope not to exceed 3:1. 
(c)  Landscaping will also be provided for the interior parking areas. Trees will be planted in each parking lot to attain a minimum average density of one (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) for each fifteen (15) parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. Interior parking lot landscaping will include an overall percentage of greenery, in addition trees, as outlined below. 
Total Parking Area Interior Landscape Area 0-24,999 square feet 5% 25,000-49,999 square feet 8% 50,000 square feet and larger 10%  
(d)  Except for customer and employee parking, parking lot landscape requirements do not apply to storage or standing parking spaces incidental to uses, such as sales and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats, trailers or other similar uses. 
(e)  To calculate the total parking area and the subsequent percentage of required interior lot landscaping, total the square footage of parking spaces, planting islands, curbed areas and all interior driveways and aisles. Landscaped areas located contiguous to the parking lot may be used to meet the interior landscaping requirement. Landscaped areas located outside and away from the parking lot may not be used to meet the interior landscaping requirement. 
(f)  The required landscaping for parking lots shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout the parking lot, although adjustments may be approved by the Planning Director where the shape or size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees or other natural constraints reasonably prevent such distribution. 
(g)  All landscaped areas, including the permeable areas and drip lines around trees and planting beds used for visual screening which abut any parking lot or vehicular travel area, shall be protected with curbs sufficient to protect them from vehicular intrusion. 
    An automatic irrigation system is required for all landscaping. Irrigation systems shall be designed and installed with rain sensors and low gallonage, low angle nozzles in such a way as to avoid water overflow into the street. A freeze sensor shall be placed in each controller to prevent the irrigation system from activating to create unsafe spillage on roads and/or sidewalks. 
    Industrial landscaping requirements. These standards apply to new industrial developments. Those uses located on the square with no on-premise parking are exempt from this ordinance. These standards may be met by saving existing trees on the site or planting new trees. 
(a)  A ten-foot linear landscape strip is to be provided adjacent to all perimeter public streets, exclusive of right-of-way. The landscape strip will include one (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) for every fifty (50) linear feet of street frontage. 
(b)  Where parking lots and drives abut the landscape strip along a street right-of-way, a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs will be provided to screen those areas from the street. The shrubs must be a minimum of three (3) feet in height at maturity and planted according to the spacing shown below. The screening will extend along the entire street frontage of the parking lot, exclusive of driveways and visibility clips. A landscape berm may be provided in lieu of the screening hedge. The berm must be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches above the average grade of the street and parking lot curbs with a slope not to exceed 3:1. 
(c)  Landscaping will also be provided for the interior employee and customer parking areas. Trees will be planted in each parking area to attain a minimum average density of one (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) for each twenty-five (25) parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. Interior parking lot landscaping will include an overall percentage of greenery, in addition trees, resulting in one hundred (100) square feet per provided tree. 
(d)  The required landscaping for parking lots shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout the parking lot, although adjustments may be approved by the Planning Director where the shape or size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees or other natural constraints reasonably prevent such distribution. 
(e)  All landscaped areas, including the permeable areas and drip lines around trees and planting beds used for visual screening which abut any parking lot or vehicular travel area, shall be protected with curbs sufficient to protect them from vehicular intrusion. 
    An automatic irrigation system is required for all landscaping. Irrigation systems shall be designed and installed with low gallonage and low angle nozzles in such a way as to avoid water overflow into the street. A freeze sensor shall be placed in each controller to prevent the irrigation system from activating to create unsafe spillage on roads and/or sidewalks. 
    General provisions. Clear cutting of trees is prohibited within the City of Decatur. Cutting of trees, grading and land clearing may be done, only for development purposes, in accordance with an approved final plat with the construction plans and/or engineering site plan. Cutting trees and land clearing for other than development purposes shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Director of Planning. The existing natural landscape character of the city shall be preserved to the extent reasonable and feasible. In an area of the street frontage containing a stand of recommended trees, the developer shall use best good faith efforts to preserve such trees. 
    It is recommended that trees from the list provided in this section be considered to meet the requirement of this ordinance, however alternate species may be presented to the Planning Director for approval. For every recommended tree in healthy, thriving condition that is preserved, the developer/owner shall be given credits as outlined below. Tree caliper shall be measured at one (1) foot from the base of the tree. Credit for trees saved in the required ten-foot landscape strip will only be applicable for trees required in the landscape strip area. Credit for trees saved in the parking area will only be applicable for trees required in the parking area. 
Size Of Existing Trees 

From Recommended List Credit 4-8" Caliper 2 9-14" Caliper 3 15-24" Caliper 4 25+" Caliper 5 Points granted for trees of greater size will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Director.  
    Where conflict arises regarding existing trees and required parking spaces to be provided, the following applies: 
1.  A reduction in parking spaces may be allowed, up to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the total required parking spaces required, in order to protect qualified trees located in the parking area. 
2.  Reduction in the number of parking spaces allowed for each protected tree shall be determined on a case by case basis and influenced by the tree's chances of survival. 
    Landscaping with irrigation is required for all development and construction as follows: 
1.  A landscape plan must be submitted as part of the engineering site plan process for all multi-family, commercial and industrial zoning districts and for non-residential uses allowed in single-family residential districts. A tree schedule shall also accompany all final plats for single-family detached and attached residential additions. 
2.  Where the location of existing overhead utility lines conflict with the required landscape strip, planting of trees that mature at a lesser height will be required, i.e. Chinese Pistache, Japanese Black Pine, and Aristocrat Pear. Where easements containing underground utilities conflict with the required landscaping strip, required tree planting shall be outside the easement on the property owner's side. 
3.  Required landscaping must be permanently maintained in a healthy growing condition at all times. The property owner is responsible for permanent maintenance of all plantings on an as needed basis. This maintenance includes, but is not limited to, regular weeding, mowing of grass, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning, repair/replacement of damaged hardscape and replacement of sick/dying plants. 
4.  To maintain visibility, no fence, structure, or planting higher than three (3) feet above the established street grades, nor any tree with foliage extending below ten (10) feet above the established street grades, shall be planted within twenty (20) feet of any street intersection. 
5.  All common areas abutting an existing thoroughfare or collector street, or one (1) so designated by the Master Plan, shall be landscaped and irrigated. 
6.  A two-year maintenance bond as defined in the Subdivision Ordinance shall be required covering all required landscaping and irrigation improvements before acceptance of dedicated improvements or Certificate of Occupancy. 
7.  All required landscaping and irrigation shall be adequately maintained and promptly replaced when necessary. 
8.  In cases where equitable landscaping can be achieved through varying means, the Planning Director may grant permission to deviate from the exact specifications of this ordinance to facilitate a better overall design but not to lessen the requirements. 
    Tree survey requirements. This section shall apply to all new construction in single-family and commercial developments. A tree survey identifying all trees, by species and size, on the subject property shall be prepared by a civil engineer, arborist, landscape architect or surveyor. A tree survey shall be required with preliminary plats, final plats with construction plans, and with individual building permit applications for single-family residential development (new lots). Trees within rights-of-way and city easements do not have to be shown. 
    Provisions for removal and replacement of protected trees. Protected trees (as designated on the landscape plan), if removed, injured or destroyed, shall be replanted on a 1:1 ratio per caliper inch. If protected trees are removed, injured or destroyed and not replaced, penalties for such shall be paid according to the following chart: 
Size of Caliper Cost of Removing/Removed Protected Trees* 5-9" $500.00 10-14" $1,000.00 15-24" $1,500.00 25"+ $2,000.00 * Per tree  
    Payment for tree removal shall be due prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Funds received for tree removal shall be designated to a general beautification fund as deemed appropriate by the City. 
    Qualification to prepare plans. For all lots one (1) acre or larger, Landscape Plans shall be prepared by a Registered Landscape Architect. For lots less than one (1) acre, a Landscape Designer or Landscape Contractor, knowledgeable in plant materials and landscape design may also prepare the landscape plan. Irrigation plans shall be prepared by a Licensed Irrigator. The Planning Director may reject plans if deemed of insufficient quality or completeness and require that plans be prepared by a Registered Landscape Architect or other qualified professional. 
    Landscape plan requirements: The following items shall be provided on the required landscape plan and is to be incorporated into the set of engineered site plans. 
1.  Sheet size twenty-four-inch  thirty-six-inch, or as approved. 
2.  Acceptable scale: one (1) inch equals ten (1) feet, one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet, or as approved. 
3.  North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity. 
4.  Appropriate title (i.e. "Landscape Plan") 
5.  Title block includes street address, lot and block, subdivision name, city, state, date of preparation. 
6.  Name and address of owner. 
7.  Name, address and phone of firm preparing plan. 
8.  Boundary shown with dimensions. 
9.  Any existing easements and utilities shown. (i.e. water, sewer, storm drain, gas, electric, cable, etc.) 
10.  Width and type of bufferyards labeled on all sides. 
11.  Location, caliper size and name of all existing trees which are to be preserved. 
12.  Location, quantity, size and name of all proposed plant materials. 
13.  Maintenance note provided. 
14.  Provide standard Interior Landscape Calculation Chart from Approved Site Plan. 
15.  Visibility triangles shown. 
16.  Landscape Architect seal signed and dated, if size of development requires such. 
17.  Any berms delineated with one-foot contour intervals. 
    Irrigation plan requirements: The following items shall be provided on the required irrigation plan. 
1.  Sheet size twenty-four-inch  thirty-six-inch, or as approved. 
2.  Acceptable scale: one (1) inch equals ten (10) feet, one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet, or as approved. (Must be same as Landscape Plan) 
3.  North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity. 
4.  Appropriate title (i.e. "Irrigation Plan") 
5.  Title block includes street address, lot and block, subdivision name, city, state, date of preparation. 
6.  Name and address of owner. 
7.  Name, address and phone of firm preparing plan. 
8.  Boundary shown with dimensions. 
9.  Location of all existing trees which are to be saved. 
10.  All pipes labeled as to size. 
11.  All heads labeled as to type. (Legend is acceptable) 
12.  Backflow prevention labeled with type and size. 
13.  Connection to water service shown after meter. 
14.  Second meter (with size) shown if intended. 
15.  Any existing easements and utilities shown. (i.e. water, sewer, storm drain, gas, electric, cable, etc.) 
16.  Note on plan: "All backflow installations and connections to city water lines must be permitted separately by the City inspection staff." 
17.  Maintenance note provided. 
18.  Plan sealed, signed and dated by qualified professional as authorized above. 
    Landscaping of dedicated streets, medians or other public rights-of-way [2] 
    All unpaved public medians and parkways shall be landscaped with a minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil, seeded or sodded with Bermuda grass and irrigated with a properly designed and installed system. The location of trees shall be coordinated with the city to avoid conflict with any utilities within the medians and traffic movement. These landscape areas shall be maintained by the developer or owner until adequate coverage is attained at a maintenance level compatible with like areas in other parts of the city, unless other contractual arrangements are made between the developer and the city. The city will assume responsibility after one (1) year. This allows the landscaping materials to go through a full cycle of season change. All water usage shall be metered. Within medians, no plantings or irrigation facilities shall be permitted within areas five (5) feet in width or less. All such areas shall be covered with stamped concrete as approved by the Directors of Planning and Public Works. Upon installation, all landscape and irrigation materials within medians or right(s)-of-way shall become the property of the city. 
(a)  Trees must not be planted within thirty (30) feet of intersections or utility poles. 
(b)  Trees shall be spaced forty-five (45) feet apart when planted in rows and thirty (30) feet apart when planted in groups. 
(c)  Only trees with a mature height of less than thirty (30) feet may be planted directly under utility lines. Trees with mature heights greater than thirty (30) feet must be planted a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the outside edge of the last energized line. 
(d)  Ornamental tree spacing will be evaluated based on the desired effect. 
(e)  Trees must be planted a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of the curb. 
    Areas where median cuts are made, solid sod (Bermuda grass) will be used to repair any disturbed area. Stamped concrete will be used to cover median noses to the radius point (maximum) or as defined by the City. 
    Submittal of plans. Any developer desiring to install or maintain landscaping materials or irrigation facilities in any portion of a dedicated street, median or other public right-of-way shall submit to the Planning and Public Works Departments complete plans for any and all proposed improvements. The plans shall include the following: 
1)  A scale drawing (one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet) clearly indicating the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials and existing utilities. Planting design of materials must be submitted to ensure adequate coverage. 
2)  The name of the subdivision or addition, and the name and address of the developer. 
3)  A north arrow, scale, and date of preparation. 
4)  A clear indication of the configuration, location, type and size of all irrigation, piping, heads and controllers, including the name, address and license seal of the designer. 
5)  Such other information reasonably deemed necessary by the reviewing Departments. 
    Review and approval by the city. The city will review and approve or deny the submitted plans, and have the right to require revisions. Any installation of landscape material or irrigation facilities shall be in full compliance with the plans and specifications as approved by the city. 
    Agreement. In the case where undeveloped land exists on both sides of a public street intended to have a median, the first to develop will carry the burden of submitting plans for landscaping and irrigating the median along with escrowing half the accepted estimated cost of implementation. The second to develop will adjust those accepted plans (if necessary), escrow half the cost of implementation according to the current construction cost, and complete the landscaping with irrigation using both escrowed amounts. In the event that the original escrow amount has fallen short of current construction cost, the city will make up the difference in cost, however if current construction cost have fallen and the original amount covers more than half of the cost, then the extra funds shall be placed in the city's account for maintaining and planting medians. If required by the Director Planning, developer shall also provide the city with a cash escrow to the city for ten (10) percent of the total cost of the proposed improvements prior to approval of the plans. In order to defray future costs of landscaping and irrigation, the Director may also require such other terms and conditions in the agreement the Director deems reasonably necessary to ensure the proper installation and maintenance of all landscaping and irrigation facilities. 
    Landscape and irrigation criteria. In areas to be maintained by the city, all landscape and irrigation materials to be used by the developer shall be designed to conserve water and be of low maintenance. All landscape and irrigation improvements shall conform to the requirements of the city governing sight distance for traffic safety and other ordinances of the city. 
    A list of all plant types and irrigation plans shall be submitted as part of the Engineering Site Plan for review and approval. The developer shall furnish, or cause to be furnished at its sole expense, all labor, equipment, accessories, and services necessary to install all landscaping materials and irrigation facilities in accordance with the plans as approved by the city. All installations will be inspected by the city. All planting, if maintained by the city, must be approved by the City of Decatur. Irrigation facilities within medians or adjacent to curbs shall be designed and installed with low gallonage and low angle nozzles in such a way as to avoid water overflow into the street. A freeze sensor will be placed in each controller to prevent the irrigation system from activating to create unsafe spillage on roads and/or sidewalks. 
    Maintenance requirement. Developer, at its sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished, all labor, materials, equipment, accessories, and services necessary to maintain all plant materials when and as they become damaged or die. 
    In residential developments, the developer shall maintain all landscaping and irrigation materials and equipment. If, after development, less than ninety (90) percent of the lots in the residential subdivision have building permits issued for the construction and C.O. received of homes thereon, then in such event, the developer's maintenance responsibilities shall continue until such ninety (90) percent issuance is realized. With approval by the City, the developer may relinquish maintenance responsibility to a viable homeowners association. 
(Ord. No. 04-08-20,  1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 06-06-19,  1, 6-26-06) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note- These provisions are not meant to apply to internal streets within industrial developments. 

Section 108. - Buffering. 
    Buffering shall be required in all subdivisions and for all development and construction as follows: 
1.  All residential subdivisions or developments abutting collector or thoroughfare streets either existing or so designated by the Master Plan shall buffer the entire length of the abutted street. 
2.  All development having open yard storage, rear loading docks or facilities, trash dumpsters or other related activity or materials generating noise, dust or other pollutants not common to the general area or compatible with adjacent zoning designations or use shall buffer to encompass such areas. 
3.  All trash dumpsters shall be encompassed with a buffer which shall include a solid, decorative gated access designed to be architecturally compatible with the area. 
4.  All subdivisions and development adjoining property with a different zoning classification or use shall buffer the whole length of the adjoin. 
5.  All buffers shall be architecturally compatible with the general area. 
6.  Buffering, landscaping and architectural compatibility shall be approved by City Staff prior to platting or construction. 
7.  The proximity of the wall to the landscaping shall be such that the landscaping always fronts the street and, if not applicable, fronts the most restrictive district or use. When proven that the overall design can be improved by reorientation, this proximity can be modified by City Staff approval as long as none of the requirements are lessened. 
8.  All required buffers shall be a minimum of Type C unless otherwise specified in the Buffer Type Table shown below. Normal landscaping requirements specified in Section 107 above may be counted towards the landscape buffer requirements specified in this Section. A landscape band will constitute two-inch caliper overstory trees every fifty (50) linear feet and groundcover within a ten-foot landscape strip. 
BUFFER TYPE TABLE 
SF-1 SF-2 2F MF MHD CO C1 C1A C2 M-1 SF-1 A B B B B B C C SF-2 B B B B B C C 2F A A B B B B C C MF B B A B B B B C C MHD B B B B B B B C C CO B B B B B B C C1 B B B B B C C1A B B B B B C C2 C C C C C B B M-1 C C C C C C C C B  
a)  Type A -Four (4) feet One (1) linear landscaping band. 
b)  Type B -Six (6) feet Decorative fence architecturally compatible with general area with one (1) linear landscaping band. 
c)  Type C -Six (6) feet Decorative fence architecturally compatible with general area with two (2) linear landscaping bands. 
9.  Decorative fencing shall be composed of at least fifty (50) percent masonry material with all structural elements being masonry. Decorative fencing shall be at least eighty (80) percent solid with no more than twenty (20) percent open space. Fencing may be replaced with an additional band of landscaping. 
10.  Where two (2) different zoning classifications or uses are separated by right-of-way, the required buffer type may be reduced by one (1) level to the minimum of a Type A. 
11.  In cases where an equitable buffer can be achieved through varying means, City Staff may grant permission to deviate from the exact specifications of this ordinance to facilitate a better overall design but not to lessen the requirements. 
APPROVED TREE LIST 
(1)  Approved Tree List For Required Landscaping on Public Right-of-way: 
Scientific Name Common Name Size at Maturity Pinus nigra Austrian Pine >25 ft. (30 ft.) Pinus eldarica Afghan Pine >25 ft. (40 ft.) Pyrus calleryana 'Aristocrat' Aristocrat Pear 25 ft. Pyrus calleryana 'Bradford' Bradford Pear 25 ft. Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak >25 ft. (80 ft.) Quercus virginiana Live Oak >25 ft. (50 ft.) Quercus shumardii/texana) Shumard/Texas Red Oak >25 ft. (80 ft.) Quercus muhlenbergii Chinquapin Oak >25 ft. (80 ft.) Ulmus crassifolia Cedar Elm >25 ft. (80 ft.) Ulmus parvifolia Lacebark Elm >25 ft. (50 ft.) Pistacia chinensis Chinese Pistachio >25 ft. (50-70 ft.) Pinus thunbergii Japanese Black Pine >25 ft. (30 ft.) Carya Illinoinensis Pecan >25 ft. (100 ft.) Cercis candensis Eastern Red Bud <25 ft. (20 ft.) Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress >25 ft. (80 ft.)  
(2)  Recommended Tree List For Required Landscaping on Private Property: 
Scientific Name Common Name Size at Maturity Chilopsis linearis Desert Willow >25 ft. (30 ft.) Diospyrus texana Texas Persimmon <25 ft. (10-30 ft.) Fraxenis texensis Texas Ash >25 ft. (50 ft.) Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum >25 ft. (70 ft.) Pinus nigra Austrian Pine >25 ft. (30 ft.) Pinus eldarica Afghan Pine >25 ft. (40 ft.) Pyrus calleryana 'Bradford' Bradford Pear 25 ft. Pyrus calleryana 'Aristocrat' Aristocrat Pear 25 ft. Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak >25 ft. (80 ft.) Quercus virginiana Live Oak >25 ft. (50 ft.) Quercus shumardii/texana Shumard/Texas Red Oak >25 ft. (80 ft.) Quercus muhlenbergii Chinquapin Oak >25 ft. (80 ft.) Ulmus crassifolia Cedar Elm >25 ft. (80 ft.) Ulmus parvifolia Lacebark Elm >25 ft. (50 ft.) Pistacia chinensis Chinese Pistachio >25 ft. (50-70 ft.) Pinus thunbergii Japanese Black Pine >25 ft. (30 ft.) Carya illinoinensis Pecan >25 ft. (100 ft.) Magnolia grandiflora Southern Magnolia >25 ft. (60 ft.) Acer saccharum "Caddo" Caddo Maple >25 ft. (60 ft.) Quercus accutissima Sawtooth Oak >25 ft. (50 ft.) Taxodium accendens Pond Cypress >25 ft. (70 ft.) Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress >25 ft. (80 ft.)  
(3)  Recommended Shrubbery List: 
Scientific Name Common Name Spacing Berberis thunbergii Barberry, Red 2'-3' Ilex cornuta 'Burfordii Nana' Dwarf Burford Holly 2'-3' Elaeagnus macrophylla Elaeagnus, Silverberry (Ebbenji') 3'-4' Myrica pusilla Myrtle, Dwarf Wax 2'-3' Rhapiolepis indica Indian Hawthorn 2'-3' Juniperus Sabina 'Tamariscilfolia' Tam Juniper 3'  
    Other varieties complying with height and spacing requirements may be acceptable when approved by the Planning Director. 
    Lists are based on publications of Neil Sperry and Howard Garrett. 
(Ord. No. 04-08-20,  1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 06-06-19,  1, 6-26-06) 
Section 109. - Green space. 
    Green space shall be required in all subdivisions and for all development and construction as follows: 
1.  Residential developments having four (4) or more units on a single lot shall provide an open, green space for area residents at the ratio of one hundred (100) square feet of green space per bedroom with a five-hundred-square-foot minimum. 
2.  Green space should be clustered when possible and connected through pedestrian walkways with connections to pedestrian walkways on adjoining properties. 
3.  Green space shall be designed according to these criteria, each given in order of importance: a) to offer safe, open, common, natural space to residents, b) to serve as many residents as possible, and c) to provide safe pedestrian access to adjacent pedestrian attractors. 
4.  Green space shall be in addition to any other requirement resulting in open space or green space. 
5.  Green space shall be subject to all buffer and landscaping requirements when applicable. 
6.  At a minimum, green space shall be covered with lawn grasses and a three-inch diameter canopy tree per five hundred (500) square feet of green space. 
7.  If found to meet the intent of the ordinance, City Staff may grant permission to deviate from the exact specifications of this ordinance to facilitate a better overall design but not to lessen the requirements. 
8.  Green spaces shall be identified on the plat and the following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument on the face of the plat: 
GREEN SPACE RESTRICTION: 
Green space areas are strictly reserved as landscaped, open green spaces only and shall never allow intrusions of any kind that are not landscape related or that in any way lessen the amount of area or landscape material without the expressed, written permission of the City of Decatur. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 110. - Miscellaneous. 
    110.1 Private streets. All streets, including streets in Planned Developments as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, not dedicated to the public shall be paved in accordance with the these Design Standards and shall be maintained by means of a Home Owner's Association, the property owner or other means as approved by the Commission. 
    Any request to dedicate a private street as a public street shall be approved only if arrangements are made to bring the street into conformity with all city standards and regulations in effect at the time of dedication at the cost of affected property owners. 
    All private streets that intersect with public streets shall be constructed with standard drive approaches. In such cases where an unusual condition exists, the City Engineer may approve standard intersection approaches if the approval is requested prior to the preparation of the plans. Private streets will be named and shown on the plat. Street signs for said private streets shall be erected and maintained by the Home Owner's Association or property owner. 
    110.2 Trench safety. In conformance with House Bills 662 and 665 as passed by the Seventieth Legislature Regular Session of the State of Texas, all construction projects within the City of Decatur or its extraterritorial jurisdiction as provided by the Municipal Annexation Act (Article 970a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) shall contain provisions for trench safety. 
    On construction projects in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five (5) feet, the uniform set of general conditions must require that the bid documents and the contract include detailed plans and specifications for adequate safety systems that meet Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards and that these plans and specifications include a pay item for these same safety systems. 
    110.3 Underground utilities. All distribution lines, cables, etc. for utilities shall be installed below ground within the subdivision. Transmission lines or major cables to provide utilities such as electric, telephone and cable television to the area as a whole may be located above ground on the perimeter of the subdivision being served. The installation of these utilities shall conform to commonly accepted construction standards and be subject to review by the City Engineer. 
    110.4 Off-street parking. All parking shall be off-street, meaning that all vehicle maneuvering is done on the subject parcel and not on the street or right-of-way. The following minimum dimensions apply for off-street parking: 
Parking Angle Stall Width Stall Length Maneuvering Space 90 degrees 9 feet 18 feet 24 feet 60 degrees 9 feet 18 feet 20 feet 45 degrees 9 feet 18 feet 18 feet  
    110.5 Driveway approaches. All driveway approaches connecting to City streets shall be composed of concrete and shall meet the construction requirements as specified in Sheet P-5 of the city's Construction Standards. (Note: Driveway spacing and width details are given in Section 201.8, Tables G & H). 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 111. - Parking. 
    111.1 Off-street parking. All parking shall be off-street, meaning that all vehicle maneuvering is done on the subject parcel and not on the street or right-of-way. 
1.  Three thousand six hundred (3,600) psi reinforced concrete with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches or four (4) inches of Type "B" and two (2) inches of Type "D" HMAC. 
2.  Subgrade thickness and content shall be determined from a geotechnical report sealed by a licensed professional engineer registered in Texas provided by the developer. 
3.  Standard curb and gutter as shown on P-4 of the Construction Standards shall be placed around all landscaping areas and the external boundary of the parking area. 
4.  All off-street parking areas shall be striped in accordance with the latest addition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) published by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
5.  The following minimum dimensions apply for off-street parking (See Appendix A): 
Parking Angle Stall Width Stall Length Maneuvering Space 90 Degrees 9 feet 18 feet 24 feet 60 Degrees 9 feet 20 feet 20 feet 45 Degrees 9 feet 19 feet 18 feet  
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 112. - Driveways. 
    112.1 Driveway approaches. All driveway approaches connecting to city streets shall be composed of concrete and shall meet the construction requirements as specified in Sheet P-5 of the city's Construction Standards. (See Tables F and G in section 201.8 for driveway spacing and width details). 
    The normal driveway grade within the street right-of-way is set at one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot rise above the top of curb at the property line. The minimum elevation of a driveway at the right-of-way is two (2) inches above the top of curb. Barrier free sidewalk construction requires a maximum driveway grade as measured from the gutter of eight (8) percent. 
    Where driveway construction or reconstruction must occur off the street right-of-way, the usual maximum grade is fourteen (14) percent. The maximum change in grade without vertical curve is twelve (12) percent for any ten (10) feet in distance. Driveways should be profiled for a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet outside the right-of-way to ensure adequate replacement design. 
    Due to state laws requiring barrier free construction of sidewalks, steps or other abrupt changes in sidewalk grades are prohibited at driveways. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
CHAPTER 2. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 201. - Street improvements. 
    201.1 Street classification definitions. Streets shall be classified according to the following: 
1.  Thoroughfare (principal, major, minor): The main function of a thoroughfare is to carry traffic from one (1) urban area to another. The thoroughfare system serves the major activity centers of urbanized areas. A thoroughfare is used for longer urban trips and carries a high portion of the total traffic with a minimum of mileage. 
2.  Collector: Carries traffic from local streets to thoroughfare. Also may serve local facilities such as schools, churches. Uses served would include medium and high density residential, limited commercial facilities, elementary schools, some small offices and as direct access within industrial parks. Collector streets also carry heavy traffic to major commercial and industrial facilities from thoroughfare. Uses would include office parks, industrial parks, and community level commercial facilities. 
3.  Local: Carries traffic from residential and commercial areas to collector streets and interconnects individual sites. Local streets carry light traffic volumes and trips are of a short duration. 
    201.2 General requirements. The following general requirements apply to street improvements: 
1.  Adequate streets shall be provided by the subdivider. The arrangement, character, extent, pavement width, right-of-way width, grade and location of each street shall conform to the Master Plan. Each street shall be considered in its relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, significant natural features such as mature trees or water courses, public safety and convenience, and its relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such street. 
2.  Whenever a tract to be subdivided abuts any part of any street so designated on the Master Plan, or where a street designated on the Master Plan crosses any part of the tract to be subdivided, such part of the proposed public street shall be platted. The right-of-way shall be dedicated, and the street shall be constructed by the subdivider, generally consistent with the location as indicated on the Master Plan, and to a width consistent with the Master Plan and the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance. 
3.  Whenever a subdivision, development or new construction occurs adjacent to an existing street, the street shall be curbed and guttered according to the specifications given herein. 
4.  All streets shall be designed to coordinate with existing streets in adjoining subdivisions. When conditions permit, centerline offsets shall be at least one hundred thirty-five (135) feet. Greater centerline offsets may be required by the City Engineer and shall be planned where necessary for traffic safety. 
5.  Streets shall be named to provide continuity with existing streets. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets. All street names are subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon recommendation of the City Staff. 
6.  Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into such un-subdivided area. 
7.  Streets should be platted to allow two (2) tiers of lots between streets when possible. 
8.  The reservation in private ownership of strips of land at the end of proposed or existing streets and intended solely or primarily for the purpose of controlling access to property not included in the subdivision shall be prohibited. 
9.  Half streets shall be prohibited, except divided thoroughfare streets where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the Commission finds it will be reasonable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining land is subdivided. The other half of the street shall be platted within the adjacent tract at the time it is platted. 
10.  A median opening with an offset of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the centerline of an intersecting street or alley shall be prohibited. 
11.  Eyebrows or partial cul-de-sacs are not permitted on thoroughfare or collector streets. 
    201.3 Culs-de-sac. The following shall apply to cul-de-sacs: 
1.  Streets designated to be dead-ended permanently shall be platted and constructed with a paved cul-de-sac. Any dead-end street of a temporary nature, if longer than two hundred (200) feet, shall have a surfaced turning area eighty (80) feet in diameter for a cul-de-sac. Temporary dead-end streets shall have provisions for future extension of the street and utilities and, if the temporary cul-de-sac is utilized, a reversionary right to the land abutting the turnaround for excess right-of-way shall be provided. 
2.  A street ending permanently in a cul-de-sac should not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet, and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
    201.4 Street class requirements. The following street class requirements shall apply: 
1.  Street layout shall provide for continuation of collector streets in areas between thoroughfares. 
2.  Those local streets designated by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be extended through the tract to the tract boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unplatted lands. In general, these extensions should be at such intervals as necessary to facilitate internal vehicular circulation with adjoining unplatted lands. 
3.  Where single-family or duplex uses abut an existing or proposed thoroughfare or collector street, the plat or dedication instrument will provide: 
i)  Lots to side onto the arterial with a non-access restriction on the thoroughfare or collector side, or 
ii)  Reverse frontage with screening and containing a non-access restriction along the rear property line, or 
iii)  Other treatment as may be necessary or required for adequate protection of adjoining properties, and as approved by the City Council after taking into consideration the proposed method of off-street parking and maneuvering which will prevent the necessity of backing into the thoroughfare or collector street. 
    201.5 Street design general provisions. The following general provisions shall apply: 
1.  All dedicated streets shall conform to the criteria set forth in the Master Plan. Additional right-of-way will be required at most intersections and may be required at high-volume driveways to provide for left and right turn lanes to maintain traffic volume capacities through the intersections. Additional utility easements may also be required beyond the right-of-way in some locations. 
2.  The dedicated streets shall conform to the minimal design parameters as shown in Table A in section 201.8. 
3.  Streets shall be designed in accordance with The Texas Department of Transportation's Highway Design Division Operations and Procedures Manual. 
4.  No street intersections of a thoroughfare (principal, major or minor) shall vary from a ninety-degree angle by more than five (5) degrees. Intersections of a collector or local streets shall not vary from ninety (90) degrees by more than fifteen (15) degrees. 
5.  All intersections shall have: 
i)  A tangent section at least fifty (50) feet long that meets the angle of intersection requirements, and 
ii)  A centerline curve radius of at least four hundred (400) feet. 
    201.6 Pavement types. The developer shall provide a geotechnical report, sealed by a licensed professional engineer, containing recommendations for subgrade thickness and content. The minimum pavement thicknesses are provided below. 
1.  For Local Streets serving primarily residential areas, the developer shall construct six (6) inches reinforced concrete or four (4) inches of Type "B" and two (2) inches of Type "D" asphalt on a minimum of eight (8) inches of stabilized subgrade. 
2.  For Collector Streets, the developer shall construct seven (7) inches of reinforced concrete on eight (8) inches of stabilized subgrade or as approved by the City Engineer. 
3.  For Thoroughfare Streets, the developer shall construct eight (8) inches of reinforced concrete on ten (10) inches of stabilized subgrade or as approved by the City Engineer. 
    201.7 Street signs. The following requirements shall apply: 
1.  Street signs shall be furnished and installed by the Subdivider for all intersections within or abutting the subdivision. 
2.  Street signs shall be six (6) inches extruded, have white lettering on a green background, be engineer grade reflectorized, and include the block numbers along with the street name. 
3.  Stop signs shall be twenty-four-inch by twenty-four-inch in size and shall conform to the standards as set forth in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
4.  All signs shall be of engineer grade reflective material and be located in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
5.  The sign pole shall be buried to a minimum depth of two (2) feet and placed in twelve (12) inches diameter concrete filled posthole. The pole shall be tall enough to accommodate all applicable signs. The bottom of the stop sign shall be located seven (7) feet above the finished grade of the surrounding ground. 
6.  The developer shall submit a list of signs to be placed and a graphical representation of the signs for review by City Staff prior to installation. 
    201.8 Street Design Tables. The following tables provide design information as given in the Master Plan. 
Table A-Street Design Criteria 
Street 

Classification Min. Design 

Speed (MPH) Max. % Grade Min. % Grade Area Free from Storm Water, Using a 100-Year Frequency Storm Thoroughfares Principal 70 6 0.5 One lane in each direction Major 70 6 0.5 Minor 60 6 0.5 Collector 50 8 0.5 One lane or center 12' Local 30 10 0.5  
Table B-Urban ROW Widths 
    Thoroughfare Planning and Design Guides, North Central Texas Council of Governments, June 1995 
Functional 

Class No. Lanes Median Min. 

(feet) Recommended 

(feet) Intersection 

(feet) Principal 6 Yes 132 156 200 4 Yes 108 132 150 Major 6 Yes 110 132 142 4 Yes 86 102 112 5 No 80 95 105 3 No 58 70 75 Minor 4 Yes 80 100 110 4 No 64 80 90 3 No 56 68 80 2 No 50 60 72 Collector 4 No 64 78 90 3 No 56 68 66 2 No 50 60 60  
Table C-Lane Widths 
Location Functional 

Classification Min. 

(feet) Recommended 

(feet) Urban Principal 12 12 Major 12 12 Minor 11 12 Collector 10 12 Rural Principal 12 12 Major 12 12 Minor 12 12 Collector 12 15  
Table D-Median Widths 
    Thoroughfare Planning and Design Guides, North Central Texas Council of Governments, June 1995 
Design Speed Minimum 

(feet) Recommended 

(feet) 55+ 40 54 45-54 22 30 40-44 18 22 <40 14 18  
Table E-Median Lane Widths for Two-Way Left Turn Lanes 
    Thoroughfare Planning and Design Guides, North Central Texas Council of Governments, June 1995 
Speed Limit (mph) Usual 

(feet) Minimum 

(feet) 0-30 12-14 11 35-40 12-14 11 45-50 14 12 50+ 16 14  
Table F-Design Speeds 
    Thoroughfare Planning and Design Guides, North Central Texas Council of Governments, June 1995 
Location Functional Classification Recommended Range (mph) Urban Principal 45-70 Major 45-55 Minor 40-50 Collector 35-40 Rural Principal 50-70 Major 50-70 Minor 40-60 Collector 40-50  
Table G-Access Management Minimum Spacing 
Thoroughfare Planning and Design Guides, North Central Texas Council of Governments, June 1995 
Functional 

Classification Driveway Spacing Median Openings Directional Full Principal 440 2,640 5,280 Principal (Svc. Rds.) 330 N/A N/A Major/Minor 220 440 880 Collector 100 N/A 330 Local One Per Lot N/A N/A  
Table H-Driveway Widths 
Area Minimum 

(feet) Maximum 

(feet) Residential 8 24 Commercial 10 - One Way 28 Industrial 10 - One Way 30  
    201.9 Horizontal curves and super elevation. The alignment of the streets and thoroughfaresis usually determined by the alignments of the existing right-of-way or structures which cannot be relocated. Changes in the direction of a street or thoroughfare are minimized by constructing a simple curve having a radius which is compatible with the speed of vehicular traffic. To increase the safety and reduce discomfort to drivers traversing a curved portion of a street or throroughfare, the pavement may be super-elevated. 
    For small deflection angles, horizintal curves should be sufficiently long to avoid appearance of a kink. Curves should be at least five hundred (500) feet long for a central angle of five (5) degrees, and the minimum length should be increased to one hundred (100) feet for each one (1) degree decrease in the central angle. 
    Curvature in the alignment of arterials is allowed under certain conditions, but the greater traffic volume and the higher vehicle speeds which accompany these thoroughfares tend to increase the number of accidents when curving of alignment occurs. Curves in the alignment of minor streets usually provide aesthetic value to residential neighborhoods without affecting the orderly flow of traffic or safety. 
    A recommended minimum radius of curvature or vehicle design speed and pavement cross-slopes is shown in Table H. These are based on traffic consisting of typical present day automobiles operating under optimum weather conditions. There are other important considerations in the design of curves on thoroughfares including the location of intersecting streets, drives, bridges and other topographic features. When super-elevation is required on collectors and arterials, the following formula will be used: 
E=(V 2 /15R)-f 
Where: 
e = rate of roadway super-elevation, feet per foot; 
f = side friction factor (see table H); 
V = vehicle design speed, mph; and, 
R = radius of curve in feet. 
Table H-Minimum Centerline Radius for Roadways 
Super-Elevation Rate of Design Speed (mph) In/ft 30 35 40 45 -1/2 590 790 1010 1270 - 3/8 540 720 930 1170 -1/4 500 670 860 1080 - 1/8 470 630 800 1010 0 440 590 750 940 + 1/8 420 550 710 890 +1/4 390 520 670 840 + 3/8 370 490 630 790 +1/2 360 470 600 750  
Street Classification Side Friction Factor (f) Local/Residential 0.160 Collector 0.155 Arterials 0.145  
    Local or residential streets intersecting a collector street or arterial will have a tangent section of centerline at least fifty (50) feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the collector or arterial; however, no such tangent is required when the local or residential street curve has a centerline radius greater than four hundred (400) feet with the center located on the collector street or arterial street right-of-way line. Within a reverse curve, there will be a tangent section of centerline no less than one hundred (100) feet long. 
Table I-Vertical Curves 
    When two (2) longitudinal street grades intersect at a point of vertical intersection (PVI) and the algebraic difference in the grades is one (1) percent or greater, a vertical curve is required. Vertical curves are utilized in roadway design to affect a gradual change between tangent grades and should result in a design, which is safe, comfortable in operation, pleasing in appearance and adequate for drainage. The vertical curve will be formed by a simple parabola and may be a crest vertical curve or a sag vertical curve. 
MINIMUM LENGTH OF A VERTICAL CURVE 
Crest Vertical Curve Sag Vertical Curve L = KA Where: L = KA Where: L = minimum langth vertical curve required for safe stopping sight distance; L = minimum langth vertical curve required for comfort; K = horizontal distance in feet required to effect a one (1) percent change in gradient; K = horizontal distance in feet required to effect a one (1) percent change in gradient; A = algebraic difference in grade. A = algebraic difference in grade.  
Design Speed (mph) Safe Stopping Sight Distance (ft) Normal Crest Vertical Curve K (ft) Normal Sag Vertical Curve K (ft) 70 730 247 181 60 570 151 136 50 425 84 96 45 360 61 79 40 305 44 64 35 250 29 49 30 200 19 37  
Based on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets 2001 by AASHTO 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 202. - Water system improvements. 
    202.1 General. This section pertains to general design requirements for water distribution system construction in the City of Decatur. 
1.  All water lines shall be sized and designed in accordance with the City of Decatur Water Distribution System Master Plan or as determined by the City Engineer. In the absence of specific standards, all water supply, distribution, pumping, and storage improvements shall be designed in accordance with the most current standards of the American Water Works Association, the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and criteria adopted by the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290, "Water Hygiene." 
2.  Water lines for multi-family, commercial and industrial fire protection lines shall be dedicated to the public, unless the system is isolated from the public system by a detector check. 
3.  The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense, water distribution facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. The water system shall provide individual service to every lot in the subdivision. All water mains constructed within a proposed subdivision shall be extended to the perimeter of the proposed subdivision to allow for future extension of the water system into adjacent properties. The water system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the specifications contained in these Standards. Where considered necessary by City Staff, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by these Standards to provide for the future growth and expansion of the city's water distribution system. 
    202.2 Water line sizing. 
1.  Standard water line sizes are six-inch, eight-inch, twelve-inch, and sixteen-inch diameter. Other sizes must be approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  All water lines shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in diameter. All water lines shall be looped except in cul-de-sacs. Dead end lines shall not exceed fifty (50) feet on multi-family, commercial, or industrial sites. 
    202.3 Water line location. 
1.  Water lines shall be located in the parkway. Along State Highways, water lines are required to be constructed on both sides of roadway. New water lines crossing existing streets shall be placed by boring. A casing shall be required under major and minor collector roadways. Open cut excavation will not be allowed to cross existing streets, unless approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  All public water lines located on private property shall be centered in an easement. Water lines shall not be located under paved surfaces where possible. Easements for water line construction shall meet the following requirements: 
i)  The easement width shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
ii)  If the water line is less than twelve (12) feet deep, the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance of six (6) feet from the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement, the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance of three (3) feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities. 
iii)  If the water line is greater than twelve (12) feet deep, the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance of nine (9) feet from the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement, the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance of six (6) feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities. 
3.  All piping with mechanical couplings, push-on, or similar joints subject to internal pressure shall be designed with blocking, anchors, and restraining harnesses to preclude separation of joints. 
    202.4 Water line materials. 
1.  Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe. 
i)  PVC pipe shall be designed, manufactured, and tested in accordance with the applicable requirements of AWWA C-900 (six-inch through twelve-inch water pipe) AWWA C-905 (sixteen (16) inches and larger water pipe), and AWWA M-23. 
ii)  All PVC water pipe shall be blue in color. 
iii)  Six-inch through tweleve-inch water pipe shall be pressure class 150, DR 18. Pressure class 200, DR 14 pipe may be required by the City Engineer in areas of high distribution system pressure. 
2.  Fittings. 
i)  Fittings shall be ductile iron in accordance with AWWA C110 or AWWA C153. 
ii)  Fittings: ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11, except gaskets, shall be neoprene or other synthetic rubber and factory installed. Natural rubber will not be acceptable. 
iii)  All buried metal shall be wrapped in polyethylene Tube Wrap: ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5 
    202.5 Installation. 
1.  General. 
i)  All installations shall conform to the latest NCTCOG Specifications, as amended by these standards. 
ii)  All six-inch and eight-inch water pipes shall be installed with a minimum of forty-two (42) inches of cover over top of pipe; twelve-inch water pipes shall be installed with a minimum of forty-eight (48) inches cover. Pipes sixteen (16) inches and larger shall be installed with a minimum of sixty (60) inches of cover over top of pipe. 
iii)  The amount of trench excavation shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet from the end of the pipe laying operations, and no more than three hundred (300) feet of total open trench will be allowed. At the end of each work day, all trench excavation shall be backfilled to the end of the pipe laying operation. Barricades and lights will be required around any open trench left overnight. 
iv)  All connections to existing water mains shall be made under pressure unless dry connections will not cause any loss of service. Under special conditions connections that cause an interruption of service may be performed with approval of the City Engineer. 
v)  Coated tracer wire shall be installed in the embedment material above the PVC pipe with the tracer wire terminating in the in-line gate valve boxes accessible by City Staff. Blue underground water line tape of a minimum four-inch width shall be installed above the embedment material. 
vi)  Density tests shall be taken every two hundred (200) feet. The density reports shall be submitted daily to the city's inspector. 
vii)  All density reports shall be completed and delivered to the city's inspector before paving is allowed to begin. 
2.  PVC Water Pipe and appurtenances shall be installed as specified in AWWA Manual M-23 and in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations. 
3.  Fittings. 
i)  Fittings shall be installed in accordance with AWWA C-600. 
ii)  All mechanical joint bends, fees and reducers which require blocking shall be additionally restrained with EBAA megalug retainer gland or approved equal. 
iii)  All fittings that are concrete blocked must be polyethylene wrapped. 
    202.6. Fire hydrants. 
1.  Fire hydrants in commercial and industrial areas shall generally be at street intersections and so located that there will be a fire hydrant every three hundred (300) feet. Fire hydrants in a residential area shall be generally located on street intersections and not over five hundred (500) feet apart. Fire hydrants in a multi-family complex shall be generally located on street intersections and not over three hundred (300) feet apart. 
2.  Materials. 
i)  Fire hydrants shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C-502, Dry-Barrel Fire Hydrants. 
ii)  Hydrants shall be manufactured such that all maintenance and adjustments can be performed without excavation and such that hydrants may be faced in any direction in relation to base. 
iii)  The hydrant nozzle arrangement shall be three-way, consisting of two (2) two and one-half-inch hose nozzles and one (1) five-inch pumper nozzle. The two (2) hose nozzles are one hundred eighty (180) degrees apart with the pumper nozzle in between and on the same horizontal plane. Centerline of outlet nozzle shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above the ground/hydrant bury line. 
iv)  Threads on hose and pumper nozzles shall meet the requirements of National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 1963, "Standard for Screw Threads and Gaskets for Fire Hose Couplings" as follows: 
HOSE NOZZLE PUMPER NOZZLE Nominal Size of Coupling Waterway 21/2" 4" Number of Threads per Inch 71/2 4 Thread Designation (NH = Fire Hose) 2.5-7.5 NH 4-4 NH Approximate Outside Diameter of External Thread 3 1/16 " 5" Length of Nipple 1" 11/4" Length of Pilot to Start of 2 nd Thread 1/4" 7/16 " Depth of Coupling 15/16 " 1 3/16 " Diameter of Gasket Seat in Coupling 3 3/16 " 5 1/8 " Length of Coupling Internal Thread 11/16 " 7/8 " From Face of Coupling to Start of 2 nd Thread 3/16 " 3/8 "  
v)  Outlet nozzles shall be fastened into the nozzle section by threads or mechanical means and secured in place by a pin, a set screw or other acceptable method to prevent the nozzle from turning or backing out. Connecting the nozzle to hydrant by leading is not acceptable. 
vi)  Nozzle cap harnessing and gaskets shall be furnished. 
vii)  Shut off. 
a)  The hydrants shall be of the compression type, with the main valve opening against the pressure and closing with the pressure. 
b)  The valve action shall provide positive shut-off at minimum closing torque. 
c)  Wedge action closing gates shall not be used. 
d)  All hydrants shall open by turning the operating-stem nut to the LEFT (COUNTER CLOCKWISE). A clearly visible CURVED ARROW and the word "OPEN" shall be cast in relief on the top of the hydrant to indicate the direction of opening. 
e)  The fire hydrant operating nut shall be square in shape. The square nut shall measure one (1) inch at the base, and seven-eighths ( 7/8 ) inch at the top with all faces tapered uniformly. The nut shall be so designed as to protect the working mechanism from the moisture and dirt. 
viii)  Bury Length - The standard fire hydrant bury length from ground to bottom of the connecting pipe shall be three (3) feet six (6) inches. The hydrant shall be of a design that will permit extensions without disturbing the bottom section of the hydrant. 
ix)  Hub Type - Inlet connection shall be mechanical joint unless otherwise specified, and shall be for six-inch ductile iron pipe. The nominal diameter of the fire hydrant main valve opening is to be five and one-fourth (51/4) inches. 
x)  Hydrant Body - The body of the hydrant between the elbow and the top cap must be made in two (2) parts connected by a swivel flange, or breakable flange which will permit facing of the nozzles in any desired direction in increments of forty-five (45) degrees or less. The complete hydrant shall be of such design that when the hydrant barrel is broken through traffic collision or otherwise, it may be replaced without disturbing the bottom section of the hydrant. Extension sections, where required, shall include barrel extension section, extension rod with connectors provided for lengthening the complete unit. These units shall be available in increments of six (6) inches in length. 
xi)  The fire hydrant body shall be painted a high gloss alkyd fire hydrant red. 
xii)  Ballards shall be placed around fire hydrants in high traffic areas. The ballards shall be placed at forty-five (45) degree angles to the fire hydrant with a minimum spacing of thirty (30) inches. 
3.  Location Markers - A location marker shall be placed in the center of the roadway opposite the fire hydrant. If the fire hydrant is located near the intersection of at least two (2) streets, a marker shall be placed on all streets. The installation of this reflector shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. Location markers shall be Stemsonite 1-88-55A or approved equal. 
4.  Manufacturers - Approved fire hydrants manufacturers are Mueller (Super Centerion 200) and M&H (Model 129). 
    202.7 Valves. 
1.  Resilient seated gate valves shall be used for six-inch through sixteen-inch water lines. Butterfly valves shall be allowed for sixteen (16) inches and larger water lines when approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  Valves of approved design shall be installed at the intersections of all water mains so as to provide for proper maintenance and operation of the system and to provide a means of shutting off the supply to portions of the system for repairs. Valves shall be spaced such that only one (1) fire hydrant is out of service at any one (1) time. Three (3) valves shall be used on a four-way water line intersection and a minimum of two (2) valves shall be used on a three-way intersection. 
3.  Resilient Seated Gate Valves. 
i.  Resilient seated gate valves three (3) inches through sixteen (16) inches shall meet or exceed the latest revisions of AWWA C509 and shall meet or exceed the requirements of these standards. 
ii.  Resilient seated gate valves for buried service shall be furnished with a square two-inch operating nut. The valve box shall be Tyler Pipe 6850 series or approved equal. The valve box lid shall be painted safety blue. The paint shall be Glidden or approved equal. 
iii.  Butterfly valves shall meet or exceed the latest revision of AWWA Standard C504 for Class 150B butterfly valves and shall meet or exceed the requirements of this specification. All valve components shall conform to Underwriters Laboratories classification in accordance with ANSI/NSF Standard 61. 
4.  Installation. 
i)  Valves shall be furnished with extensions, such that the working nut is a maximum of forty-eight (48) inches below grade. 
ii)  Adjustable valve boxes shall be furnished and set on each valve in accordance with these standards. Valves that are deeper than forty-eight (48) inches, AWWA C900 PVC pipe shall be used for stacks, as long as the adjustable valve box is used at the top. 
iii)  After the final clean-up and alignment has been complete, the contractor shall cast in place a concrete block, twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-four (24) inches around all valve box tops at the finish grade. See construction details. 
iv)  Valves located within a right-of-way shall be indicated on the face of the curb, or where curbs do not exist, on a conspicuous location adjacent to the valve location. Markings are to be the stamping of a four-inch high letter "V" with the point of the "V" pointing towards the valve location. 
v)  Valve markers shall be provided in rural areas. 
5.  Manufacturers. 
i)  Approved manufacturers of three-inch through twelve-inch resilient seated gate valves are Mueller and M & H. 
ii)  Approved manufacturers of sixteen-inch resilient seated gate valves are Mueller, M & H and American Flow Control. 
iii)  Approved manufacturers of sixteen-inch and larger butterfly valves are Dezurik, Clow and Keystone. 
    202.8 Air Release and Flushing Valves. 
1.  Adequate air relief and flushing valves shall be provided for flushing, disinfection, daily operation requirements and repairs when required by the City Engineer. Air release valves shall be required on twelve (12) inches and larger water lines. Water lines shall be designed so that each section of the water line can be flushed at its lowest and highest points. 
2.  All dead end lines shall have a fire hydrant installed for flushing purposes. If installation of a fire hydrant is not possible, a flushing valve is required. 
3.  A fire hydrant shall be required at high points on water lines smaller than twelve (12) inches for air relief and flushing. 
4.  Air release valves and air/vacuum valves shall meet or exceed the latest revision of AWWA C5. 
    202.9 Tapping sleeve. A tapping sleeve and valve shall be used when connecting a new water line to an existing line. A resilient seated gate valve shall be flanged to the tapping sleeve. The tapping sleeve shall be a Smith-Blair type 664-665 stainless steel tapping sleeve, or approved equal. 
    202.10 Water service. 
1.  The water meter box shall be placed a minimum of six (6) inches behind the back of curb, and the water service shall be no more than twenty-four (24) inches deep, covered with a meter box in place at grade. If no curb is present, the water service shall be located at the property line, no more than twenty-four (24) inches deep, covered with a meter box in place at grade. Along roadways without a curb the water service line shall be constructed at a minimum of eighteen (18) inches below the ditch flow line. All water services crossing beneath streets must be encased in four-inch diameter PVC casing. 
2.  Meter and service sizes will be determined by the developer prior to requesting service from the city. The minimum water service size between the water main and the meter shall be three-fourth (3/4) inches and the minimum meter size shall be five-eighth ( 5/8 ) inches. 
3.  Water services on undeveloped lots shall be located at the property line and shall be a minimum of one (1) inch in diameter. 
4.  Materials. 
i)  Service saddle shall be double strap bronze with brass body or stainless steel double bolt wide straps with stainless steel body. Minimum size tap shall be three-fourth-inch diameter. 
ii)  Service lines shall be three-fourth-inch minimum diameter, Type K copper as specified in ASTM B88. 
iii)  Corporation and Curb Stops. 
a)  Corporation stop shall be two-inch ball type with compression outlet fitting, designed for a minimum working pressure of two hundred (200) psi. 
b)  Curb stop shall be set with compression inlet fitting and lock ring. 
iv)  Meter box for meters two (2) inches and smaller. Meter boxes shall be provided as shown in the Construction Details. 
5.  Installation. 
i)  General. 
a)  All water service shall be installed in accordance with these standards. 
b)  Each individual service location shall be saw cut into the face of the curb with a four-inch high blue "W" painted by the Contractor. If no curb exists, a similar mark should be placed in the pavement near the edge of the roadway. 
ii)  Residential Meters - All residential meters shall be manufactured by Badger Meters. 
iii)  Commercial Meters (two (2) inches and larger) - The developer shall purchase from the manufacturer a master compound meter. The meter shall be installed by a utility contractor or plumber. All meters in this size class are required to have a strainer prior to the meter. 
6.  Acceptable Manufacturers for Corporation Stops, Curb Stops, and Service Saddles are Ford, Mueller and Smith-Blair. 
    202.11 Flushing valves. 
1.  Materials 
i)  Corporation stop shall be two-inch ball type with compression outlet fitting, designed for a minimum working pressure of two hundred (200) psi. 
ii)  Two-inch curb stop shall be ball type with compression inlet fitting with fee head shut off. 
iii)  Pipe shall be two (2) inches diameter, Type K copper as specified in ASTM B88. 
    202.12 Water line bore. 
1.  Minimum casing thickness shall be one-fourth (1/4) inch. Casings shall be required under collectors and thoroughfares, highway crossings, and railroad crossings. Casings may also be required were deemed necessary by the City Engineer. The construction bore pit shall be located at a minimum distance of four (4) feet behind the back of curb or edge of pavement where no curb is present. 
2.  The design engineer shall design the water line pipe casing for the following loading conditions and applicable combinations thereof: 
i)  Cooper's E-80 Railway loading or AASHTO HS20 loading as applicable, 
ii)  Earth loading with the height of fill above the casing as shown on the plans, 
iii)  Loads applied during jacking, including axial load from jacking, and 
iv)  All other applicable loading conditions, including loads applied during transportation and handling. 
3.  Materials. 
i)  Steel Casing Pipe - Steel casing pipe shall be new (or used if approved by the City Engineer) and suitable for the purpose intended and shall have a minimum yield strength of thirty-five thousand (35,000) psi. Casing shall meet ASTM A-36, ASTM A-570, ASTM A-135, ASTM A-139, or approved equal. Pipe shall be coated with coal tar epoxy (fifteen (15) mils min.) in accordance with AWWA C-210. Pipe joints shall be welded in accordance with AWWA C-206. After pipe is welded, coating shall be repaired. 
ii)  Cement Mortar - Cement mortar shall consist of one (1) part cement to two (2) parts clean sand with sufficient water to make a thick, workable mix. 
iii)  Pressure Grout Mix - Grout shall be comprised of one (1) cubic foot of cement and three and one-half (3.5) cubic feet of clean fine sand with sufficient water added to provide a free flowing thick slurry. If desired to maintain solids in the mixture in suspension, one (1) cubic foot of commercial grade bentonite may be added to each twelve (12) to fifteen (15) cubic feet of the slurry. 
iv)  Casing Insulators (Spacers) - Use casing insulators for any type of carrier pipe. Insulators shall be high density polyethylene. Insulators shall fit snug over the carrier pipe and position the carrier pipe approximately in the center of the casing pipe to provide adequate clearance between the carrier pipe bell and the casing pipe. Insulators shall be manufactured by "Recon" and be Racci Type or approved equal. 
4.  Installation. 
i)  Excavation and Backfill of Access Pits. 
ii)  Do not allow excavation over the limits of the bore or tunnel as specified. Trench walls of access pits adjacent to the bore or tunnel face shall be truly vertical. Shore the trench walls as necessary to protect workmen, the public, structures, roadways, and other improvements. 
iii)  Excavations within the right-of-way and not under surfacing shall be backfilled and consolidated by mechanical methods as specified in these standards for compaction of trenches under roadways. Surplus material shall be removed from the right-of-way and the excavation finished to original grades. Backfill pits immediately after the installation of the carrier pipe is completed. If carrier pipe is not installed immediately after casing pipe installation, the City may require the access pits be temporarily backfilled until installation of carrier pipe. 
iv)  Where seeding or sodding is disturbed by excavation or backfilling operations, such areas shall be replaced by seeding or sodding as specified elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 203. - Wastewater system improvements. 
    203.1 General. This section pertains to general design requirements for wastewater collection system construction in the City of Decatur. All sewer lines shall be sized and designed in accordance with the Master Plan or as determined by the City Engineer. In the absence of specific standards, all collection, treatment, and disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the most current criteria adopted by the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 317, Design Criteria for Sewerage Systems. 
1.  All sewers shall be designed with consideration for serving the full drainage area subject to collection by the sewer in question; the drainage area may be modified with the concurrence of the City Engineer because of the projected rate of development or the financial feasibility of the proposed extension. 
2.  Sewers should be designed with straight alignment whenever possible. When horizontal curvatures must be used, the maximum joint deflection should be in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations. 
3.  The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense, wastewater collection facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. The wastewater collection system shall provide individual service to every lot in the subdivision. All sewer mains constructed within a proposed subdivision shall be extended to the perimeter of the proposed subdivision to allow for future extension of the wastewater collection system into adjacent properties. The wastewater collection system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the specifications contained in these Standards. Where considered necessary by City Staff, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by these Standards to provide for the future growth and expansion of the city's wastewater collection system. 
4.  All sewers shall be designed with hydraulic slopes sufficient to give mean velocities, when flowing full or half full, of no less than two (2) feet per second on Kutter's or Manning's formulas using an "n" value of 0.013. Slopes shall also conform to TAC Chapter 317, Sewage Collection System. 
5.  When a one hundred fifty (150) psi rated sewer line is required due to its proximity to a water line, the one hundred fifty (150) psi rated pipe shall terminate at a manhole on each end. The pipe shall be extended to the interior wall of the manhole. No external boot connection will be allowed. 
    203.2 Sanitary sewer line sizing. 
1.  Standard sewer line sizes are six (6) inches, eight (8) inches, twelve (12) inches, fifteen (15) inches, and eighteen (18) inches in diameter; other sizes must be approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  Sewer lines shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter. 
    203.3 Location. 
1.  Sewer lines shall be constructed at a minimum depth of four (4) feet. They shall be located in the parkway and are required to be constructed on both sides of a state highway. No sewer lines will be allowed to cross a state highway. 
2.  Easements for sewer line construction shall meet the following requirements: 
i)  The easement width shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
ii)  If the sewer line is less than twelve (12) feet deep, the outside diameter of the sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of six (6) feet from the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement, the outside diameter of the sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of three (3) feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities. 
iii)  If the sewer line is greater than twelve (12) feet deep, the outside diameter of the sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of nine (9) feet from the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement, the outside diameter of the sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of six (6) feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities. 
    203.4 Materials. 
1.  All sanitary sewer pipes shall be PVC pipe type SDR-35 for sewer lines constructed less than fifteen (15) feet deep. SDR-26 shall be provided where sewer lines exceed fifteen (15) feet. PVC pipe will not be allowed for depths greater than twenty-four (24) feet unless approved by City Engineer. If service connections are needed on sewer pipe constructed below fifteen (15) feet in depth, a parallel line shall be constructed at a shallower depth, specifically for service connections. 
2.  All PVC sanitary sewer pipe shall be green in color. 
3.  PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to the current ASTM Designation D 3034 for four (4) inches through fifteen (15) inches and ASTM Designation F 679 for greater than fifteen (15) inches. 
    203.5 Installation. 
1.  General. 
i)  All installations shall conform to ASTM Designation D2321, and the latest NCTCOG Specifications as amended by these standards. 
ii)  Sewer lines shall not be installed within nine (9) feet horizontally of any water main or fire hydrant. 
iii)  Construction shall begin at the downstream end of project and continue upstream with the bell facing upstream. No upstream piping shall be installed before downstream piping unless approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  Excavation and Backfill. 
i)  When PVC pipe is used, green marker tape with the wording "Buried Sanitary Sewer" shall be installed in the backfill material no more than twelve (12) inches above the top of the pipe. 
ii)  The amount of trench excavation shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet from the end of the pipe laying operations, and no more than three hundred (300) feet of total open trench will be allowed. At the end of each workday, all trench excavation shall be backfilled to the end of the pipe laying operation. Barricades and lights will be required around any open trench left overnight. 
iii)  Density tests shall be taken every two hundred (200) feet. The density reports shall be submitted daily to the city's inspector. 
iv)  All density reports shall be completed and delivered to the city's inspector before paving is allowed to begin. 
    203.6 Inspection. 
1.  All sanitary sewer lines shall be inspected using television inspection methods prior to acceptance by the city. 
i)  The Contractor is responsible for cleaning the sewer pipe. If the inspection shows debris or evidence that the line has not been properly cleaned, the review will cease and the tape will be returned to the Contractor. 
ii)  A city representative shall be present during the television inspection, unless otherwise authorized in writing. 
iii)  The televised inspection shall commence only after the line has passed both air and mandrel test. 
2.  Televised Inspection Criteria. 
i)  All sanitary sewer mains must be flushed with water just prior to televised inspection. Water is to be provided at the Contractor's expense. A city representative shall be present during the flushing of the main. 
ii)  All television equipment used shall have a minimum of two hundred twenty (220) lines of horizontal resolution. The picture shall be in color. 
iii)  All video information on tape must have good picture quality. 
iv)  As a title heading on the tape and during the televising, the operator must: 
a)  Note the project name and Contractor name. 
b)  Note the name of the company and the operator performing the video inspection. 
c)  Note line size and material, joint type and length. 
d)  Line segment to be televised including beginning and ending station numbers. 
e)  Note page of plans used and year plans were stamped. 
f)  Note date and time of inspection. 
g)  Footage counter must be displayed on the tape during the filming. 
h)  Show the above title block before and after each line segment. Show the title block at one hundred-foot intervals while filming the line segment. 
i)  All defects should be shown on film for a minimum of ten (10) seconds before proceeding with the televising. 
v)  The Contractor shall supply a log sheet used in conjunction with the video tape for written documentation. All written information gathered must be legible and clearly understandable. 
a)  Note the project name, Contractor name and contract number. 
b)  Note the name of the company and the operator performing the video inspection. 
c)  Note pipe size and material, joint type and length between joints. 
d)  Note the VCR tape footage counter, start to end. 
e)  Note line segment to be televised, station numbers from and station numbers to length of line segment as indicated on plans. 
f)  Note page of plans used and year plans were stamped. 
g)  Note date and time of inspection. 
h)  Indicate by sketch the line segment to be televised in relation to surrounding road intersections and street addresses. Identify manhole station numbers. Show direction of flow with arrows and direction the camera is going. Indicate direction of north on the sketch. 
i)  Note the water depth at the beginning, every fifty-foot station, every change in grade, and at the end of the line segment. 
j)  Identify the clock location, direction, size and type of laterals entering main. Indicate laterals as saddles, punched, or glued fittings. 
k)  Indicate final footage televised at end of the log sheet. 
1)  One tape per visual televised inspection project shall be furnished to the Public Works Director. 
2)  Tapes must be VHS format, one-inch wide T-120, high quality tape. Tapes are to be recorded on SP (two (2) hours) play. 
3)  All tapes and run sheets shall be submitted to the city. All tapes and log sheets shall become the property of the city. 
3.  Criteria for repair. 
i)  The Contractor shall make repairs if the inspection reveals any deficiency in the sewer line. If repairs are required, another television inspection shall be made after the repairs are complete on a new tape from manhole to manhole at the Contractor's expense. 
ii)  Repairs shall be made to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and Public Works Director. 
    203.7 Manholes. 
1.  Manholes shall be located at all intersections of sewer lines and at intermediate spacing along the line. Generally the maximum spacing should not exceed five hundred (500) feet. Manholes should be located at all changes in grade and at the ends of all sewer lines that will be extended. 
2.  A manhole is required at the junction of sewer lines with different inside pipe diameters. 
3.  A drop of at least 0.1 feet is required through the manhole when a change in flow direction occurs. 
4.  The flow line into a manhole should not be greater than six (6) inches above the flow line out of the manhole. Where the flow line in is greater than two (2) feet above the flow line out, a drop manhole is required. 
5.  Minimum manhole inside diameter is four (4) feet. 
6.  Drop-connection manholes shall have a minimum inside diameter of five (5) feet, with an interior drop connection if line size is greater than eight (8) inches. 
7.  Minimum cast in place manhole wall thickness is eight (8) inches. For depths greater than twelve (12) feet add an extra four (4) inches of thickness for each additional six (6) feet of depth. 
8.  Minimum pre-cast wall thickness is five (5) inches. 
9.  A manhole is required where a sanitary sewer line enters and exits private property. 
10.  All manholes shall be constructed of concrete. 
11.  Installation. 
i)  Use the following table to determine sanitary sewer manhole sizes: 
Pipe Sizes Depth of Cover Maximum Diameter of Manhole Number of Pipe Connections Allowed in Manhole Under 12" <12' 4' 3 12'-20' 5' 3 12" to 18" <12' 5' 3 12'-20' 6' 4  
NOTE: If the proposed design requires the sewer line to be placed at depths greater than shown above, the design will require approval by the City Engineer. 
ii)  Cast-in-place. 
a)  The manhole foundation shall be poured on undisturbed soil and shall have a minimum thickness of eight (8) inches. 
b)  The inlet and outlet pipes shall be poured into the foundation of the manhole. The pipe shall extend one and one-half (11/2) inches into the manhole. When straight through flow occurs, the pipe shall not be laid continuously through the manhole. 
c)  The invert shall be shaped and smoothed so that no projections will exist and the invert shall be self cleaning. The invert floor shall have a minimum slope of one (1) inch per foot. 
d)  Concrete work shall conform to all requirements of ACI 301, Standard Specification for Structural Concrete, published by the American Concrete Institute, except as modified herein. 
e)  Detailing of concrete reinforcement and accessories shall be in accordance with ACI Publication 315. 
f)  Portland Cement shall be Type II, low-alkali and conform to ASTM Designation C-150. 
g)  The manhole shall not be backfilled within twelve (12) hours after the concrete placement. 
h)  The face of curb shall be sawed with an "MH" to mark the location of all manholes. The location of the stamp shall be a line that intersects the center of the manhole cover and the curb perpendicular to the centerline of the street. For manholes located in intersections, the curb shall be stamped at the closest location to the manhole. If no curb exists, a similar mark should be placed in the pavement near the edge of the roadway. 
iii)  Precast Manhole. 
a)  Precast manholes shall be constructed in accordance to ASTM Designation C-478. 
b)  Manhole base shall have a spread footing and be placed on a minimum of twelve (12) inches of crushed rock. 
12.  Approved precast manhole manufacturers are Hydro-Conduit and Gifford Hill American. 
    203.8 Manhole Frame and Cover. 
1.  Cover. 
i)  All manhole covers shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Grey Iron Castings, ASTM A-48, Class 30 B. 
ii)  All manhole covers shall be twenty-four (24) inches in diameter. 
iii)  All manhole covers shall have two (2) integrally cast pick bars. 
iv)  Acceptable manufacturers include Bass and Hays and Vulcan. 
2.  Frames. 
i)  All manhole frames shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Grey Iron Castings, ASTM A-48, Class 30 B. 
ii)  All manhole frames shall provide a twenty-four (24) by 1/4 inch opening to assure proper fit of the manhole cover. 
iii)  Acceptable manufacturers include Bass and Hays and Vulcan. 
3.  Extension Ring. 
i)  All precast reinforced concrete extension rings shall conform to ASTM C-478. 
ii)  The number of extension ring sections shall be kept to a minimum (i.e. use 1-12 inch extension ring instead of two- to six-inch extension rings). 
iii)  A one-inch by three and one-half-inch bitumastic gasket shall be used to seal the extension ring at both joints. 
4.  Rain Pan. 
i)  Rain pans shall be high density polyethylene plastic. 
ii)  Acceptable manufacturers include Knutson or approved equal. 
    203.9 Sewer Service. 
1.  No sewer service line (lateral) shall be less than four (4) inches in nominal diameter. Commercial sewer laterals shall be six (6) inches minimum diameter. 
2.  Sewer laterals shall be located at the center of the lot and extended to the property line and be a minimum of ten (10) feet downstream of the water service. 
3.  Sewer service laterals shall have no more than six (6) feet of cover at the property line. 
4.  A cleanout shall be located on the service lateral at the time of connection to the building. 
5.  All lateral sewer service lines shall be PVC pipe type SDR-35. 
6.  All PVC sanitary sewer pipe used for lateral services shall be green in color. 
7.  All service laterals shall be installed in accordance with the sanitary sewer embedment and backfill standards. 
    203.10 Cleanouts. 
1.  All cleanouts are to be constructed of PVC pipe type SDR-35. 
2.  All PVC sanitary sewer pipe shall be green in color. 
3.  PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to the current ASTM Designation D 3034 for four (4) inches through fifteen (15) inches and ASTM Designation F 679 for greater than fifteen (15) inches. 
    203.11 Main Line Cleanouts. Main line cleanouts shall be located on dead end sewer mains at a distance no greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet from the preceding manhole. If the distance is greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet, a manhole shall be installed at the end of the line. 
    203.12 Aerial sewer. 
1.  The piers for the aerial crossing shall be designed in accordance with the guidelines of the Ductile Iron Pipe Research Association. 
2.  Aerial sewer crossings shall be located in areas where the sewer line cannot be constructed with the appropriate minimum cover. The design engineer shall design the aerial crossing in accordance with these standards and as approved by the City Engineer. 
3.  Pier placement and spacing shall be determined according to soils analysis performed by a geotechnical engineer. Piers shall be placed at a maximum span distance as indicated by the design engineer's calculations. 
4.  Pier placement and spacing along with a soils report shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
5.  All above ground sewer installations shall be ductile iron, minimum Class 150, utilizing restrained joints and shall have a wall thickness required for the size and span as designed. The pipe shall have an internal polyurethane coating. 
6.  The aerial pipe shall be connected to the sanitary sewer pipe by means of a manhole on each side of the aerial crossing. 
7.  Piers are to be constructed with a minimum of Class A three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi reinforced concrete. 
8.  The design engineer shall submit a pipe design for approval by the City Engineer. 
9.  The design engineer shall submit a pier design for approval by the City Engineer. 
    203.13 Sewer line boring. 
1.  The design engineer shall design the sewer line pipe casing for the following loading conditions and applicable combinations thereof: 
i)  Cooper's E-80 Railway loading or AASHTO HS20 loading as applicable. 
ii)  Earth loading with the height of fill above the casing as shown on the plans. 
iii)  Loads applied during jacking, including axial load from jacking. 
iv)  All other applicable loading conditions, including loads applied during transportation and handling. 
2.  Steel casing pipe shall be new (or used if approved by the City Engineer) and suitable for the purpose intended and shall have a minimum yield strength of thirty-five thousand (35,000) psi. Casing shall meet ASTM A-36, ASTM A-570, ASTM A-135, ASTM A-139, or approved equal. Pipe shall be coated with coal tar epoxy (fifteen (15) mils min.) in accordance with AWWA C-210. Pipe joints shall be welded in accordance with AWWA C-206. After pipe is welded, coating shall be repaired. 
3.  Cement mortar shall consist of one (1) part cement to two (2) parts clean sand with sufficient water to make a thick, workable mix. 
4.  Grout shall be comprised of one (1) cubic foot of cement and three and one-half (3.5) cubic feet of clean fine sand with sufficient water added to provide a free flowing thick slurry. If desired to maintain solids in the mixture in suspension, one (1) cubic foot of commercial grade bentonite may be added to each twelve (12) to fifteen (15) cubic feet of the slurry. 
5.  Casing insulators shall be used for any type of carrier pipe. Insulators shall be high density polyethylene. Insulators shall fit snug over the carrier pipe and position the carrier pipe approximately in the center of the casing pipe to provide adequate clearance between the carrier pipe bell and the casing pipe. Insulators shall be manufactured by "Recon" and be Racci Type or approved equal. 
6.  All bores shall be installed at a grade no less than the minimum indicated by TAC, Chapter 317 for the desired pipe size. 
7.  All bores shall maintain grade enough to ensure desired clearance distances between existing utilities and bore. 
8.  Bore pits must be a minimum of four (4) feet from the back of curb when located for boring under roadways. 
9.  Do not allow excavation over the limits of the bore or tunnel as specified. Trench walls of access pits adjacent to the bore or tunnel face shall be truly vertical. Shore the trench walls as necessary to protect workmen, the public, structures, roadways, and other improvements. 
10.  Excavations within the right-of-way and not under surfacing shall be backfilled and consolidated by mechanical methods as specified in these standards for compaction of trenches under roadways. Surplus material shall be removed from the right-of-way and the excavation finished to original grades. Backfill pits immediately after the installation of the carrier pipe is completed. If carrier pipe is not installed immediately after casing pipe installation, the right-of-way Owner may require the access pits be temporarily backfilled until installation of carrier pipe. 
11.  Where seeding or sodding is disturbed by excavation or backfilling operations, such areas shall be replaced by seeding or sodding as specified elsewhere. 
    203.14 Lift stations. 
1.  Lift stations must be designed in accordance with 30 TAC, 317.3. 
2.  Instrumentation and control. 
i)  The voltage supplied for pump operation shall be three-phase, four hundred eighty (480) volts. Converting single phase power to three-phase power using additional mechanical equipment shall not be allowed. 
ii)  Wet-well level control shall be achieved through the use of an ultrasonic level indicating transmitter. 
iii)  Stations with a total pumping capacity rating less than one thousand (1,000) gpm shall be equipped with an automatic telephone dialing system. 
iv)  Submersible pumps shall be provided with moisture and motor over-temperature sensors. 
3.  Site requirements. 
i)  A concrete pad will be required at the front of the control cabinet. The pad shall provide a three-foot working area away from the face of the cabinet and extend the width of the enclosure mounting structure. Pad depth shall be a typical four (4) inches. 
ii)  A one-inch minimum potable water service is required. The water service may be set in a standard eighteen-inch galvanized water meter box with a one-inch brass angle stop. 
iii)  The site shall be graded to drain away from the station to prevent stormwater inflow or infiltration into the wet-well. 
iv)  The site shall be located outside of the one hundred-year flood plain. 
v)  The site shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of an existing or proposed residence, if possible. 
vi)  If applicable the lift station site driveway shall include driveway area for maintenance vehicles to park off public roadway while performing maintenance. The minimum driveway length shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
vii)  A concrete driveway turning area is required where access drives extend more than twenty (20) feet from main roads. The driveway area shall be "T" shaped with the applicable turning radius. The minimum driveway width shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 
Section 204. - Drainage and storm sewer improvements. 
    204.1 General. Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed by the developer in accordance with all city standards and the following basic requirements: 
    204.2 Runoff calculations. 
1.  The selection of which method to use for calculating runoff depends upon the size of the contributing drainage area at the most downstream point of the project. The "Rational Method" is acceptable for designing projects in which the drainage area is less than two hundred (200) acres. A unit hydrograph method is required for projects with larger drainage areas. 
2.  No matter which method is used to calculate runoff, a developer or builder of property greater than one (1) acre in size, or any property that was platted as a part of an overall tract which was greater than one (1) acre in size (including churches and schools), shall develop the property so that the rate of runoff created by the development as it leaves the property does not exceed the rate of runoff that would have been created if the property had developed as a single-family residential property. 
3.  Runoff computations shall be based upon fully developed watershed conditions in accordance with the land use projections in the latest Master Plan. The design engineer shall size drainage facilities by disregarding the detention effects of upstream property and calculating the runoff as if the off-site property was developed without any detention. If an approved regional detention/retention facility is in operation, the design engineer may size downstream drainage facilities based on consideration of the detention effects of the regional facility. 
4.  Procedure for drainage areas less than two hundred (200) acres. 
i)  Computation of Storm Water Runoff for drainage areas less than two hundred (200) acres shall be by the "Rational Method," which is based on the principle that the maximum rate of runoff from a given drainage area for an assumed rainfall intensity occurs when all parts of the area are contributing to the flow at the point of discharge. The formula for calculation of runoff by the "Rational Method" is: 
Q = CIA 
Where: Q = the maximum rate of discharge, expressed in cubic feet per second. 
C = Coefficient of Runoff. 
Park areas - No developed land 0.30 Developed Park sites 0.40 Single-family Residential 0.55 Duplex 0.60 Multiple Family 0.70 Schools 0.70 Churches 0.70 Neighborhood Commercial 0.70 Office Commercial 0.70 Commercial 0.85 Industrial 0.85  
I = Intensity of Runoff in inches per hour ( Use Appendix A - IDF Curve ). 
A = Drainage Area in acres. 
ii)  Time of concentration is the longest time, without interruption of flow by detention devices, that a drop of water takes to flow from the farthest point of the drainage area to the point of concentration (i.e. the point of design). The time of concentration is composed of the inlet time and the flow time in a conduit or channel to the point of design. 
iii)  When designing in lets and laterals, the time of concentration is equal to the inlet time. The design engineer will compare the above specified inlet times to the actual calculated inlet time by computing the flow time overland and along the gutter to the first inlet. Manning's equation shall be used to determine flow time to the inlet. The design engineer may use the actual calculated or specified inlet time. 
a)  The inlet time shall be ten (10) minutes for property zoned multiple family, churches, schools, local business, central business, commercial, or industrial. 
b)  An inlet time of fifteen (15) minutes shall be used for property zoned for parks, cemeteries, agricultural, and single-family residential. 
5.  Procedures for Drainage Areas greater than two hundred (200) acres: 
i)  For drainage areas in excess of two hundred (200) acres where the use of the "Rational Method" does not provide reliable results, the use of a unit hydrograph method shall be made. The use of a unit hydrograph calculation will be based upon standard and accepted engineering principles subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Acceptable methods include the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Technical Release Number 55 or the Corps of Engineers HEC-1 models for drainage areas two hundred (200) acres or more. 
ii)  The unit hydrograph method shall be based upon fully developed watershed conditions assuming no effects from the small on-site detention facilities for maintaining the rate of runoff as if the property was developed as single-family residential use. The detention effects of large regional detention facilities can be taken into account in unit hydrograph methods. 
iii)  Circumstances that may require the use of a unit hydrograph method include sizing open channels, reclaiming floodplains, creating lakes, or building other types of drainage-related facilities on major drainage courses. Design engineers of these types of facilities should be aware that the requirement of designing for fully developed watershed conditions will mean that they will have to calculate these fully developed flows instead of using the flows calculated in the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) flood insurance studies for Decatur or Wise County. 
    204.3 Design storm frequencies. The approved drainage system shall provide for positive overflow at all low points. The term "positive overflow" means that when the inlets do not function properly or when the design capacity of the conduit is exceeded, the excess flow can be conveyed overland along a grassed or paved course. Normally, this would mean along a street or alley, or shall require the dedications of special drainage easements on private property. 
DRAINAGE FACILITY DESIGN RECURRENCE INTERVAL Closed Storm Sewer Systems 10-year with 100-year positive overflow in streets such that the depth of flow in the street does not exceed the top of curb. Closed Storm Sewer Systems and Inlets at Street Low Point or Sag 100-year with positive overflow Culverts and Bridges 100-year Concrete-lined Channels 100-year Earthen Channels 100-year  
    204.4 Street and alley capacity. 
1.  The depth of flow in the streets shall not exceed the top of curb for the one hundred-year storm. 
2.  The flows created by the one hundred-year storm shall be contained within the capacity of all paved alleys. 
3.  The first floor elevations of all residential and other structures shall be set at a minimum elevation of one (1) foot above the top of the street curb elevation or the alley invert, and with positive drainage provided away from the structure. Positive overflow sections shall provide a minimum of one (1) foot of freeboard from the overflow invert adjacent to structures and the corresponding first floor elevation of all residential and other structures. 
    204.5 Inlet placement and capacity. 
1.  Storm sewer inlets shall be built along paved streets at such intervals that the depth of flow, based upon the one hundred-year storm, does not exceed the top of curb. Inlets shall be located as necessary to remove the flow based on a ten-year storm. If in the opinion of the City Engineer the flow in the gutters would be excessive using the above design criteria, the storm sewers or inlet locations could be altered to relieve adverse conditions. 
2.  Inlets shall be placed upstream from an intersection whenever possible. At any intersection, only one (1) street shall be crossed with surface drainage and this street shall be the lower classified street. When an alley intersects a street, inlets shall be placed in the alley whenever flow down that alley would cause the capacity of the intersecting street to be exceeded. 
3.  The minimum inlet size shall be five (5) feet. No more than twenty (20) feet of inlet shall be placed along one (1) gutter at any given location. Minimum sizes of laterals shall be eighteen (18) inches for use with five-foot inlets, twenty-one-inch laterals with ten-foot, fourteen-foot, and drop inlets and twenty-four-inch laterals for twenty-foot inlets. Where laterals tie into trunk lines, place the laterals on a sixty-degree angle with the trunk line and connect them so that the longitudinal centers intersect. 
    204.6 Pipe design standards. 
1.  Storm sewer conduit shall be sized to flow full. Manning's Equation shall be used to determine the conduit size. 
2.  Minimum and Maximum Velocities in Pipes. 
i)  The minimum velocities in conduit shall be two and one-half (2.5) feet per second. 
ii)  Maximum velocity in the pipe shall not exceed twelve (12) feet per second. 
iii)  The maximum discharge velocities in the pipe shall also not exceed the permitted velocity of the receiving channel or conduit at the outfall to prevent erosive conditions. The maximum outfall velocity of a conduit in partial flow shall be computed for partial depth and shall not exceed the maximum permissible velocity of the receiving channel unless controlled by an appropriate energy dissipater (e.g. stilling basins, impact basins, riprap protection). 
3.  In general, storm water shall be carried in concrete pipe conduit, but other types of conduit can be used to carry stormwater. However, prior permission to use other conduit materials must be obtained from the City Engineer. 
4.  Hydraulic Gradient. 
i)  Conduits must be sized, and slopes must be set such that runoff flows smoothly down the drainage system. To insure this smooth passage, the hydraulic gradient must be at the proper elevations. The hydraulic grade line shall be established and shown on the plans for all storm sewer design. 
ii)  The hydraulic grade line shall in no case be closer to the surface of the ground or street than one (1) foot. 
iii)  Hydraulic gradient calculations shall account for all head losses that may occur in the storm sewer line. Friction head loss shall be determined by direct application of Manning's Equation. Minor losses due to turbulence at structures shall be determined using Appendix B of this section. 
    204.7 Culvert design. 
1.  One (1) foot of freeboard is required between the one hundred-year water surface elevation and the top of curb elevation. Exceptions must be approved in writing by the City Engineer. 
2.  Culverts must be designed using standard methods and engineering judgment. Culverts shall be designed in accordance with the latest edition of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) Hydraulic Design Manual. Standards of the City of Decatur will take precedence over TxDOT Manual in cases of conflict. 
3.  Culvert hydraulic grade line calculations shall consider both inlet and outlet control. 
4.  Culverts shall be skewed such that impacts due to the flood and normal flow angles of attack on the structure are minimized. 
5.  The maximum velocity through a culvert shall be fifteen (15) feet per second. 
6.  Stream stability shall be assessed when determining the number of barrels, height and width and culvert skew. Potential for scour shall be accounted for in the design. 
    204.8 Bridges. 
1.  Two (2) feet of freeboard is required between the one hundred-year water surface elevation and the low chord of the bridge. Exceptions to this requirement must be approved by the City Engineer in writing. 
2.  The skew of the bridge piers and abutments shall be oriented as close to the normal or flood direction of flow resulting in an angle of attack as close to zero (0) degrees as possible. 
3.  Bridges shall be designed using standard methods. 
4.  Stream stability shall be assessed when designing the abutments and interior bents of the bridge. Scour shall be accounted for in the design. 
    204.9 Channels. 
1.  Open channels are discouraged in urban areas. Open channels may be used instead of an enclosed system when the pipe size, necessary to carry the design storm event, exceeds the capacity of two- to sixty-inch RCP. Open channels shall not be permitted when two- to sixty-inch RCP pipes will carry the design flow, unless approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  Open channel design criteria: 
i)  Channels may be left in their natural state provided that the channel velocities are six (6.0) feet per second or less and that one (1) foot of freeboard is available during the design storm event. 
ii)  If the natural channel is to be replaced by an improved channel, the flow from the one hundred-year design flood must be contained within the improved channel while allowing for one (1) foot of freeboard. 
iii)  Improved channels shall be trapezoidal shaped and include a lined section if the design velocity is greater than six (6) feet per second. Lining types such as concrete, rock walls and gabions may be used upon approval of the City Engineer. The maximum velocity allowed in concrete lined channels is fifteen (15) feet per second. 
iv)  Unless shown to be feasible in a soils report sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the State of Texas and approved by the City Engineer, improved channels shall have minimum side slopes of: 
a)  Four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical for earthen, grassed-lined side slopes. 
b)  One and one-half (1.5) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical for concrete-lined side slopes in rock. 
v)  Where practicable, all unpaved channels should have sufficient grade to avoid ponding during backwater flow conditions. A minimum slope of 0.40 percent is required for earthen channels and swales, except those used as part of a wetlands area. 
vi)  The developer or owner shall use low maintenance vegetation for vegetative cover, as approved by the City Engineer prior to planting. The selection of materials shall comply with either the current ground cover listing for North Central Texas furnished through the Texas Agricultural Extension Service. 
3.  Manning's equation can be used to design channels and determine water surface elevations and velocities when backwater effects are negligible. Channels where backwater effects occur must be designed using models accepted by FEMA. 
4.  All channel sections must consider and account for channel stabilization in their design. This requirement pertains to all sections whether they are left in their natural condition or are modified in any manner. The design of all drainage channels and swales shall assure adequate capacity and minimum maintenance to overcome the result of erosion, silting, sloughing of bends or similar occurrences. 
5.  When performing hydraulic analyses for channel or drainageway design, the starting water surface shall be based on the following criteria: 
i)  When the ratio of the drainage area of the receiving creek (at the confluence location) to the drainage area of the channel or drainageway being designed is fifteen (15) or greater, the ten-year water surface of the receiving creek shall be used as the starting water surface for hydraulic design calculations. For creeks where the ten-year water surface is not available, the slope-area method will be used for starting design calculations. 
ii)  When the ratio of the drainage area is less than fifteen (15), the one hundred-year elevation on the receiving creek shall be used as the starting water surface for design calculations. 
    204.10 Detention design. Detention/retention facilities shall be designed for the one hundred-year design flood according to the following criteria: 
1.  Dedicated detention/retention basins shall also include an additional one (1) foot of freeboard and two (2) feet of sediment storage. The volume of runoff storage for drainage areas greater than two hundred (200) acres shall be computed using unit hydrograph procedures. Acceptable unit hydrograph procedures are provided in section XI.B.5 of this document. 
For drainage areas less than two hundred (200) acres, the above methods are recommended; however, an approximate routing method based on the rational formula is allowable. 
2.  All detention facilities designed shall consider the timing of the flood peak in the main channel into which the detention facility drains. Delaying the peak from a site in lower portions of a watershed may result in a higher peak on the main channel. 
3.  A detention facility shall have enough gradient to ensure positive drainage to the outlet structures so as to avoid nuisance conditions such as standing water, odors, insects, and weeds. A minimum slope of 0.40 percent towards the outlet structure is required for all detention facilities. 
4.  Detention areas in parking lots shall not be: 
i)  In required parking spaces but in extra spaces. 
ii)  Behind speed bumps unless the speed bumps are made with reinforced concrete. 
iii)  Deeper than six (6) inches unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer and warning signs shall be posted. 
5.  Drainage easements shall be provided for all regional detention/retention facilities and for other detention/retention facilities where two (2) or more owners are involved. 
6.  Detention facilities shall be designed to empty in less than twenty-four (24) hours, unless it is also serving as an erosion control facility. 
7.  Detention facilities used as a sediment control device shall meet the following requirements: 
i)  The sediment control facility shall be designed with minimal velocities such that sediment is dropped and not picked up by flows at any time during the storm event. 
ii)  The basin shall be designed with adequate sediment storage area so that sediment removal is not required more than twice a year. Expected removal periods greater than twice a year must be specified in the maintenance plan and approved by the City Engineer. 
iii)  Sediment control facilities cannot be used to meet detention requirements unless the volume of sediment is included in the calculations for the detention basin design. 
8.  The owner shall maintain detention/retention facilities unless the facilities are dedicated to the City of Decatur. The following measures are required to ensure the facility functions properly. 
i)  Facilities should be mowed at least twice a year to control weeds and discourage woody growth. 
ii)  Debris, litter and accumulated sediment should be removed from detention facilities at least twice a year. Particular attention should be given to removal of debris, litter and sediment around outlet structures. 
iii)  Detention basins designed for sediment removal shall be maintained as specified in the maintenance plan and approved by the city with construction plan submittal. 
    204.11 Flumes. The use of flumes is not recommended for widespread use. Flumes shall not be permitted when the purpose of a permanent flume is to carry runoff down the sides of earthen channels. A flume may be used to direct overflow runoff along property lines until the runoff can be intercepted by streets or conduits. Flumes crossing sidewalks shall be covered or bridged such as to minimize danger to pedestrians. 
    204.12 Residential grading and drainage. 
1.  Surface runoff from residential lots shall cross no more than one (1) additional lot before being directed toward the street or a dedicated drainage system. When the flow reaches the second lot, side lot swales shall be in place to direct the flows to the street or to a dedicated city drainage system within an easement in the rear yard. Furthermore, no more than one (1) lot may drain to a second lot before the flow is directed to a street or to a dedicated city drainage system. Where lot to lot drainage occurs, the lot lines shall be aligned and a dedicated private drainage easement shall be provided. 
2.  Three (3) general categories of residential lot grading and drainage plans are anticipated within the City of Decatur as shown in Figure No. 1. Specific deviations from these three (3) plans will be considered on an individual basis. 
3.  When adjacent to the floodplain, the finished floor (FF) elevation of commercial buildings shall be one (1) foot above the one hundred-year fully developed water surface elevation (WSE) of the ultimate floodplain. The FF elevation of residential buildings shall be two (2) feet above the one hundred-year fully developed water surface elevation (WSE) of the ultimate floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01,  1, 2-14-05) 

APPENDIX C 
MINOR HEAD LOSSES 
A.  Entrance Losses 
1.  Equation: 
HL = Ke ( V 2 ) 2 
2g 
Where: 
HL = head loss (feet 
V 2 = velocity in downstream pipe (ft/s) 
Ke = head loss coefficient 
G = gravity constant (32.2 ft/s 2 ) 
2.  Entrance Loss Coefficients (Ke) 
Type of Structure and Design of Entrance     Ke 
Concrete Pipe 
Projecting from fill: 
Socket end (groove-end) ..... 0.2 
Square cut end ..... 0.5 
Headwall or headwall and wingwalls: 
Socket end of pipe (groove-end) ..... 0.2 
Square-edge ..... 0.5 
Rounded (radius = 1/12 D) ..... 0.2 
Mitered to conform to fill slope ..... 0.7 
End-section conforming to fill slope ..... 0.5 
Beveled edges, 33 to 45 bevels ..... 0.2 
Side- or slopetapered inlet ..... 0.2 
Pipe or Pipe-Arch Corrugated Metal 
Projecting from fill (no headwall) ..... 0.9 
Headwall or headwall and wingwalls square-edged ..... 0.5 
Mitered to conform to fill slope, paved or unpaved slope ..... 0.7 
End-section conforming to fill slope ..... 0.5 
Beveled edges, 33 to 45 bevels ..... 0.2 
Side- or slope-tapered inlet ..... 0.2 
Box, Reinforced Concrete 
Headwall parallel to embankment (no wingwalls): 
Square-edged on 3 edges ..... 0.5 
Rounded on 3 edges to radius of 1/12 barrel dimension or beveled on 3 sides ..... 0.2 
Wingwalls at 30 to 75 to barrel: 
Square-edge rounded to radius of 1/12 barrel dimension or beveled on 3 sides ..... 0.2 
Wingwall at 10 to 25 to barrel: 
Square-edged at crown ..... 0.5 
Wingwall parallel (extension of sides): 
Square-edged at crown ..... 0.7 
Side- or slope-tapered inlet ..... 0.2 
B.  Bend Losses 
1.  Equation: 
HL = Kb ( V 2 ) 2 
2g 
Where: 
HL = head loss (feet) 
V 2 = velocity in downstream pipe (ft/s) 
Kb = head loss coefficient 
G = gravity constant (32.2 ft/s 2 ) 
2.  Bend Loss Coefficient (Kb) 
The following head loss coefficients for bends in storms are for pipes with diameters of forty-eight (48) inches or less. For storm sewers with diameters greater than forty-eight (48) inches the momentum equation should be used to determine headloss. 
Conduit on Curves 
K;sub \ sub; Radius of Pipe Bend 90 60 45 22.5 Pipe radius = diameter 0.50 0.43 0.35 0.20 Pipe radius = 2 to 8 diameter 0.25 0.21 0.18 0.10 Pipe radius = 8 to 20 diameter 0.40 0.34 0.28 0.16  
C.  Junction Losses 
1.  Equation: 
HL = (V 2 ) 2 - Kj(V 1 ) 2 __________2g 2g  
Where: 
HL = Head loss (ft) 
V 1 = Velocity in the upstream pipe (ft/s) 
V 2 = Velocity in the downstream pipe (ft/s) 
Kj = Head loss coefficient 
G = Gravity constant (3.2 ft/s 2 ) 
2.  Junction Loss Coefficient (Kj) 
Description of Condition     Kj 
Inlet on Main Line ..... 0.50 
Inlet on Main Line with Lateral ..... 0.25 
Manhole on Main Line with 221/2 Lateral ..... 0.75 
Manhole on Main Line with 45 Lateral ..... 0.50 
Manhole on Main Line with 60 Lateral ..... 0.35 
Manhole on Main Line with 90 Lateral ..... 0.25 
45 Wye Connection or Cut-in ..... 0.75 
60 Wye Connection or Cut-in ..... 0.70 
Inlet or Manhole at Beginning of Line ..... 1.25 
Appendix D - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2014-06-06,  1, June 23, 2014, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as a new Appendix D to read as herein set out, at the editor's discretion. 
State Law reference- Texas Local Government Code,  213.003. 

I. - INTRODUCTION 

    The City of Decatur, Texas is located in Wise County forty-five miles northwest of the Fort Worth metropolitan area. Decatur enjoys a population of over 5,200 people 1 [] within its city limits with nearly that many in its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) and outlying area. Spanning over 4,000 acres of rolling terrain, the city offers varying land uses from rural residential to urban apartments and from commercial agriculture support to retail and commercial with some industrial. Decatur is fully within the award winning Decatur Independent School District (DISD), which extends well beyond the Decatur city Limits. The city and DISD are proud of its blue ribbon schools, and high achieving extra curricular programs. Decatur has also been an exemplary Texas Main Street City for nearly ten years. This broad range of land uses, commitment to excellence and advantageous location makes Decatur a very attractive site for prospective families and commercial/retail industries. 
    The Dallas Fort Worth Metroplex is increasingly expanding and Wise County is on the edge of that growth. A recent study done by Harvard University 3 [] concluded that the population of Wise County would more than double over the next two decades. With the expected rate of growth, the strong sense of identity that Decatur maintains can only be preserved and nurtured by moving forward with purpose. This Comprehensive Plan sets forth that purpose. 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
According to the 2000 US Census. 
According to the Texas Education Agency, Decatur is part of the Region 11, Fort Worth Region. 

--- () --- 
Harvard University's Graduate School of Design. 

1. - MISSION STATEMENT 
    The Mission of this Comprehensive Plan is 'To guide and enhance the growth and operation of the City of Decatur while improving the economic well-being and quality of life for all its citizens. It is vital that these efforts maintain the unique character and heritage of the city in order to insure that a sense of community pride and belonging will be shared by this and all future generations.' 
    The primary objectives of this Comprehensive Plan are to: 
  Influence and manage the development of the community; 
  Minimize conflict between land uses; 
  Predict infrastructure and service needs in advance of demand; 
  Increase both the benefits and cost effectiveness of public investment; 
  Ensure that community facilities are located to best serve the community; and 
  Coordinate public and private investment. 
    The Comprehensive Plan policies are intended to provide guidance in the evaluation of future decisions on land use, infrastructure improvements, transportation, and other issues. Ordinances that are proposed and considered after the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan policies should be consistent with the relevant goals and policies contained in the Plan. If an ordinance instituting or modifying rules or regulations is being considered which is contrary to the goals and policies of the plan, either the plan should be reviewed and amended prior to the adoption of the ordinance, or it should be clearly stated what circumstances necessitate that it be in conflict with the plan. 
    The Comprehensive Plan provides the basis for rational decision-making and serves as a guide to the governing body, the City Council. This Comprehensive Plan does not replace the decision-making process, nor does it take the place of the city's development ordinances or other ordinances in establishing regulations. Implementation of the Comprehensive Plan is at the sole discretion of the city's governing body. The enactment of the Comprehensive Plan policies does not constitute a substantive change in existing ordinances of the City of Decatur, nor does it supersede or replace the development ordinances or any regulatory ordinances adopted prior to the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan. In the event of apparent conflict between the Comprehensive Plan and current ordinances of the city, the current ordinances will control. In applying such ordinances, consideration should be given to the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan in an attempt to reconcile the two provisions. 
    Planning is a continuous and dynamic process that helps the community achieve goals that are important to its citizens and to the community at large. Over time, these goals will likely change. Then, the community must again review where they have been, how they got there, what has changed since their last planning effort, and where they want to go next. This is a normal planning process, and it happens in all communities. 
2. - HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF DECATUR 

    For most of the 20 th century, Decatur was just another small north Texas city with a great history. Over the course of a few short years at the end of the '20s, the city was transformed from a busy provincial settlement into a quiet small town. It's once sturdy agricultural and mineral economic base, that supported a thriving population of 3,200 in 1928, slowly bottomed out, and its stagnant population hovered between 2,300 and 3,000 until the early 70's. By the end of the 1970's, the city's population began to grow, found by couples searching for the right kind of place to raise families and commuters responding to the expanding job market. On balance, the century had been kind to the city. Out of the way and maintaining its rural atmosphere, the urban core of Decatur was so well designed that there was little need to distort its classical lines to accommodate the ever-growing automobile traffic. 
    Colonel Absolom Bishop first arrived in what would soon become Wise County in 1854. Bishop helped organize the campaign to carve Wise County out of the undifferentiated territory known as Peter's Colony. In 1856 the county creation bill, which delineated the boundaries of Wise County, passed through the State legislature in Austin. With the incorporation of the county, the need arose to create a county seat, which, at the time, was required to be within 5 miles of the county's center. In preparation for this, Bishop had inked a deal with James Proctor in 1854. Proctor's property, some 160 acres, covered the hilltop upon which the city now stands. Bishop convinced Proctor to deed 60 acres to the newly formed city, the return for which would be a dramatic increase in land values enjoyed by Proctor as the city was built. 
    Bishop set to the platting of the original city with determination. An early historian of Decatur declared that, "To his natural endowments of taste and an orderly mind, Colonel Bishop brought to the task before him the garnered observations of broad travel and the experience of metropolitan life, which intangibles he worked into the grand plan of the county capital of Wise County." Rejecting the erratic construction and the haphazard building plans that often accompanied the creation of new urban centers on the frontier, Bishop was keen to ensure that the new city developed in accord with his specific vision of a systematically developed urban area that remained centered on the square. 
    To this end, and armed with hefty pile of 'burr-oak stakes' Bishop set about surveying and laying out the town initially known as Taylorsville, after president Zachary Taylor, whose fierce prosecution of the Mexican/American war of the mid 1840's had greatly impressed the novice city planner. Bishop's affection for the president quickly palled in the wake of Taylor's pronouncement that he would happily use the same kind of force to bring dissident states into line with the federal government, and led to Bishop's successful petition to have the city's name changed to Decatur in honor of the naval hero, Commodore Stephen Decatur. Although overtly inspired by the square-centered and compact street design of nearby McKinney, Bishop's city design further revealed the influence of colonial practice and 18 th century neo-classical aesthetics. 
    In his mind's eye, Bishop conjured the image of a compact hillside community whose orderly grid of streets would form a coherent system that radiated outward from the central public square. This specific form of urban organization not only revealed the impact of the simple, rational yet balanced attributes of classical aesthetics which had shaped many of the cities in the eastern colonies, but also the rectilinear grid that dominated the Spanish colonial cities to the south. True to his reputation, Bishop sought, and largely succeeded, to create a virtue out of the limited availability of level building sites in the city by ensuring the city square was on the very tip of the hill, one of the flattest pieces of land in the city at that time. 
    Not surprisingly, this aspect of the city's design reflected Bishop's dominant principles and the continuing common sense view that civic life is guided, shaped and responsive to the mutually reinforcing bulwarks of commerce and law. Bishop's design effectively solidified the elevation of this principle, as the majority of the budding city's residents would have to ascend the hill in order to participate in the public life of the city. Indeed, one historian attributes a "vision of a gleaming palace of justice towering above the prairies" to Bishop. By centralizing both legal and commercial activities in the city, Bishop was forcefully asserting the primacy of these two aspects of community life in the face of the absence of both in the surrounding area as well as the city's uncertain future. 

    By the turn of the century, the center of Decatur was in place. The city's third and final courthouse was completed in 1896 and the majority of the limestone and brick buildings that ring the square outnumbered the cheaper wood framed structures. The Romanesque Revival style county courthouse was commissioned after the third wooden one burned in the opening weeks of 1895. It was completed in 1896. As was the case in many North American cities, the last decade of the 19 th and the first decade of the 20 th centuries were marked by a rapid modernization with the introduction of new services such as electricity and sanitary sewers and potable water. While the introduction of services and the growing importance of the motor car allowed for greater territorial spread of housing (particularly noticeable at the time along the 'major thoroughfare' of College) the commercial and social life of the city was still focused on the square and courthouse. 

    After the successful conclusion of the Indian Wars, Decatur enjoyed an extended period of prosperity into the 1920's. These years were marked by population growth, territorial expansion, the creation of new services, the addition of a railroad depot and, in the latter half of this idyllic period, the development of an oil and gas industry. The decade that marked the city's greatest expansion was the 1880's. In 1880 there were 579 residents in the city and by 1890 the city's population had ballooned to 1,746. The rapid expansion of the population was fostered by the arrival, in 1882, of the Fort Worth and Denver Railroad. Although the rail line effectively stunted the city's potential for eastward expansion, the depot linked local producers to distant markets and served as a catalyst for the coming decades' rapid developments. It's hard to underestimate the economic and social impact of the railroad on small frontier cities. By slashing the cost of transporting products and people, the railway entwined the city in a far-reaching web of business, social and cultural relations. In order to further minimize transport costs, businesses clustered around the rail terminal in the city. The industrial development around the railroad diverted economic focus to the eastern half of the city and helped consolidate the commercial and legal activities in the center. As industry continued to develop, housing began filling in the city's vacant lots. With two newspapers, a theater, a post office, a number of dry goods retail outlets and different official buildings all located within spitting distance of the square, the center of town was the cultural and social hub of the city, precisely as Bishop had hoped it would be. 
    The Crash of 1929 and subsequent great depression stifled development in the city and the population contracted as residents sought out opportunities elsewhere. As the regional economy stagnated, the population declined leaving Decatur to quietly and quickly shift to just another small city. Through these difficult times, the city maintained its integrity and unique status as the county seat which, in turn helped realize a series of improvements. The construction of U.S. 380 (originally known as Highway 24) and Highway 81 in the 1930's, followed by the relocation of Highway 81 to the current location of 287/81 in 1968 and the construction of the U.S. 380 Bypass completed in 1987 provided means by which Decatur could experience a new surge of growth with the new millennium. 
    Decatur has experienced what some might consider a negative impact from the railroad and the new highways that exacerbated the effect of dividing the heart of the city from outlying areas. The infrastructure that caused this division, creating a boundary between the city's older buildings and sites for future expansion, also spurred development. On one hand, the new highways had the effect of pulling traffic away from the downtown core, encouraging new business on the outskirts of town and straining the downtown businesses. On the other hand, it ensured that city's compact historic center remained largely unchanged, awaiting to be rediscovered. Decatur has managed to retain much of its historical charm while standing ready to embrace the future. 
    In November of 1996, the City of Decatur informally adopted a Comprehensive Master Plan. This document, developed by an outside consulting firm, was a gathering of multiple reports prepared over a span of eighteen years. While the document as a whole was not formally adopted, the Drainage Element was adopted by ordinance in April of 1980, the Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) for water and wastewater impact fees was adopted by ordinance in March 1998, and the Parks Master Plan was adopted by ordinance in June 1997. 
II. - GOALS AND POLICIES 
1. - Economic Development 
    The economic development purpose for Decatur is to remain the economic center for the Wise, Montague and Jack County region through focused economic development efforts to achieve a strong and diversified economy while improving the quality of life and preserving our unique heritage and character. 
Economic Development Goals 

Goal 1. - Make Decatur a destination. 

A.  Establish the Main Street Program as a permanent, full-time city department. 
B.  Promote city and countywide tourist attractions in order to establish Decatur as a central destination from which to enjoy area points of interest. 
Goal 2. - Encourage economic diversity and jobs creation that are compatible with Decatur's natural and cultural resources. 
A.  Assess the current status of economic development in Decatur and the city's ability to meet projected land, labor and capital demands at all levels (neighborhood, community, city, state, national and international). 
B.  Investigate and attract outside funding sources to foster economic development. 
C.  Establish a full time grant writer position within the Planning Department or contract with an outside firm that specializes in grant writing. 
D.  Develop an inventory of target private and public industries that actually or potentially impact the economic health of Decatur and the tri-county region. 
E.  Collect and analyze local industries that are importing products to determine which of those goods can be manufactured in Decatur, and recruit those industries that are exporting products to start up in or relocate to Decatur. 

F.  Promote tourist and convention industries to national and international visitors. 
G.  Facilitate and promote development of Decatur's visitor industry by fully utilizing the community's assets. 
H.  Evaluate industries in terms of their economic stability, operational needs and growth potential, target markets and examine ways Decatur can provide adequate infrastructure and support services for those markets. 
I.  Prioritize and target those economic sectors in which Decatur can create or sustain a competitive advantage for economic growth and job creation. 
J.  Facilitate the development and expansion of targeted industries such as: manufacturing and assembly; research; high technology; aviation and regional distribution. 
K.  Encourage the design of a higher educational system that will meet the needs of a diversified economy. 
Goal 3. - Promote a business-government relationship that addresses the needs of businesses to operate in a positive and mutually beneficial environment. 
A.  Create an environment of entrepreneurship, productivity and innovation in Decatur that promotes business start-up and business growth. 
B.  Develop new and existing partnership programs that promote cooperation among public agencies, industry, and the community to enhance economic growth throughout the city. 
C.  Promote consistency in the development process. 
D.  Provide information to streamline the business and real estate development process. 
E.  Periodically review and revise the city's policies, procedures and permitting processes so that applicants are treated equitably and efficiently. 
F.  Increase public awareness of available economic development incentives. 
G.  Analyze all new ordinances to evaluate their cost impact on businesses from a competitive economic perspective and balance that assessment with the impact of the quality of life. 
H.  Provide and maintain infrastructure and transportation services so that economic activity can operate efficiently throughout the city. 
I.  Encourage continued development and diversification of Decatur's retail environment. 
Goal 4. - Identify and recruit regional, state, national and worldwide companies in order to diversify and expand our tax base. 
A.  Expand Decatur's industrial base by taking advantage of market opportunities in regional, national and international markets. 
B.  Work toward establishing Decatur as a major hub for distribution and light manufacturing. 
C.  Work with the Economic Development Corporation to recruit businesses outside of Decatur. 
Goal 5. - Advocate a labor force qualified to meet the needs of Decatur's employers. 
A.  Promote and facilitate community dialogue regarding education goals and objectives for Decatur. 
B.  Develop an industry skills council that includes representatives from the business community, the city, the educational community and the general public to effectively communicate current and projected skill needs. 
C.  Encourage the development of publicly and privately administered training programs and incorporate an evaluation and updating process into those programs in order to meet the need for current and projected skills. 
Goal 6. - Support and protect the City's investment in the Municipal airport and take advantage of the airport as a key to the future economic development of the city. 
A.  Create a unique zoning category for the airport property to include eminent future expansion. 
B.  Expand the airport runway to facilitate the expansion of Decatur's industrial base. 
C.  Encourage airport related development immediately adjacent to the airport. 
Goal 7. - Support and protect the City's investment in the Wise Regional Health System and take advantage of the medical facility as a key to the future economic development of the city. 
A.  Encourage cooperation between the City of Decatur Planning Department and the Wise Regional Health System to plan new and/or expanded facilities to accommodate population forecasts. 
B.  Encourage health care related development immediately adjacent to the Wise Regional Medical facilities. 
C.  Work with the Wise Regional Medical System to improve traffic flow to and around its facilities. 
2. - Land Use and Zoning 
    To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community, provide for a variety of housing opportunities and densities. To protect the property values and aesthetics of the community by channeling and directing growth through regulating and restricting: the height, appearance, use, location, density and size of structures; the lot coverage; the size of the yards, courts and other open spaces to the maximum extent permissible within the proper exercise of the police power as delegated by the city Code and the authority which may be exercised by cities pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code. To ensure optimum overall conservation, protection, development and use of the unique scenic, aesthetic, recreational, open space, historic, and natural resources of the city. 
Land Use and Zoning Goals 

Goal 1. - Provide a diversity of zoning categories to encourage residential, commercial, industrial and other non-residential development and historic preservation. 
A.  Provide for a sufficient amount of residential categories to allow a variety of house size, lot size and densities. 
B.  Allow cluster development in order to promote open space. 
C.  Develop a zoning category for mixed uses in appropriate locations. 
D.  Promote the use of planned developments to include mixed uses that maximize resources and promote neighborhood unity. 
E.  Locate high volume commercial uses along highways and create a magnet for tourists by taking full advantage of Decatur's unique location and attributes such as: 
  A multi-modal junction including highway, railroad and air travel; 
  The governmental magnet as the County Seat; 
  Easy access in the center of Wise County and adjacent to the metroplex; and 
  Major medical provider for the tri-county area. 
F.  Provide multiple residential zoning categories to allow for varied housing demand. 
G.  Buffer high impact land uses from low impact land uses by inserting compatible, stratified zoning districts between them. 
H.  Update the Zoning Ordinance to reflect the Land Use Map in Appendix 2. 
Goal 2. - Create a special district with specific regulations for the area around the Civic Center. 
A.  Petition TXDOT to work closely with the city to develop safe access, including turn lanes, signalization and widened shoulders, from and across Highway 380 to the Civic Center. 
B.  Petition TXDOT to work closely with the city to develop a pedestrian underpass/overpass across Highway 380 to connect the Creek Side Hiking/Biking Trail. 
C.  Prepare a section for a 'Convention District' within the zoning ordinance to facilitate enhancement and preservation of the community's Civic Center and the surrounding area by the following: 
  Regulate permitted uses to protect the integrity and a sense of place; 

  Promote land uses that are stimulating and appropriate immediately adjacent to the civic center such as restaurants, hotels and parks; and 
  Emphasize pedestrian friendly activities. 
Goal 3. - Create a special district with specific regulations and design guidelines for Historic Downtown. 
A.  Petition TXDOT to work closely with the city to develop the Walnut and Main Street corridors as one way streets implementing street design elements such as medians, sidewalks, street lighting, street trees/landscaping and street furniture. 

B.  Prepare a section for a 'Downtown District' within the zoning ordinance to "facilitate enhancement and revitalization of the original old town area's turn-of-the century architecture and the Texas small town character" by: 
  Allowing greater development densities than elsewhere in the city; 
  Encouraging mixed uses; 
  Regulating architectural design to protect historical integrity and a sense of place; and 
  Emphasizing pedestrian friendly activities. 
C.  Encourage infill development & redevelopment within this district through incentive packages, grant programs and promotional efforts (i.e. the glamorous place to be... "Historic Downtown"). 
D.  Evaluate the feasibility of rerouting traffic in order to create a pedestrian mall on the square. 
E.  Provide public restroom facilities near the square. 
Goal 4. - Create a special district with specific regulations and design guidelines for the Historic Waggoner Mansion. 
A.  Petition TXDOT and the BNSF Railroad to work with the city to develop safe connection to Main Street for both motorists and pedestrians by use of a pedestrian underpass along with either a vehicular underpass and/or an improved at-grade crossing implementing street design elements such as street lighting, street trees/landscaping and street furniture. 

B.  Petition TXDOT, the Tarantula Train Authorities and the BNSF Railroad to work with the city to develop a Tarantula Train connection on its own set of tracks that would pick up from a station 'reminiscent of old' at Main Street. Link this depot to the Mansion via landscaping, cobblestone walks and retail development. 
C.  Prepare a section for a 'Mansion District' within the zoning ordinance to facilitate enhancement and preservation of an historic landmark and the surrounding area by the following: 
  Regulate architectural design to protect historical integrity and a sense of place; 
  Promote land uses that are stimulating and appropriate immediately adjacent to the mansion such as additional cultural arts and parks; and 
  Emphasize pedestrian friendly activities. 
D.  Encourage infill development within this district through incentive packages, grant programs and promotional efforts. 
E.  Adopt available protective measures to maintain and preserve the Mansion to the greatest extent possible. 
Goal 5. - Create a special district with specific regulations and design guidelines for the Historic Wise County Museum. 
A.  Petition TXDOT to work with the city to develop the State and Trinity Street corridors as one way streets implementing street design elements such as medians, sidewalks, street lighting, street trees/landscaping and street furniture. 
B.  Prepare a section for a 'Museum District' within the zoning ordinance to facilitate enhancement and preservation of an historic landmark and the surrounding area by the following: 
  Regulate architectural design to protect historical integrity and a sense of place; 
  Promote land uses that are stimulating and appropriate immediately adjacent to the museum such as additional cultural arts and parks; and 
  Emphasize pedestrian friendly activities. 
C.  Encourage infill development within this district through incentive packages, grant programs and promotional efforts (i.e. the "Cultural Arts District"). 
3. - Infrastructure 
    The purpose of this section is to develop a policy of maintenance, repair, upgrading and expansion of the city's infrastructure, planning for growth in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. Infrastructure should be visible and functional elements of a beautification scheme. 
Infrastructure Goals 

Goal 1. - Plan, locate and maintain quality infrastructure to facilitate attractive, safe and healthy environments for our citizens and to promote economic development. 
A.  The Public Works Director and Planning Director shall develop an annual review process of the efficient distribution of the city's infrastructure for review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and final approval by the City Council. 

B.  The Public Works Director and Planning Director shall develop a plan to provide city infrastructure to areas within the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction that may become a part of the city. 
C.  The Public Works Director and Planning Director shall develop a plan to provide city services to areas of the city that are currently underserviced. 

D.  The City Council shall carefully consider future development that would require extended "Leap Frog" annexations. 
E.  The City Council shall encourage the re-use of currently abandoned or underutilized sites existing within the city. 
Goal 2. - Develop policies for various transportation modes that will increase safe access to employment centers; community services; retail, commercial and recreation areas; and education facilities. 

A.  Prepare design and construction regulations and standards for utility and transportation infrastructure and capital improvement projects. 
B.  The Public Works Director and Planning Director shall develop a plan for provide a city-wide bicycle/pedestrian network. 

C.  The Public Works Director and Planning Director shall undertake a regular review of substandard streets and alleys in order to make alternate use recommendations to the City Council for action. 
D.  The Public Works Director and Planning Director shall evaluate the need for one-way streets to enhance traffic flow throughout the city and make recommendations to the City Council for action. 
E.  The Police Chief, Public Works Director and Planning Director shall evaluate the existing speed limits and evaluate the need to change those limits to enhance safe traffic flow throughout the city and make recommendations to the City Council for action. 
F.  The Public Works Director and Planning Director shall explore the potential for light rail and bus public transportation systems to link to other parts of Wise County and the DFW Metroplex. 
4. - Urban Design 
    The purpose of this section is to guide the city into a cohesive and attractive arrangement of future and existing neighborhoods, commercial centers and public amenities while preserving and enhancing the existing historical and cultural resources. 
Urban Design Goals 

Goal 1. - Develop a balanced, diversified citywide park system including open space and hike/bike trails. 
A.  Develop a City Park, Recreation and Open Space Board which will: 
  Coordinate acquisition and development of public open spaces/parks. 
  Create a Parks and Open Space Master Plan (POSMP). 
  Complete the development and revitalization of existing parks. 

  Ensure that parks are fully accessible to all citizens. 
  Develop and maintain an inventory of existing and potentially significant park and open space lands. 
  Encourage conservation and protection of identified properties through conservation or scenic easements, overlay zoning districts or acquisition by purchase or donation. 
  Provide for amendments to and implementation of the POSMP. 
  Develop a parkland dedication requirement, to include fees in lieu of land, for all subdividers of land. 
  Foster the joint use relationship between the city and other government institutions' (i.e. DISD, Wise County, etc.) open spaces. 
  Pursue grant funding for projects as outlined in the POSMP. 
B.  Plan and develop a citywide system of linear parks and hike and bike trails which incorporate drainage ways and open spaces that link parks, historic sites, schools, institutions and neighborhoods. (See Appendix 3) 
C.  Promote special events to encourage the use of the trail system. 
D.  Involve citizens in the design, development and maintenance of parks and open spaces. 
E.  Establish Harmon Park as a downtown recreational facility that would include a city pool, ball diamonds, playgrounds, and entertainment facilities such as open air concerts, summer theater events, and other like cultural and performing arts activities. 
Goal 2. - Encourage the development and use of various types of transportation modes that will decrease the dependence and reliance on single occupancy vehicles while increasing access to employment centers, community services and commercial, cultural, educational, and commercial facilities. 
A.  Develop a long-term comprehensive transportation needs assessment. 

B.  Study the feasibility of alternative transportation modes (i.e. trolley, bicycle) that will link downtown with other major destinations. 
C.  Provide and encourage transportation options that emphasize convenience, safety, environmental quality and efficiency. 
D.  Develop traffic control measures such as: 
  Reducing parking requirements and encourage shared parking in the downtown district in order to encourage non-vehicular transportation; 
  Providing appropriate directional signage for public parking; 
  Providing public parking areas to encourage off-site parking; 
  Access management principles including required shared driveways; 
  Work with TXDOT to install medians and/or other traffic calming devices in FM 51 and FM 730 and other high traffic roads under state jurisdiction. 
E.  Develop criteria for requiring traffic impact analyses. 
F.  Encourage resident and employment growth within walking distance of the downtown areas and neighborhood and employment centers. 
G.  Promote the safe use of bicycles as an efficient and environmentally sound means of transportation by encouraging a citywide network of trails, lanes and storage facilities. 
  Include bicycle-parking requirements in city regulations for cultural, recreational and other major destinations. 
  Identify bicycle lanes and trails as they are developed and publish a citywide bicycle map. 
H.  Aggressively support a regional transportation system that expands capacity by using linked transportation networks such as light rail and bus routes. 
I.  Assign a priority to the maintenance of streets and sidewalks and provide proper annual budget support. 
  Seek equitable contributions from heavy users for street and road repairs. 
  Establish design requirements for streets and road construction so as to increase the life expectancy to the maximum extent possible. 
J.  Promote a safe and convenient pedestrian travel network with sidewalks, walkways and trails integrated into the transportation system and neighborhood centers. 
Goal 3. - Preserve and enhance viewsheds and visibility corridors. 

A.  State and Trinity Streets are identified as visibility corridors between the Courthouse and the Heritage Museum and should be protected as such by: 
  Establishing protective measures within the zoning ordinance that require new buildings to relate to the positive and architectural qualities that currently exist. 
  Place all overhead utility lines underground. 
  Establishing protective measures within the zoning ordinance that maintain setbacks and regulate building height so that the view of the courthouse from the museum, and visa versa, are preserved. 
B.  Main and Walnut Streets are identified as visibility corridors between the Courthouse and the Waggoner Mansion and should be protected as such by: 
  Establishing protective measures within the zoning ordinance that require new buildings to relate to the context and enhance the positive qualities that currently exist. 
  Place all overhead utility lines underground. 
  Establishing protective measures within the zoning ordinance that maintain setbacks and regulate building height so that the view of the courthouse from the mansion, and visa versa, are preserved. 

C.  Document those points in and around the city from which the courthouse can be seen and develop protective measures for the preservation of those views. 
Goal 4. - Guide the development of each city gateway in order to provide exciting and welcoming entrances that encourage tourism and commerce. 
A.  Continue installation of landscaped welcome signs at established gateways. 
B.  Protect the city's established gateways through set design elements and zoning. 
  Encourage utilization of light pole banners and public art markers to identify and highlight city attractions 
C.  Develop welcome centers at selected city visitor sites to provide maps, information, and public restroom facilities. 
5. - Community Services 
    The purpose of this section is to develop and enhance services in the community that promote the education, safety, health and welfare of our citizens and to optimize the delivery of those community services by striking a balance between centralized and dispersed service locations. 
Community Services Goals 

Goal 1. - Provide prompt, professional services from the police, fire and emergency medical agencies. 
A.  Locate police, fire and emergency medical (EMS) facilities to provide effective and efficient services. 

  Integrate new police, fire and EMS facilities with other community service facilities, as appropriate, provide adequate parking, and help to establish a sense of place for the neighborhood. 
  Locate facilities to decrease response time, increase availability factor and provide sufficient, equitable and appropriate coverage. 
  Pursue public/private partnerships to locate satellite facilities. 
B.  Expand on the development of and implementation of intervention and public awareness programs that inform citizens of ways to increase safety. 
  Conduct public safety awareness programs both proactively and upon request. 
  Provide resources to track and monitor potential health and safety problems and to adequately inform and educate the public regarding those issues. 
C.  Develop programs for crime victims. 
D.  Pursue the synergistic value of combining emergency response agencies by cross training police, fire and EMS personnel. 
Goal 2. - Develop a formalized planning relationship between the school district and the city that would predict future growth and provide adequate educational facilities that provide for the most efficient and effective use of those facilities. 
A.  Encourage the construction of schools as integral components of future residential neighborhoods. 
B.  Target areas for development and revitalization where there is excess space in existing schools. 
C.  Encourage the DISD and other entities to share fiscal and demographic data resources for planning purposes. 

D.  Encourage cooperation between the City of Decatur Planning Department and the DISD to plan new and/or expanded facilities to accommodate population forecasts. 
E.  Encourage cooperative, flexible design of school facilities to ensure maximum use for the school district and potential use as a continuing neighborhood resource. 
F.  Establish incentives that encourage neighborhood support of their schools and publicly recognize neighborhoods that have shown individual initiative to improve schools within their boundaries. 
G.  Coordinate city capital improvement and event plans with school district plans as much as practicable. 

H.  Encourage a sidewalk program to enhance the safety, appearance and access to schools for neighborhood residents. 
I.  Encourage DISD to locate schools to meet current and future population trends and geographic dispersement. 
J.  Develop public/private partnerships for additional school facilities and to increase awareness of and accessibility to the Decatur school system. 
Goal 3. - Promote the development and operation of the public and school library systems to provide accurate, timely, relevant and efficient services. 

A.  Locate branch and mobile libraries in neighborhood centers or other locations that will be attractive and convenient additions to neighborhoods, where community residents can easily and willingly go. 
B.  Design and operate library facilities that are friendly, inviting, safe and easy to use. Invite public involvement in the design of new library facilities. 
C.  Develop public/private partnerships for additional library branches and to increase awareness of and accessibility to the Decatur library system. 
D.  Enhance the public library's role as a source of information about local government and its services. 
E.  Encourage cooperative development of DISD and city library systems in order to improve availability to all citizens. 
Goal 4. - Provide Cultural Art opportunities that are accessible to all Decatur citizens. 

A.  Develop public/private partnerships to provide cultural amenities throughout the community (i.e. art gallery, ballet conservatory, jazz clubs, etc.) 
B.  Maintain the downtown district as the cultural focal point of the community. 
C.  Promote cooperation between the DISD, city and other public/private partnerships in establishing and enhancing public cultural art programs. 
  Promote the city's cultural and historical background through the arts. 
  Consider aesthetics as an integral part of capital improvement projects. 
Goal 5. - Establish well-managed activity centers for both the youth and senior citizens of Decatur. 
A.  Provide a senior center as a component of Parks and Recreation to house indoor group activities and outdoor recreation with appropriate staffing to ensure successful programming. 
B.  Provide a youth activities center as a component of Parks and Recreation to include team athletics, year-round activity programs and after-school programs with appropriate staffing to ensure successful coordination and planning. 
Goal 6. - Promote community cohesiveness, awareness and pride. 
A.  Conduct festivities to acknowledge and educate the community about programs including but not limited to the National Night Out safety awareness program. 
B.  Collaborate with other entities to combine city and county-wide events such as fun runs, car shows, festivals, etc. and produce a community calendar for mail distribution and marketing. 
C.  Consider improving the Reunion grounds and promote activities throughout the year. 
D.  Coordinate a city parade to traverse the historic landmarks and trails of the city. 
Goal 7. - Promote the development and operation of the Wise Regional Health System to provide accurate, timely, relevant and efficient services. 
A.  Design and operate medical facilities that are friendly, inviting, and easy to use. 
B.  Enhance the medical facility's role as a source of information. 
Goal 8. - Develop a formalized planning relationship between the Wise County governing body and the city that would predict future growth and ensure cooperation between these two government agencies. 
A.  Develop inter-local agreements regarding fire service, library services, street improvements and other issues of mutual interest. 
6. - Housing and Neighborhoods 
    The purpose of this section is to create, preserve and enhance neighborhoods in order to establish a sense of place within the community while contributing to its safe, dynamic and sustainable development through the incorporation of basic elements such as schools, parks, open space, emergency services, cultural and human service facilities, areas of commerce, and all types of housing. 
Housing and Neighborhoods Goals 

Goal 1. - Preserve, protect and enhance the integrity, economic viability and livability of Decatur's neighborhoods. 
A.  Rezone vacant or underutilized property in and around neighborhoods to encourage redevelopment that is compatible in use and intensity with the existing neighborhood. 

B.  Sponsor a study of neighborhoods to determine neighborhood decline and explore possible solutions. 
C.  Encourage businesses and developers to work with neighborhood residents regarding location and design of new development to enhance or compliment the character and size of existing neighborhoods. 

D.  Promote conversion or adaptive reuse of vacant or underutilized commercial buildings to provide affordable infill housing by providing incentives to the private sector to promote reuse of vacant or underutilized commercial buildings for affordable housing such as public/private partnerships, tax abatement, tax phase-in, historic rehabilitation credits, impact fee reductions, zoning and platting processing, and affordable housing tax credits. 

E.  Plan easily accessible commercial, educational, cultural and recreational facilities that respect the mobility of every citizen. 
F.  Promote increased awareness among property owners and residents of the importance of property maintenance to positive long term housing quality. 
G.  Utilize a city code enforcement program to bring substandard units into compliance with the city codes and help minimize the need for demolition and displacement. 
H.  Plan and complete new affordable housing projects in a timely manner and with adequate funding to mitigate displacement of residents. 
Goal 2. - Adopt a Neighborhood Planning Process and neighborhood plans to guide the city's elected policy makers in land use decisions. 
A.  Develop a training program through the Planning Department for neighborhood residents and groups interested in preparing neighborhood plans including attractive, easy to understand, bilingual neighborhood planning information, data and manuals. 
B.  Encourage consideration of neighborhood plans by elected and appointed officials and city staff as they perform their duties and responsibilities. 
C.  Establish a zoning classification such as Mixed Use District or Neighborhood District for neighborhood specific plans. 
D.  Develop a neighborhood revitalization strategy and include an annual goal setting process. Require neighborhood representatives to reflect the goals and policies of the city Comprehensive Plan as they form their neighborhood plans. 
Goal 3. - Provide safe, attractive, well-maintained neighborhoods. 
A.  Protect the character and quality of neighborhoods by creating, maintaining and enhancing open spaces and parks within them. 

B.  Develop a park dedication ordinance to require developers of all residential developments to dedicate land or cash in lieu of land for parks. 
C.  Strengthen the enforcement of codes and regulations affecting neighborhoods by vigorous enforcement with revitalization activities, adequate code compliance funding and encouraging citywide clean-up events. 
D.  Consider new approaches to enhance the viability and attractiveness of neighborhoods through urban corridor regulations, tree preservation and planting plans, and clean neighborhoods public awareness/education campaigns. 
E.  Develop the necessary program to be accepted in the Tree City USA program. 
F.  Maintain and enhance public safety facilities and supplement these services with neighborhood education and awareness programs by: 
  Providing an adequate level of municipal auxiliary services to keep up with population growth and annexation. 
  Encourage residential areas to participate in neighborhood watch or cellular patrol programs and other crime prevention programs. 
  Encourage communication between neighborhoods and the police officers patrolling their areas. 
G.  Create and enhance neighborhood environments that emphasize the physical and emotional well-being of children including but not limited to the following: 
  Support essential or coordinated services within the community such as early childhood development, family counseling, family and parenting education and public safety services. 
  Support after-school programs so students can choose from a variety of supervised and high quality programs as opposed to unsupervised time after school. 
Goal 4. - Promote the provision of sound, affordable housing for Decatur. 
A.  Preserve and revitalize housing and promote targeted infill housing in neighborhoods, particularly older neighborhoods. 
B.  Maintain infrastructure in good repair. 

C.  Promote clean-up and minor repair of older housing stock through neighborhood and organizational initiatives utilizing all available resources. 
D.  Investigate and consider implementation of or participation in local, state and federal grant supported programs for housing revitalization and establishment. 
E.  Require affordable housing providers and all other infill developers to compliment the architectural design and character of the neighborhood in which new housing is being constructed. 
F.  Establish affordable housing goals and encourage private lenders to become directly involved in them. 
G.  Give priority in the use of housing reinvestment programs to the revitalization of neighborhoods with higher proportions of low and moderate income residents or with the worst housing conditions. 
H.  Establish a program to assist homeowners in refurbishing their houses with historic significance and character without regard to income. 
I.  Facilitate the provision of affordable housing by the private sector by offering incentives such as: 
  Tax abatement, tax phase-in, historic rehabilitation credits, impact fee reductions, zoning and platting processing, and affordable housing tax credits 
  Adopt alternative building methods that facilitate the building of high quality affordable housing without compromising safety, structural soundness or energy efficiency. 
J.  Investigate a process to make publicly owned lots available to the private sector. 
K.  Develop a comprehensive housing preservation strategy to retain housing stock including the use of below-market rehabilitation financing, structure relocation, land banking, adaptive re-use/conversion of non-residential buildings, and charitable land trusts. 
L.  Regulate the demolition of housing by establishing standards and procedures which determine if the building is eligible for designation or is designated historic; whether rehabilitation is economically feasible; whether building codes/regulations have been violated; and make certain health and safety issues are addressed. 
M.  Provide fair and adequate enforcement measures including fines, liens, and other penalties for non-compliance with demolition regulations. Encourage a Habitat for Humanity program. 
N.  Establish a housing rehabilitation program. 
O.  Encourage local church groups to do their mission trips at home. 
P.  Encourage local financial institutions, business community and civic groups to cooperate with the housing rehabilitation program. 
Q.  Allow flexible zoning in Council approved target neighborhoods for a variety of affordable housing. 
Goal 5. - Preserve and enhance the city's historic resources. 
A.  Actively encourage preservation and renovation as a primary priority. 

  Re-use historic buildings when possible before building new ones for expansion of public facilities. 
  Review building codes, fire codes and permit approval processes to determine if they can be modified to facilitate the redevelopment of historic structures without compromising safety. 
  Encourage architectural design competitions of projects to stimulate new ideas in the renovation and use of historic structures. 
B.  Build on Decatur's unique history. 
  Cooperate with other groups to identify and designate the historic routes of the Chisholm Trail as a statewide historical and cultural network. 
  Actively pursue and encourage the redevelopment of the Waggoner Mansion and capitalize on its relationship with Thistle Hill in Fort Worth. 
  Consider routes for designated pedestrian and bicycle paths that connect the historic features within the city and neighboring sites. 
  Develop a program for mapped, guided and unguided tours of the historic features within the City of Decatur. 
C.  Pursue funding for historic preservation and additional staffing to monitor and carry out preservation activities. 

D.  Provide incentives for preservation of privately owned historic properties, promote the preservation of public owned historic properties and consider the creation of historic preservation fund for city owned historic structures. 
  Adoption of the Uniform Building Conservation Code. 
  Create program for local rehabilitation tax credits, tax abatements or tax phasing for historic properties. 
  Provide information on historic property preservation resources, grants and low interest loans. 
  Accept support from organizations willing to sponsor historic preservation upkeep of publicly owned property. 
  Encourage the creation of endowment funds to be used for historic, publicly owned properties. 
  Consider rehabilitation of underutilized publicly owned properties. 
Goal 6. - Encourage development of the downtown area as a complete neighborhood to enhance its image to visitors and residents. 
A.  Encourage new development in the downtown area to create a broad range of housing stock including single occupancy hotels; low, moderate and upper income housing; and housing for elderly persons. 
  Give priority to existing buildings, particularly those with vacant upper floors, for meeting housing needs. 
  Adapt zoning, construction and fire codes that facilitate new housing in existing buildings without compromising the health and safety of the occupants. 
  Investigate tax abatement programs for historic buildings to encourage their reuse for housing. 
  Investigate the use of Community Development Corporations (CDCs) to help fund additional housing development, redevelopment or rehabilitation in the downtown area. 
  Encourage the private banking community to develop a lenders consortium to provide affordable housing in the downtown area. 
B.  Investigate the requirements of developing a program with the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Community Development Block Grants (CDBG) and other funding entities. 
C.  Advocate downtown for public and private facilities that support the downtown neighborhood character and historic resources. 

D.  Encourage the development of a performing arts district. 
E.  Continue to improve multi-modal access to downtown and develop a transportation plan for the downtown neighborhood to address parking, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, delivery of goods and services and potential transit/trolley operations. 
F.  Create pedestrian ways and bicycle trails to connect downtown with adjacent neighborhoods, open spaces, commerce, community and other support facilities. 
G.  Encourage retail development downtown through cooperative efforts with the Small Business Administration and financial incentive programs. 
H.  Pursue developing a downtown police foot and bicycle patrol program. 
I.  Encourage downtown to be the major office and retail center for the area. 
J.  Analyze downtown's existing and potential growth and activity centers, and strategically construct parking facilities to accommodate maximum parking availability and efficiency. 
7. - Natural Resources 
The purpose of this section is to protect the natural resources unique to Decatur in order to maintain the city's future economic vitality and high quality of life for all citizens. 
Natural Resources Goals 

Goal 1. - Preserve the unique, rare and significant features in and around Decatur. 
A.  Develop new and make use of existing partnership programs between public agencies and private citizens to monitor the city's air and water quality. 
B.  Work with state and local agencies to develop or expand scientifically based watershed monitoring and education programs that involve citizen groups and school districts. [] 

Lake Bridgeport 4 
C.  Encourage the conservation of the city's surface and groundwater resources through public education programs, information programs and protective regulations. 
D.  Continue to forge strong relationships and partnerships with regional interests to study and evaluate water supply options for Decatur and surrounding region. 
E.  Encourage retention of the 100-year floodplains as natural drainage ways without permanent construction, unnecessary straightening, bank clearing or channeling while promoting their use as open space such as greenways, parks, wildlife habitat, linked pedestrian friendly corridors. 
F.  Establish policies and regulations to minimize waste generation through effective waste reduction, reuse, and recycling and through expanding the demand for recycled products. 
G.  Develop and provide cost-effective recycling programs in existing neighborhoods and educate home and business owners on how the program works. 
H.  Prepare a comprehensive program to manage brush, yard waste, sludge and similar materials for the purpose of reducing and reusing solid waste. 
I.  Educate the public on the handling and transportation of hazardous materials. 
J.  Develop and implement a comprehensive, regional hazardous materials handling, transportation and remediation plan which includes enforcement procedures and non-compliance penalties. 
K.  Develop a spill response protocol and mitigation plan to address accidents involving hazardous materials. 
L.  Consider during the zoning process and when issuing building permits, the proximity of residential neighborhoods to the storage of hazardous materials. 
M.  Establish a strong natural resources protection policy for Decatur that preserves the integrity of the natural settings of neighborhoods, communities, open spaces and parks, and develop clear procedures for enforcement. 

N.  Continue to implement and update, as necessary, the landscape and tree ordinances for public and private properties to emphasize preservation of established native vegetation and the use of drought tolerant species. 
O.  Assist in the development of a comprehensive, regional natural resources plan. 
P.  Recognize that natural gas and oil exploration will continue into the foreseeable future and needs to be planned carefully to preserve surface development potential. 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Photo taken from www.lakebridgeport.com. 

Goal 2. - Achieve a sustainable balance between the conservation, use and development of Decatur's natural resources. 
A.  Develop programs to attract environmentally sensitive industry to Decatur and to encourage local industry to adopt water conserving and minimal impact technologies in their operations. 
B.  Encourage use of other modes of transportation besides the single occupancy automobile. 
C.  Investigate setting standards for collection and use of gray water or reclaimed (recycled) water for non-potable uses. 
D.  Encourage cooperation among natural resource management agencies, other professionals and the DISD in developing environmental education materials and outreach programs. 
E.  Institute programs to instill "common courtesy" practices to correct environmentally negative behavior such as litter and noise pollution. 
III. - Glossary of Terms 
City of Decatur Comprehensive Plan
Glossary of Terms 
    During the Comprehensive Plan update, many terms will be used that are specific to urban planning field. To facilitate discussions with residents, the following terms are provided: 
  Access: The physical attributes of a site/facility that enables a person or his attendant means of transportation, to enter a site/facility; see Public Access   Active Recreation: Those recreation uses which require a greater degree of physical exertion and involvement, and which contribute to the physical and mental well-being of an individual. Active recreation facilities typically require the alteration of land, vegetation, topography, or other natural features unless developed on a previously impacted site. This includes, but is not limited to, activities such as tennis, baseball, golf, football, etc.   Adaptive Reuse: A process through which an older building or site, particularly one with historic value, is rehabilitated or adapted to meet current codes and respond to current market demand for commercial or residential space.   ADA: See Americans with Disabilities Act.   Affordable 
Housing: For Wise County, this refers to houses between the prices of $90,000 and $140,000.   Agriculture: Activities within land areas which are predominantly used for the cultivation of crops and livestock including: cropland, pastureland, orchards, vineyards, nurseries, ornamental horticulture areas, groves, confined feeding operations and specialty feeding farms.   Alleyway: A narrow service way that provides a permanently reserved but secondary means of public access not intended for general traffic circulation; typically located along rear property lines.   Amendment: A formal City Council change or revision to the Comprehensive Plan, including either the Plan's text or its maps.   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA): Federal legislation specifying provisions to be made in the design (or redesign) of buildings, parking, and outdoor areas to remove barriers for persons with disabilities and guaranteeing equal opportunity in public accommodations, transportation and government services.   Appeal: The process by which an individual, group or entity obtains formal review of a decision.   Appropriate: An act, condition or state that is considered suitable.   Arterial: Major roadway mainly serving through-traffic; takes traffic to and from expressways and freeways; provides access to adjacent properties.   Boulevard: A roadway characterized by a landscaped media and planting strips on each side.   Buffer: An area of land separating two distinct land uses that acts to soften or mitigate the effects of one land use on the other.   Buildout: The point at which all land eligible for development under the Comprehensive Plan has been developed to its maximum allowed level.   Business 
Retention: Programs aimed at supporting, retaining, and sustaining local businesses.   Capital 
Improvement: Any construction, land acquisition, equipment purchase, or rental proposal that costs $25,000 or more and has a five year or longer expected service life. Projects which may cost less than $25,000 which are considered necessary for the implementation of any long-term improvement, including implementation of the adopted Comprehensive Plan, will be considered a capital improvement.   Capital 
Improvement 
Program: A 5-year program for the construction and financing of new public facilities.   Certificate of 
Appropriateness: A document awarded by the Historic Preservation Advisory Board allowing an applicant to proceed with a proposed alteration, demolition or new construction within the designated historic district, following determination of the proposal's suitability according to applicable criteria.   Center: Commercial and mixed use areas of the city that serve as the focus for community life; may serve the region, the city, general neighborhoods or a single neighborhood.   CDC: See Community Development Corporation   Cluster 
Development   Collector Street: Roadway that collects and distributes local traffic to and from arterial streets, and provides access to adjacent properties.   Commercial Strip: A land use pattern characterized by continuous automobile-dependent commercial frontage, usually dominated by front parking lots and long, low buildings oriented towards a highway or arterial street.   Community 
Development Block Grant (CDBG): Grant program administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the State Department of Housing and Community Development. Grants must primarily be used to benefit very low- and low-income households with emphasis on housing and public improvement projects. The City of Decatur is an entitlement city that receives an annual funding grant from HUD.   Community 
Development 
Corporation: A loan program to start small business for low income individuals or individuals with credit issues.   Community Park: A large natural and/or landscaped area preferably with a minimum of two acres provided per one thousand individuals in a planning area.   Compatible: Capable of existing together without significant conflict or ill effects.   Comprehensive Plan: A compendium of city (or county) policies regarding long-term development, in the form of maps and accompanying text. The Plan is a legal document required by state law.   Consistency: Compatible with; not in conflict with.   Corridor: Any major transportation route, including freeways, expressways, arterials, or transit lines; may also be used to describe land uses along these routes.   Council/Manager Government: A type of municipal government in which the chief executive official is a city manager selected by the City Council. Decatur has a Council/Manager form of government.   Creek: Any of a number of natural watercourses flowing; usually characterized by a distinct channel and a band of dense vegetation along the banks.   Density: For residential uses, the number of permanent residential dwelling units per acre of land. For non-residential uses, density is often referred to as development intensity and is expressed through a ratio of floor area to lot size.   Design Guidelines: These are provisions guiding the design of buildings that are not mandatory but may be used by staff, the city's advisory boards and commissions, and the City Council in evaluating projects.   Development: This is the carrying out of any building activity, the renovation, rehabilitation or remodeling of any structure, the alteration of land, the division of land into three or more parcels, or the establishment of flag lots or access easements.   Development Permit: This includes any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, rezoning, site development plan, approval, certification, special exception, variance, or any other official action of local government having the effect of permitting the development of land.   Easement: The right to use property owned by another for specific purposes, such as access to another piece of property, conveyance of stormwater, or transmission of gas or electricity.   Expressway: Major roadway with limited access to adjacent properties; devoted almost exclusively to traffic movement, mainly serving through-traffic.   Flag Lots: Lots in the shape of a flag on flagpole with the flagpole portion being the only portion of the lot with street frontage.   Floodplains: Any area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source; including areas which may or may not have a direct hydrological connection to a surface water body.   Freeway: Major roadway with controlled access; devoted exclusively to traffic movement, mainly of a through or regional nature.   Frontage: The part of a lot that touches a road or street; it is often described as a specific amount such as "60 feet of frontage."   Gateway: A point along a roadway at which a motorist or pedestrian gains a sense of having entered the city or a particular part of the city. This impression can be imparted through such things as signs, monuments, landscaping, a change in development character, or natural feature such as a creek.   General Fund: Component of the city budget generated by sales tax, property tax, franchise fees, and other miscellaneous sources and used to fund general city services and debt service.   Goal: A general end towards which the city will direct effort.   Gross Density: The number of dwelling units for each acre of land, including areas devoted to streets, parks, sidewalks, and other public right-of-ways.   Groundwater: Water under the earth's surface, often confined to aquifers, capable of supplying wells and springs.   High Density: A land use designation characterized by single-family dwellings and mixed uses. High-density developments should be located in or adjacent to higher intensity land use areas. The developments can support the more intense uses and provide a buffer for lower intensity uses such as low and medium density residential developments. The gross densities for high density residential are 9.7 or more dwelling units per acre. High density for Multi-family is characterized by 3 or more dwelling units per acre. Mixed use developments are also appropriate.   Historic District: A significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.   Impact: The effect of any direct, man-made actions or indirect repercussions of man-made actions on existing physical, environmental, social or economic conditions.   Impact Fees: A method of financing off-site public improvements in which developers are charged a facility-specific fee in proportion to the amount of need for the facility that their development project will generate.   Infill: Development of individual vacant lots or leftover vacant properties within areas that are already developed.   Infill Housing: Housing units constructed on infill lots.   Infrastructure: Public services and facilities, such as sewage disposal systems, water supply systems, other utility systems, and roads.   Land Use Map: The map included in Appendix 2 of the Comprehensive Plan. The Land Use Map depicts the general distribution of proposed land uses, by general category, throughout the city.   Light Industrial Land Use: Land uses involving manufacturing, assembling, fabricating and warehousing activities which are generally conducted indoors, such as that found in machine shops, bottling and canning works, boat building, and freight or trucking terminals.   Local Street: Minor roadway that provides access to adjacent properties only.   Low Density: A land use designation for residential areas (single-family dwellings only) that are built at gross densities less than or equal to 5.2 dwelling units per acre.   Master Plan: A conceptual plan submitted for approval prior to application for individual entitlements. A master plan must depict the general type, amount and distribution of proposed land uses, the basic circulation system, the general location of open space, the general sizing and distribution of utilities and services and the expected phasing of development.   Medium Density: A land use designation characterized by single-family dwellings and duplexes only. The gross densities for medium density residential are between 5.3 and 9.6 units per acre.   Mitigate: To ameliorate, alleviate, or avoid to the extent reasonably feasible.   Mixed Use: A development type in which various uses, such as office, retail and residential are combined in the same building or within separate buildings on the same site or on nearby sites.   Mixed Use Land Use: A land use designation characterized by a diverse range of vertical and horizontal land uses that are co-located together in a balanced mix including, residential development, shops, employment community and recreation facilities and parks and open space.   Neighborhood: A part of the city defined by distinct characteristics and boundaries and considered as familiar territory by its residents.   Neighborhood Park: Park of roughly two to 10 acres in size, intended to meet the recreation needs of people living or working within a one-half mile radius.   Net Density: The number of dwelling units for each acre of land in planned or actual use, excluding dedicated streets, parks, sidewalks and other public facilities.   One-hundred Year Flood Plain: A flood of a magnitude that has a statistical probability of occurring once every 100 years, or one percent chance in any given year.   Open Space: Any parcel or area of water or land that is essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space use for the purpose of (1) the preservation of natural resources; (2) the managed production of resources; (3) outdoor recreation; or (4) public health and safety.   Passive Open Space: Open space that is set aside for the purpose of resource conservation, protection of public safety, or visual enjoyment rather than active recreation.   Planning Area: The geographic area covered by the Comprehensive Plan; corresponds to all land within the city limits plus land in the unincorporated area.   Policy: A specific statement of principle or of guiding actions that implies clear commitment but is not mandatory. A general direction that a governmental agency sets to follow, in order to meet its goals and objectives before undertaking an action program.   Public Access: The ability of the public to physically reach, enter or use public sites, facilities and activities.   Public Facilities: Transportation, sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water, fire and police protection, emergency medical, education, parks and recreation and public health systems and facilities.   Redevelopment: Activities or projects in an area to eliminate and prevent the development or spread of slums and blight, or to provide affordable housing, whether for rent or sale, to low and moderate income households; or to generate renewed economic activity and development.   Rehabilitation: The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.   Residential 
Arterial: Major roadway mainly serving through-traffic; takes traffic to and from expressways and freeways; provides access to adjacent properties, most of which are residential properties located on both sides of the roadway with direct frontage and driveways on that roadway.   Right-of-way: The strip of land over which certain transportation and/or other public facilities are built, including roads, railroads and utility lines.   Setback: The horizontal distance between two points such as a property line and a structure.   Storm Drain: A device used to capture stormwater runoff, usually from streets or other non-permeable surfaces, and transport it via pipes to ditches, creeks, channels and other drainage courses.   Uniform Building Code: A national standard building code that sets forth minimum standards for construction.   Urban Design: The art and science of giving form, in terms of both beauty and function, to selected urban areas or cities; addresses the location, mass and design of various components of the environment and combines elements of urban planning, architecture and landscape architecture.   View Sheds: All points from which a particular item can be seen are points within the viewshed of that item.   Vision: A shared dream of the future characterized by long-term idealistic thinking. Provides the foundation for the development of the goals, policies and programs.   Water Resources: Term used to collectively describe groundwater (aquifers), surface water (rivers, lakes, creeks, etc.) precipitation and water supply.   Watershed: The region or area of land that drains water, sediment, and dissolved materials to a common outlet or body of water.  
IV. - Appendices 
Appendix 1. - Major Thoroughfare Plan 

Appendix 2. - Land Use Map (as of 06/23/2014) 

Appendix 3. - Trails Plan Map 

Appendix 4. - Public Notice and Participation 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1975 CODE 
  This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1 2-26 1-21, 1-22 2-76, 2-77 1-23-1-26 2-91-2-94 1-41, 1-42 2-181, 2-182 1-43, 1-44 2-166, 2-167 1-51-1-55 2-236-2-240 1-56-1-59 2-241 1-61-1-63 2-256-2-258 1-65 2-259 2-1-2-15 3-26-3-40 2-19 3-41 2-31-2-35 3-61-3-65 2-41, 2-42 3-1 3-1, 3-2 4-26, 4-27 3-4 4-30 3-6 4-31 3-21, 3-22 4-32, 4-33 3-31 4-51 3-32-3-37 4-52-4-57 3-38 4-59 3-39 4-58 3-40, 3-41 4-60, 4-61 4-1-4-11 7-26-7-36 4-31 7-56 4-32 7-76 4-33, 4-34 7-121, 7-122 4-35-4-38 7-77-7-80 4-39 7-59 4-40-4-58 7-124-7-142 4-59, 4-60 7-60, 7-61 4-61 7-57 4-63 7-81 4-64 7-123 4-65 7-58 4-66 7-96 4-67 7-56 7-97 4-68 7-56 7-98 4-69 7-99 4-70-4-74 7-101-7-105 4-75 7-100 5-11, 5-12 5-1 6-1-6-10 6-56-6-65 6-21-6-32 6-26-6-37 6-34 6-38 6-35-6-37 6-66 6-53 6-1 8-1 12-1 8-2(a)-8-2(d) 12-26-12-29 8-2(e) 10-27 8-2(f) 12-29 8-3 12-30 8-4(a) 12-46 8-4(b) 12-5 8-4(c) 12-47 8-4(d) 12-4 8-5 12-2 9-1-9-5 1-2 9-6-9-8 2-276-2-278 10-1-10-7 14-27-14-33 10-8 14-26 10-9 10-1 10-10 10-26 10-21-10-30 10-56-10-65 10-42 10-81 10-43-10-46 10-86-10-89 10-47 10-91 10-48 10-90 10-49-10-52 10-82-10-85 13-1-13-5 2-126-2-130 13-7, 13-8 2-131, 2-132 13-201, 13-202 9-26, 9-27 13-203(a)-(c) 9-28 Section Section  
this Code 13-203(d) 9-29 13-204-13-206 9-30-9-32 13-208 9-33 14-31 14-96, 14-97 14-32 14-104 14-33 14-99, 14-100 14-34 14-1 14-35 14-103 14-37 14-2 14-41 14-51 14-42-14-49 14-55-14-62 14-50-14-52 14-52-14-54 14-53-14-67 14-63-14-77 16-1, 16-2 13-26 16-11 13-27 16-21 13-28 16-31, 16-32 13-29, 13-30 16-41 13-46 16-42, 16-43 13-47 16-44 13-48 16-51, 16-52 13-31, 13-32 17-1, 17-2 7-161 17-3-17-10 7-162-7-169 17-12 7-170  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1975 Code which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1975 Code. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
  Date Section  Section 
this Code 11-13-73 (Mo.) 12-26, 12-27 1-76  2- 9-76 6, 7 13-2, 13-3 3-76  6-14-76 Pts. I-VII App. B 5-82  9-13-82 Arts. I-IX App. A 6-83  8- 8-83 1, 2 13-49, 13-50 1-85  2-11-85 1 4-26 5-85  8-12-85 2, 3 12-3 4 14-98 7 14-101 8 12-3 9 14-102 4-86  4-14-86 2 4-28 6-86  8-11-86 2-183  1-12-87 (Mo.) 3-28 2-87  4-13-87 1 5-41 3-87  7-13-87 1 2-242 4-87  7-13-87 1 2-244 2 2-243 7-87  8-14-87 1, 2 13-4 10-12-87 (Mo.) 4-51 1-88  1-11-88 4-29 6-88  6-13-88 1-3 13-1 7-88  7-11-88 12-2 12-4, 12-5 12-46, 12-47 8-88  7-11-88 1-10 2-196-2-205 10-88  8- 8-88 1 11-26 2(1) 11-41 11-44 2(2), 2(3) 11-42, 11-43 2(4)-2(7) 11-45-11-48 11-88  8- 8-88 1-6 5-56-5-61 1-89  1- 9-89 1, 2 8-1 2-89  4-10-89 1 App. B, Pt. III, Art. 11 App. B, Pt. VII, Art. 25, App. 1, B, Pt. VII, Art. 25, App. 2 App. B, Pt. VII, Art. 25, App. 4 App. B, Pt. VII, Art. 25, App. 6, App. B, Pt. VII, Art. 25, App. 7 2-90  2-12-90 1-7 Adopting 
Ordinance, p. vii 3-90  2-12-90 I, II 12-6 4-90  2-12-90 1-3 2-245 5-90  7- 9-90 1-4 4-71-4-74 11-90  9-10-90 1 13-33 14-90 10- 8-90 1-8 2-291-2-298 15-90  5-29-90 1-14 2.5-1-2.5-14 4-91  7- 8-91 1-3 10-26-10-28 4, 5 10-29 6-8 10-30-10-32 8-91  9- 9-91 1-16 2-301-2-316 7-92  8-10-92 1 7-29(a) 2 7-30 3-5 7-37-7-39 8-92  9-14-92 7-56 7-76, 7-77 11-92 10-19-92 7-139 13-92 11-24-92 1-20 7-181-7-200 2-93  3- 8-93 1, 2 App. B,  11-100, 11-102 3 App. B, App. 1(table) 4 App. B, App. 1 5 App. B, App. 4, App. 4(table) 6 App. B, App. 6 7 App. B, App. 7 4-93  5-10-93 1-10       Added 10-101-10-110 12-93  9-13-93 I       Added 13-61, 13-63-13-71 II       Added 13-62, 13-72 14-93 10-11-93       Added 10-29(c) 10-32 3-94  2-14-94 I(1-6)       Added 4-34 II(1) 4-32 III(1) 4-26 IV       Added 4-35 4-94  3-21-94 I(1-8)       Added 2-136-2-143 II(1-17)       Added 2.5-31-2.5-47 III(1-4)       Added 2.5-61-2.5-64 13-94 11-14-94 1       Rpld 2-111-2-113 2       Rpld 8-1 3       Added Ch. 8, 
Art. II(note) 3(1-8)       Added 8-51-8-58 14-94 12-12-94 1       Added App. B, Pt. VII, App. 2(8a) 2 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1 3 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 2[k.] 4-95  3-13-95 2-77 7-95  4-10-95 App. A, Art. IX,  9-1, 9-2 8-95  9-11-95 1       Added App. B, Pt. VII, App. 2(7a) 2 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1 3 App. B. Pt. VII, App. 7 3-96  4- 8-96 1-7       Rpld 2-61-2-63       Added 2-61-2-67 5-96  4- 8-96 1-7       Added 2-1 7-96  7- 8-96       Added App. B,  12-105 6-97  5-12-97 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1[1.] 5-98  4-13-98       Added App. B, Pt. VIII, App. 1 6-98  4-13-98       Added App. A,  2-2, 
6-3, 6-4 8-98  5-26-98 12       Rpld 4-26, 4-32, 4-51 1-6       Added 4-26 7       Added 4-36 8       Added 4-37 9       Added 4-38 10       Added 4-28(b) 11 4-26 (note) 12-98  7-13-98       Added 7-62 15-98  8-10-98 I-XII       Added 14-121-14-132 14-98  7-27-98 1-6       Added 14-151-14-156 2-99  3- 8-99       Added App. B, Pt. VIII, App. 2 12-99  4- 8-99 1-3       Added 2-2 10-99 10-11-99       Added 2-206 11-99 10-11-99 1       Added 2-246 15-99 12-13-99 1-7       Added 8-1 00-5-8  5- 8-00       Rpld App. A,  2-1, 2-2, 3-1-3-6, 4-1-4-4, 5-1, 5-2, 6-1-6-4, 7-1-7-6, 8-1-8-7, 9-1-9-4       Added App. A,  101-104, 201, 202, 301, 302, 401-403, 501-508, 601-613, 701-703, 801-810 00-8-11  8-14-00 (1) App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1 00-8-12  8-14-00 (1) App. B, Pt. VII, App. 2(112) 00-12-15 12-11-00 1 2-77 01-10-09 10- 8-01 1       Added 14-166-14-186 01-10-10 11-13-01 arts. 1, 2 3-1, 3-2 art. 8 3-3-3-8 art. 13 3-9 art. 3 3-26-3-35 art. 4 3-46-3-48 art. 5 3-61-3-69 art. 6 3-81-3-90 art. 7 3-101-3-103 art. 9 3-116-3-120 art. 10 3-131-3-138 art. 11 3-151-3-167 art. 12 3-176-3-183 01-11-12 11-26-01 1 4-26(e) 2       Added 4-26(g) 03-04-01  4-28-03 1 App. B,  16-100       Added App. B,  16-101-16-108       Rnbd App. B,  16-101-16-104       as App. B,  16-109-16-112 03-04-02  4-28-03 2-136 03-07-09  8-11-04 2       Rpld 7-26-7-39       Added 7-26-7-33 03-09-13  1-26-04 1       Dltd 7-56-7-62,       Dltd 7-76-7-81,       Dltd 7-96-7-105,       Dltd 7-121-7-142       Added 7-56-7-63,       Added 7-71-7-77,       Added 7-86-7-90 03-09-14  9-22-03 1 2-2(c) 03-10-17 10-27-03 1 App. B, Pt. III, 11-102 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1 03-10-18 10-27-03 1 App. B, Pt. VII, Apps. 1, 2 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 11 03-12-23  1-26-04 1 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 9 04-01-01  1-26-04 1 App. B,  11-102 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1 App. B, Pt. VII, Apps. 4-7       Added App. B, Pt. VII, App. 13 04-01-02  1-26-04 1       Added 2-144, 2-145 04-03-06  4-12-04 1 2-144(a) 2       Added 2-144(b) 04-04-08  5-24-04 1       Added 2-3 04-04-10  4-26-04 1       Added 2-146, 2-147 04-04-11  5-10-04 1, 2       Added 13-5 04-08-19  9-13-04 1 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 9,  1-7 04-08-20  6- 6-19 1 App. C,  107, 108 05-01-01  2-14-05 1       Added App. C,  101-204.12 05-10-18 10-24-05 8-57 05-10-17 10-24-05 1 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1 05-11-20 11-28-05 1 2-244 2 2-243 05-11-21 11-28-05 1-3       Added 13-34 05-12-22 12-12-05 1 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1 2       Added App. B, Pt. VII, App. 2 a.(59) 06-01-04  1-23-06 2-136(a) 06-01-05  1-23-06 2-61 06-01-06  1-23-06 2-146 06-01-07  1-23-06       Rpld 2-91-2-93       Added 2-91, 2-92 06-01-8  1-23-06       Added 2-148       Rpld App. B, Pt. II, Arts. 9, 10 06-01-09  1-23-06       Rpld 2-126-2-132       Added 2-126 06-01-10  1-23-06 2-144(a) 06-02-11  2-27-06 1       Added App. B, Pt. VIII, App. 4 06-02-12  2-28-06 1-9       Added 7-211-7-219 06-06-17  6-12-06 1, 2, 4       Added 13-6 06-06-18  6-12-06 1, 2       Added 8-71-8-73 06-06-19  6-26-06 1 App. C,  107, 108 06-10-29 10-23-06 1 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 4 07-01-01  1- 8-07 4-26(b) 6-56       Rpld 6-60 07-02-05  3-12-07       Rpld 2-291-2-298 art. I, 
 1-9       Added 2-285-2-293 art. II, 
 1-7       Added 2-294-2-300 07-04-09  4-23-07 1-7       Added 4-81-4-97 08-05-10 11-10-08 1       Rpld App. B, Pt. VII, App. 9 1(Exh. A)       Added 15-1-15-7 09-11-14 11- 9-09 1 4-26 4-30 4-36-4-38 4-73(b) 4-84(c) 2       Rpld 4-33-4-35 3       Added 4-39 10-02-04  2-22-10 1-6       Added 10-121-10-126 10-04-07  4- 8-10       Added 13-101-13-129 10-04-08  4- 8-10       Added 13-35 10-04-09  4- 8-10       Rnbd Ch. 13, Art. IV(tit.)       as Ch. 13, Art. V(tit.)       Rnbd 13-61-13-72       as 13-81-13-92       Added 13-61-13-75 10-09-12  9-13-10 1       Added 8-81-8-84 11-10-15 10-24-11 1 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 1 2 App. B, Pt. VII, App. 2 11-10-16 10-24-11 1       Added 2-247 11-11-17 11-14-11 art. 1,  A-D       Added 6.5-1-6.5-4 art. 2       Added Ch. 6.5, Art. II art. 3,  A-G       Added 6.5-5-6.5-11 art. 4,  A-D       Added 6.5-12-6.5-15 art. 5,  A-E       Added 6.5-16-6.5-20 12-10-07 10- 8-12 1       Added 7-231-7-234 2014-06-06  6-23-14 1(Exh. A)       Added App. D 2015-03-01  3-23-15 3(At. A)       Rpld App. B, Part. I, arts. 1-7 Part. II, art. 8 Part. III, arts. 11-16 Part. IV, arts. 17-20 Part. V, arts. 21-23 Part. VI, arts. 24, 25 Part. VII, apps. 1-13 Part. VIII, apps. 1-4       Added App. B, art. 1,  1.1-1.7.3 art. 2,  2.1-2.3.5 art. 3,  3.1, 3.2 art. 4,  4.1-4.5.5 art. 5,  5.1-5.2.5 art. 6,  6.1-6.2.7 art. 7,  7.1-7.10.2 2015-04-04  4-13-15 2       Rpld ch. 5, art. II, div. 3,  5-56-5-61       Added ch. 5, art. II, div. 3,  5-56-5-63 2016-06-10  6-27-16 2 4-26 2016-06-11  6-27-16 2 6-56(a)       Rpld 6-63, 6-64 2017-03-03  3-27-17 2.01 App. B,  3.2 2.02 App. B,  6.1.2, Tbl. 7 2.03       Added App. B,  6.2.8  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Texas Administrative Code Section  
this Code Tit. 3, Ch. 32 App. B,  3.2 Ch. 229,  161-171 7-211 Ch. 229,  173-175 7-211 229.176 7-217 Ch. 317 App. C,  203  
V.T.C.A. 
Alcoholic 
Beverage Code Section  
this Code 1.04 8-57(b)  
V.T.C.A. 
Agriculture 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 142.001 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. II  
V.T.C.A. Texas Business and Comerce Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 39 7-31  
V.T.C.A. 
Civil Practice 
and Remedies Code 
Section Section  
this Code 101.001 et seq. 2-1 Ch. 2, Art. VI 101.101 2-276  
Vernon's Ann. 
Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure 
Section Section  
this Code 17.04 2-183(b) 45.06 2-183 102.017 2-3 102.017(d) 2-3 102.0172 2-22  
Texas Health 
and Safety 
Code Section  
this Code Ch. 262 2-77 342.007 10-32 Ch. 365 7-29 481.134 8-72  
Texas Education Code Section  
this Code 61.003 5-59  
V.T.C.A. 
Government Code 
Section Section  
this Code 29.003 1-14 311.005 1-2 417.001 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II Ch. 418, art. 6889-7 2-292(13) 418.173 2-293 433.001 et seq. 2-295 853.305 2-246 Ch. 822, subch. D 3-2  
V.T.C.A. 
Local 
Government 
Section Section  
this Code 5.001 Ch. 2 42.021 15-2 App. A,  202 Ch. 43 App. B,  2.3 App. B,  4.1.7 53.001 1-1 1-14 Ch. 54 4-97 54.001 1-14 102.001 et seq. Ch. 5 141.00 2-200 141.007 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4 142.003 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4 2-200 Ch. 211 App. B,  1.3 App. B,  4.1.4 App. B,  4.1.7 App. B,  4.3.3 App. B,  4.3.9 App. B,  4.4.4 App. B,  4.4.7 Ch. 212 App. A,  101.3 App. B,  3.2 231.003 App. D 241.001 et seq. Ch. 2.5 241.032 2.5-2 241.041 2.5-11 241.044 2.5-12 241.901 2.5-14 Ch. 243 App. B,  3.2 Ch. 245 App. B,  2.3.2 App. B,  3.2 App. B,  4.1.7 245.005 App. B,  2.3.2 252.001 et seq. Ch. 5 271.901 Ch. 5 341.011 2-201 2-205 341.012 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4 341.012(e) 2-199 342.001 et seq. Ch. 6 351.002(c) 5-57 Ch. 395 14-121, 14-132 395.052 14-131  
Texas Human Resource Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 123 App. B,  3.2 App. B,  6.2.3  
V.T.C.A. 
Occupations 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 2303 13-104 13-108 13-125  
V.T.C.A. 
Penal Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.03 1-2 Ch. 25 7-186 38.11 2-183(a) 42.11 Ch. 3, Art. II 43.24 7-198  
V.T.C.A. 
Tax Code 
Section Section  
this Code 152.001 5-56 156.001(1) 5-59 156.151 5-62 321.210 5-41 351.004 5-61  
V.T.C.A. 
Transportation 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 501 13-103 643.252 13-105 Ch. 681 13-74 Ch. 683 13-125  
V.T.C.A. 
Water Code 
Section Section  
this Code 16.315 6.5-1  
Vernon's Ann. 
Civ. Stat. 
Article Section  Section 
this Code 110B 2-241(a) 61.001 2-240 61.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 2-236 62.105 2-242 2-242(6) 63.401 2-244(c) 63.401-63.403 2-244(a) 63.601 2-244(b) 64.102(e) 2-242(1)-2-242(3) 64.202 2-242 64.202(c) 2-242(1) 64.203 2-243(a) 64.204 2-242 64.204(b) 2-242(4) 64.301-64.308 2-242(9) 64.405, 64.406 2-242 64.408, 64.409 2-242(8) 64.410 2-242, 2-242(8) 65.401 2-239 852.004 2-245(a) 854.601-854.605 2-245(a) 855.314 2-245(a) 855.408 2-245(a) 855.502 2-245(a) 695g 2-256 970a App. A App. A,  102.1 1011n App. B,  3.2 4436 Ch. 10 10-27 4442c-4 App. B,  3.2 4477-a 13-71 4477-1 4 Ch. 12 4477-6a Ch. 3 Ch. 3, Art. II 4477-7 Ch. 12 4477-9a Ch. 10 2.011 10-1 5.08 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. III, Div. 3 5.09 10-89 5.09(b), 5.09(c) 10-87 5.09(d) 10-91 5.09(f) 10-90 5.09(g), 5.09(h) 10-82, 10-83 5.11 10-84 5069-1.03 14-129 5221f Ch. 9 App. B,  3.2 5221f-1 App. B,  3.2 6053-1 4-29 6053-2 4-29 6243-101 4-33 6687-1 13-71 6701d Ch. 13 143A 13-4(a) 149 2-183(a) 6701d-11 1 10-81  
