CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF DENTON, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: May 7, 1991 
Effective: June 1, 1991 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DENTON, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Bob Castleberry 
Mayor 
____________ 
Randall Boyd 
Robert M. Gorton 
Hugh Ayer 
Jane Hopkins 
Jim Alexander 
John Trent 
City Council 
____________ 
Lloyd V. Harrell 
City Manager 
____________ 
Debra Adami Drayovitch 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jennifer Walters 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1966 Code, as supplemented through August 4, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1966 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Debra A. Drayovitch, City Attorney, and the other members of the city staff, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
APOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 91-072 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF DENTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF FEES PREVIOUSLY ESTABLISHED; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $2,000.00 FOR VIOLATIONS OF ALL SUCH PROVISIONS THAT GOVERN FIRE SAFETY, ZONING, OR PUBLIC HEALTH AND SANITATION, INCLUDING DUMPING OF REFUSE AND A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $500.00 FOR ALL OTHER VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DENTON, TEXAS: 
Section I. That the Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Denton, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 35, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section II. That all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 4, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section III. That the repeal provided for in Section II hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section IV. That unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of $2,000.00 for violations of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for all other violations. 
Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section V. That additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section VI. That ordinances adopted after September 4, 1990 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section VII. That this ordinance shall become effective June 1, 1991 from the date of its passage, and the city secretary is hereby directed to cause the caption of this ordinance to be published twice in the Denton Record-Chronicle, the official newspaper of the City of Denton, Texas, within ten (10) days of the days of its passage. 
PASSED AND APPROVED this the 7th day of May, 1991. 
	/s/   
      Bob Castleberry, Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
JENNIFER WALTERS, CITY SECRETARY 
BY: 
/s/   
      Jennifer Walters 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO LEGAL FORM: 
DEBRA A. DRAYOVITCH, CITY ATTORNEY 
BY: 
/s/   
      Debra Drayovitch, City Attorney 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Published herein is the city's Home Rule Charter which was adopted by the voters at an election held on February 24, 1959. The original arrangement and section numbers have been retained. Subsequent amendments to the Charter are denoted by a history note at the end of the affected section and/or by a note explaining the effect of the amendment. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarity are enclosed in brackets. 
 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND POWERS 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the City of Denton, in Denton County, Texas, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner prescribed by this charter, shall be and continue to be municipal corporation and the inhabitants thereof shall be a body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Denton," possessing all power, property and interests which it possessed immediately prior to the time this charter takes effect or may hereafter acquire, and having the duties, obligations and liabilities now incumbent upon or hereafter incurred by the city as a municipal corporation.  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries and limits of the City of Denton until changed in the manner herein provided, shall be the same as have heretofore been established and as exist on the date of the adoption of this charter, which boundaries are more fully set out and described by metes and bounds in a book entitled "Official Corporate Limits of the City of Denton, Texas," which is now, and shall hereafter be, on file in the office of the city secretary of the City of Denton.  
Sec. 1.03. - Extension of city limits. 
The city council, by a vote of not less than four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of its membership, shall have the power by ordinance to provide for the alteration and extension of said boundary limits, and the annexation of territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without the consent of the inhabitants of the territory annexed. Upon the introduction of any such ordinance to the City Council, such ordinance shall be published one time in the official newspaper of the City of Denton. Amendments may later be incorporated into the proposed ordinance by a vote of not less than four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of the membership of the City Council and publication one time in the official newspaper of the City of Denton. The proposed ordinance, or any amendment thereof shall not thereafter be finally acted upon until at least thirty (30) days after the publication thereof; and upon the final passage of any such ordinance, or any amendment thereto, the boundary limits of the City shall thereafter be as fixed thereby. When any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the City of Denton, and the property situated therein shall be subject to and shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to and shall possess all the rights and privileges of the citizens of the City of Denton, and shall be under obligations as such citizens.  
Sec. 1.04. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state Constitution and by this charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 1.05. - Powers of the city. 
The City of Denton shall have and may exercise all the powers granted to cities by the Constitution or laws of Texas including specifically those powers made available to cities of more than five thousand (5,000) inhabitants by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to the Constitution of Texas (Article XI, Section 5 and the Home Rule Enabling Act (Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, Texas Local Government Code Section 5.004, Chapter 9, Chapter 26, and Subchapter E of Chapter 51), as these laws now read or may hereafter be amended. The city may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose; may cooperate with the government of Texas or any agency thereof, or with the federal government or any agency thereof, or with the government of any county, city, or political subdivision to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the health, morals, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city or its inhabitants; may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, and control such property as its interest may require; provided the city shall not sell, convey, lease, mortgage, or otherwise alienate the entire assets of any public utility system or any portion thereof essential to continued effective utility service without the prior approval by a majority of the qualified voters of the city who vote at an election held for this purpose; and may exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or the Constitution or laws of Texas. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city shall have and may exercise all other powers which under the Constitution and general laws of this state it would be competent for this Charter to specifically enumerate. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 2, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 1.06. - Liabilities, exemptions and limitations. 
(a)  No property belonging to the city shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature. 
(b)  No fund belonging to the city shall be subject to garnishment, attachment or sequestration, and the city shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings. 
(c)  No assignment of wages or other compensation earned, or to be earned, by any employee of the city shall be valid and the city shall never be required to recognize any such assignment or to answer in any proceeding thereon. 
(d)  The City of Denton shall never be liable for death or personal injury of a person or for property damages of any kind unless within ninety (90) days after the occurrence causing the damage, death, injury, or destruction a notice in writing by or on behalf of the person injured or claiming damages, if living, or the person's representative, if dead, or the owners of the property injured or destroyed is delivered to the city manager stating specifically and accurately in complete detail when, where, and how the exact death, injury, destruction, or damages occurred, the full extent of the injury, the basis of the claim, and the amount of damages claimed or asserted. This notice shall also include the residence of the claimant by street number on the date the claim is presented, the residence of the claimant for six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of the death, injury, or destruction, and the names and addresses of all witnesses that are known at the time upon who it is relied to establish the claim for damages; provided, however, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to affect or repeal the provision in subsection (e) of this section relating to the liability of the city for damages on account of injuries received on the public streets, highways, alleys, grounds, public works, and public places of the city. 
(e)  The City of Denton shall never be liable for personal injury or property damages resulting from any defect in any public street, highway, alley, grounds or public work of the city unless the specific defect causing the injury or damage shall have been known to the city manager from personal inspection or written notice thereof for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage and proper diligence shall not have been used to rectify the defect after such inspection or notice. Such notice shall be required whether the defect arose from any act or omission of the city itself through its agent or employee, or otherwise. 
(f)  No provision of this section shall ever be so construed to expand the liability of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 3, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 2, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 1.07. - Gender neutral. 
Whenever used in this Charter, a word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to include females, and, where applicable, to firms, partnerships, and corporations, as well as males. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 4, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2.01. - Number, selection and term. 
(a)  The city council shall have seven (7) members, six (6) councilpersons and a mayor. The manner of their election is prescribed herein. Each councilperson shall be elected to and occupy a place on the council, such places being numbered one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5) and six (6). The mayor's position on the council shall be place seven (7). 
(b)  Four (4) members of the council whose positions shall be places one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4), shall be residents of and elected by the qualified voters of single-member geographical districts of the city, known as districts one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4), as such districts may from time to time be determined by the city council in accordance with Section 2.01(d), and created and described by ordinance. Two (2) members of the council and the mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the entire city, commonly known as at large. One (1) at large member, place five (5), shall be a resident of district one (1) or two (2), and one (1) at large member, place six (6), shall be a resident of district three (3) or four (4). 
(c)  (1)  Each member of the council including the mayor shall hold a place on the city council, and shall be elected to such place for a two-year term. No member of the council or the mayor, who has been elected to three (3) consecutive full terms in a place, shall be eligible to file for election for that same place, whether elected before or after the effective date of this provision, without having first been off the council for at least one annual council election cycle. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the council members or the mayor from being elected to other places on the council or as mayor, so long as otherwise eligible, except that no council member or the mayor shall be elected to or serve for more than twelve (12) consecutive years. 
(2)  A person who has become ineligible to serve pursuant to Section 2.01(c)(1) shall not be eligible to be elected to a place on the council or as mayor without having first been off the council for at least one annual council election cycle, after which such person shall regain eligibility for office, if otherwise eligible under this Charter. 
(d)  The council shall from time to time create and describe by ordinance election districts known as districts one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4). Such districts shall be created so that each will contain, as nearly as possible, a population equivalent to the others, according to the latest available census data. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 1, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 2009-199, Amend. No. 1, 9-1-09, ratified 11-3-09)  
Sec. 2.02. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Each member of the council, in addition to having the other qualifications prescribed by law: 
(1)  Shall be registered to vote in the city; 
(2)  Shall have domiciled for at least one year next preceding his or her election within the corporate limits of Denton and, if running within a single member geographic district, or at large place five (5) requiring a domicile in district one (1) or two (2), or at large place six (6) requiring a domicile in district three (3) or four (4), as set forth in Section 2.01, for at least one year preceding his or her election in the district in which elected; further, shall continuously be domiciled within the corporate limits of Denton and, if elected within a single member geographic district, or at large place five (5) requiring a domicile in district one (1) or two (2), or at large place six (6) requiring a domicile in district three (3) or four (4), in the district in which elected throughout his or her term of office. 
(3)  Shall not hold any other public office of emolument; 
(4)  Shall have and maintain the eligibility requirements for municipal officers set forth in Section 141.001 of the Texas Election Code, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes Annotated hereinafter referred to as "Election Code" as it may now read or hereafter be amended. 
(b)  If a member of the council shall, after being elected, cease to possess any of these qualifications or eligibility requirements, or shall hold another office of emolument, or enter a plea of guilty to a felony, or be convicted of a felony he or she shall immediately forfeit his or her office. 
(c)  City Councilmember Stipend. Each member of the City Council shall receive compensation in the form of a monthly stipend as set forth in this section. The initial monthly stipend shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each member of the City Council elected from a district or at large position, and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the Mayor elected at large. These initial amounts shall become effective on ratification of this charter provision. 
City Council may, by a separate ordinance, approve an adjustment in the stipend no more frequently than once per fiscal year, but no increase in such compensation shall take effect until commencement of the terms of the Mayor and/or Council Members elected at the next regular election. Any increase in the amount of the stipend shall not exceed three (3) percent of the then-current stipend amount unless approved by a two-thirds (?) vote of the Council. The stipend shall be reported in the annual city budget as a separate line item. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 5, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2009-199, Amend. No. 2, 9-1-09, ratified 11-3-09; Ord. No. 2017-237 , § 1(Amends. A, E), 8-15-17, ratified 11-7-17; Ord. No. 2017-373 , § 2(Props. A, E), 11-20-17)  
Sec. 2.03. - Presiding officer: Mayor and mayor pro tem. 
The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of martial law, but shall not interfere with the managerial duties and responsibilities of the city manager. The mayor shall have all the same powers and privileges as any other councilmember, including entitlement to vote upon all matters considered by the council, but shall have no veto power. The council shall, as soon as possible after the annual election, elect from its membership a mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 2009-199, Amend. No. 3, 9-1-08, ratified 11-3-09)  
Sec. 2.04. - Vacancies in council. 
Where a vacancy in any place on the council, including that of mayor, shall occur, the vacant place shall be filled by a special election, and, where necessary, by a runoff election, in the same manner as provided in this Charter for the regular election of the councilperson. Such special election shall be held on the first authorized uniform election date following the creation of the vacancy occurring on or after the thirtieth day after the date the election is ordered. The runoff election, where necessary, shall be held in accordance with the requirements of the Election Code and all other applicable laws; provided, however, that where a vacancy shall occur within one hundred and twenty (120) days of a regular election, no special election to fill the vacancy shall be called, unless more than one vacancy occurs. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 2, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 6, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2009-199, Amend. No. 3, 9-1-09, ratified 11-3-09)  
Sec. 2.05. - Meetings of the council. 
(a)  As soon as practicable after each city council election and in accordance with state law, the council shall meet at the city hall and the newly-elected members shall qualify and assume the duties of office. Thereafter, the council shall meet regularly at city hall at such times as may be prescribed by its rules but not less frequently than once each calendar month. Special called meetings may be held from time to time at city hall or other locations accessible to the public. 
(b)  Special meetings shall be called by the city secretary upon request of the mayor, city manager, or a majority of the members of the council. 
(c)  The city manager shall attend all meetings of the council and may take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council but shall have no vote. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 3, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 2.06. - Quorum, voting. 
(a)  A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the council shall be necessary to repeal any ordinance or take any official action in the name of the city, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by the general laws of the State of Texas. 
(b)  The ayes and noes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances or resolutions and the vote of each member shall be recorded in the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 3, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Sec. 2.07. - Rules of procedure, minutes. 
The council shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of business. Except as may otherwise be provided by state law, such as certain executive sessions under the Texas Open Meetings Act, being Chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code, minutes of all meetings of the council shall be taken and preserved as a permanent record open to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 4, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 2.08. - Powers of the council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter all powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the council. Without limitation of the powers granted or delegated to the city by the Constitution, statutes, or this Charter, the council shall have power to: 
(a)  Appoint and remove the city manager. 
(b)  Appoint and remove the city attorney, the city auditor, and the municipal court judge. 
(c)  Approve members of all boards, commissions and committees serving the city. 
(d)  Adopt the budget of the city. 
(e)  Fix the salary of the city manager, city auditor, city attorney, and the municipal court judge. 
(f)  Authorize by ordinance the issuance of bonds, assignments of revenue or warrants. 
(g)  Approve plats. 
(h)  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. 
(i)  Adopt and modify the zoning plan, including any and all zoning and land use regulations to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(j)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and prescribe the kind and character of buildings, structures, or improvements which may be erected therein, and provide for the condemnation of dangerous or dilapidated buildings or structures which increase the fire hazard and the manner of their removal or destruction. 
(k)  Adopt and modify the building code. 
(l)  After receiving a recommendation from the planning commission adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas, and for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
(m)  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets or alleys of the city. 
(n)  Provide by ordinance for the exercise of the police powers of the city. 
(o)  Establish and maintain a free public library and to cooperate for such purposes with any person, firm, association or political subdivision in the manner prescribed by ordinance. 
(p)  Provide by ordinance for the exercise by this city of any and all powers of local self-government not made self-enacting by this charter or by statute. 
(q)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations of municipal affairs. 
(r)  Provide for an independent audit. 
(s)  Perform the districting and redistricting function. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 4, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 5, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 2.09. - Ordinances. 
(a)  In addition to such acts of the council as are required by statutes or by this charter to be by ordinance, every act of the council establishing a fine or other penalty or providing for the expenditure of funds or for the contracting of indebtedness, shall be by ordinance. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "The Council of the City of Denton hereby ordains:" 
(b)  Every ordinance shall be introduced in written, printed, or electronic form and passed in compliance with section 2.06 of this Article, authenticated by the signatures of the mayor (or mayor pro tem) and the city secretary and systematically recorded in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall be necessary to record only the caption or title of each ordinance in the minutes of the council. 
(c)  A full text of every penal ordinance, or in lieu thereof a descriptive caption or title stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof, shall be published at least twice in the official newspaper of the City of Denton within ten (10) days after the passage of such ordinance; provided that any penal ordinance shall become effective not less than fourteen (14) days from the date of its passage. All other ordinances, except those specifically required by this charter to be published, are not required to be published in either the official newspaper of the city or in any other publication, and such ordinances shall become effective upon passage or on the date specified therein. 
(d)  The council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems necessary and advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in the official newspaper except that the ordinance adopting the same shall be published one time in the official newspaper of the city. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 6, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 2.10. - Council not to interfere in appointments or removals. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from, office by any officer appointed by the city council under Section 2.08 of this Charter or by any of his or her subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the officers appointed by the city council and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the officers appointed by the city council, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. 2009-199, Amend. No. 4, 9-1-09, ratified 11-3-09)  
Sec. 2.11. - Employee bonds. 
The council shall require bonds of all municipal officers and employees who receive or pay out any monies of the city. The amount of such bonds shall be determined by the council and the cost thereof shall be borne by the city.  
Sec. 2.12. - City secretary. 
The city secretary shall be appointed by the city manager subject to the approval of the council. He shall serve as clerk of the council, give notice of its meetings, keep the journal of its proceedings, authenticate by his signature and record in full in a book kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions, and perform such other duties as this charter may provide or as the city manager may assign him.  
Sec. 2.13. - Independent annual audit. 
(a)  Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the council shall designate a certified public accountant who, as of the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the city government and shall submit his report to the council and to the city manager. Such accountant shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or of any of its officers. He shall not maintain any accounts or records of the city business, but within specifications approved by the council, shall post-audit the books and documents kept by the department of finance and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the city government. 
(b)  A copy of such audit shall be kept in the office of the city secretary subject to inspection by any citizen during regular office hours.  
ARTICLE III. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Municipal elections. 
(a)  The regular election for the choice of members of the City Council as provided in Article II shall be held each year on the uniform election day for municipal elections in May established by the Election Code. The Council may by resolution or ordinance order special elections which shall be held as nearly as practicable according to the provisions for a regular election. The hours and places for holding all City elections shall be determined by the City Council. All elections shall be conducted in accordance with the Election Code and all other applicable laws as they now read or may hereafter be amended. 
(b)  On the first Saturday in April immediately following adoption of Section 2.01, and the drawing of election district boundaries by the council, the voters shall elect: 
(1)  The mayor, place seven (7), for a term of two (2) years. 
(2)  Two (2) councilmembers, places five (5) and six (6), for terms of two (2) years each. 
(3)  One (1) councilmember for an interim term of one (1) year. This position shall be denominated for such interim term as place four (4) and such councilmember shall be elected from the city at large and may be a resident of any district. 
At the next following regular annual municipal election after the one referred to above in this section, the district and at large system provided in Section 2.01 shall take full effect. 
(c)  Councilmembers holding office at the time the charter amendments to Section 2.01 are adopted (places one (1), two (2) and three (3)) shall serve the remainder of their unexpired terms as at large members of the council. 
(d)  If any councilmember whose term would not otherwise expire at the time of the canvass of the results of the election specified in Section 3.01(b) shall enter said election, such councilmember's term shall be deemed to have been vacated at the time of the canvass of said election results, whether the candidacy of said councilmember is successful or not. 
(e)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the council shall become a candidate for election to any position on the council, other than for reelection to the same seat, unless such candidate shall first submit to the city secretary his written resignation from the council to be effective at the time of the canvass of the results of the next regularly scheduled election. If such candidate's unexpired term would otherwise extend beyond the date of such canvass, the city secretary shall notify the council and an election shall be held on the date of the next regularly scheduled election to fill the unexpired term of said resigning councilmember. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 7, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 7, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 3.02. - Nominations. 
(a)  Any qualified person may have his or her name placed on the ballot as a candidate for councilmember by filing with the city secretary not more than ninety (90) days nor less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of election an application in substantially the following form: 
I, ___________, do hereby declare that I am a candidate for the Council of the City of Denton and request that my name be printed upon the official Ballot for that office in the next city election. I am aware of the nepotism law, chapter 573 of the Government Code. I am qualified to serve on the council with respect to the qualifications set forth in the Charter. I reside at ___________, Denton, Texas. 
	_____
Signed 
 
The foregoing petition was filed with the City Secretary on the _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	_____
City Secretary 
 
(b)  As an alternative method, any qualified person may be nominated for councilmember by a written petition signed by the greater twenty five (25) qualified voters of the city or one-half of one percent of the total votes received by all candidates for mayor in the most recent mayoral general election, provided the candidate signs the petition certifying his or her acceptance. One such petition shall be circulated and signed for each nominee or candidate. With each signature shall be stated the place of residence of the signer, giving the street and number or other description sufficient to identify it. Nominating petitions shall be filed with the city secretary not more than ninety (90) days nor less than thirty (30) days before the election day, and shall be in substantially the following form: 
We, the undersigned electors of the City of Denton, hereby nominate ___________ whose residence address is ___________ as a candidate for councilmember of the City of Denton, to be voted for at the election to be held on the _____ day of ________, 19___; and we individually certify that we are qualified to vote for a candidate for the council. 
Name 	Address 	Date of Signing 
 
(Spaces for the greater twenty five (25) or one-half of one percent of the total votes received for candidates for Mayor signatures and required data) 
Acceptance of Nomination 
I am qualified to serve on the council of the City of Denton with respect to the qualifications set forth in this Charter. I hereby accept the nomination for councilmember and agree to serve if elected. 
	_____     
Signature of Candidate    
 
Statement of Circulator 
The undersigned is the circulator of the foregoing petition containing signatures. Each signature was appended thereto in my presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
	_____     
Signature of Circulator    
	_____     
Address of Circulator    
 
The foregoing petition was filed with the City Secretary on the _____ day of ___________, 19___. 
	_____     
City Secretary    
 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 8, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 3.03. - Official ballot. 
The city secretary shall make up the official ballot from the names presented to him. The order in which the names of the candidates for each place shall appear on the ballot shall be determined by lot in a drawing held under the supervision of the city secretary, at which drawing each candidate or his designated representative shall have a right to be present. All official ballots shall be printed at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of any general or special election, and absentee voting shall be governed by the general laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 3.04. - Canvass: Election returns, results. 
(a)  Immediately after counting the votes, the presiding judge shall deliver the official returns of the election to the city secretary. Not earlier than the third day or later than the sixth day after the election or as otherwise required by the Election Code and all other applicable laws, the city council shall canvass the returns and declare the results. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the council. 
(b)  The candidates receiving the majority of the votes cast for each place shall be declared elected. If no candidate receives a majority, or if there is a tie for any one place, the council shall order a runoff election which shall be held not earlier than the twentieth or later than the thirtieth day after the date the final canvass of the regular election is completed or as otherwise required by the Election Code and all other applicable laws. Only the names of the candidates who tie for the highest number of votes cast for that place, or the two (2) candidates who receive the highest number of votes with neither having a majority of votes cast for that place, shall be printed on the ballot for each election. In the event of a tie vote at the runoff election, the candidates who tie shall cast lots in the presence of the City Secretary to determine which one shall be declared elected, and said lots shall be cast within five (5) days of the runoff election in accordance with Section 2.028 of the Election Code and all other applicable laws. 
(c)  Immediately after the election results have been declared the mayor shall deliver certificates of election to the successful candidates. Each councilman shall take the oath of office as soon thereafter as practicable at which time his term of office shall begin. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 1, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 9, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 3.05. - Regulation of elections. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, all city elections shall be governed by the applicable provisions of the Election Code of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended. The council shall have the power to make such additional regulations as may be necessary. 
State Law reference— Elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.005 et seq.  
ARTICLE IV. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Power of initiative. 
The electors shall have power to propose any ordinance, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the proposed ordinance at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiative ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty-five percent of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election.  
Sec. 4.02. - Power of referendum. 
The electors shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the council or submitted by the council to a vote of the electors, except an ordinance appropriating money, issuing bonds or authorizing the levying of taxes, such power being known as the referendum. Within twenty (20) days after the enactment by the council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of votes cast at the last preceding regular municipal election may be filed with the city secretary requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors.  
Sec. 4.03. - Form of petition, committee of petitioners. 
Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. Referendum petition papers shall contain the full text of the ordinance which they propose to repeal. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and shall give after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of the same five (5) electors, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all the signatures were appended thereto in his presence and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be.  
Sec. 4.04. - Filing, examination and certification of petitions. 
All papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the city secretary as one instrument. Within twenty (20) days after a petition is filed, the city secretary shall determine whether each paper of the petition bears the required affidavit of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified voters. After completing his examination of the petition, the city secretary shall certify the result thereof to the council at its next regular meeting. If he shall certify that the petition is insufficient he shall set forth in his certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings.  
Sec. 4.05. - Amendment of petitions. 
An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten (10) days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the city secretary, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided in the case of an original petition. The city secretary shall within five (5) days after such an amendment is filed, examine the amended petition and, if the petition is still insufficient, he shall file his certificate to that effect in his office and notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The findings of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.  
Sec. 4.06. - Effect of certification of referendum petition. 
When a referendum petition, or amended petition as defined in section 4.05 of this article, has been certified as sufficient by the city secretary, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless approved by the electors as hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 4.07. - Consideration by council. 
Whenever the council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from the city secretary, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The council shall take final action on the ordinance within sixty (60) days after the date on which such ordinance was certified to the council by the city secretary. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the council and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question, "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?"  
Sec. 4.08. - Submission of electors. 
If the council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefor, or if the council shall fail to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the electors not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the council takes its final vote thereon. If no regular election is to be held within such period the council shall provide for a special election.  
Sec. 4.09. - Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances. 
Ordinances submitted to a vote of the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the city attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance. If a paper ballot is used it shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting thereon shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title shall have below it the same two (2) propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the elector shall be given an opportunity to vote for or against the ordinance.  
Sec. 4.10. - Results of election, publication. 
(a)  If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the city. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. 
(b)  Initiative ordinances adopted and referendum ordinances approved by the electors shall be published, and may be amended or repealed by the council in the same manner as other ordinances.  
Sec. 4.11. - Recall of councilmen. 
Any member of the city council may be removed from office by a recall election.  
Sec. 4.12. - Recall petition, committee of petitioners. 
Recall petition papers shall contain the name of the councilman (or names of the councilmen) whose removal is sought, and a clear and concise statement of the grounds for his (or their) removal. There shall appear at the head of each petition the names and addresses of five electors, who, as a committee of the petitioners shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Each signer of any petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and give after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place, and the date his signature was affixed. No signature to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which was placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition with the city secretary. The signatures to a recall petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all signatures were appended thereto in his presence and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be.  
Sec. 4.13. - Filing and certification of petitions, recall election. 
(a)  All papers comprising a recall petition shall be assembled and filed with the city secretary as one instrument. Within seven (7) days after a petition is filed, the city secretary shall determine whether each paper bears the names of five (5) electors who constitute a committee of the petitioners, and the required affidavit of the circulator thereof, and whether the petition is signed by qualified voters of the constituency of the councilmember whose removal is sought equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the number of the votes cast for that councilmember and all of his opponents in the last preceding general municipal election in which he was a candidate. As used herein "constituency" shall mean the qualified voters eligible to vote for the councilmember whose removal is sought, either by geographical district or at large, as the case may be. 
(b)  If the city secretary finds the petition insufficient he shall return it to the committee of the petitioners, without prejudice, however, to the filing of a new petition based upon new and different grounds, but not upon the same grounds. If the city secretary finds the petition sufficient and in compliance with the provisions of this Article of the Charter he shall submit the petition and his certificate of its sufficiency to the council at its next regular meeting and immediately notify the councilman whose removal is sought of such action. 
(c)  If the councilman whose removal is sought does not resign within seven (7) days after such notice the city council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall election not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after the petition has been presented to the council. If no general election is to be held within this time the council shall provide for a special election. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Sec. 4.14. - Recall election ballots. 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall be submitted: "SHALL (name of person) BE REMOVED FROM THE CITY COUNCIL BY RECALL?" 
(b)  Immediately below each such question shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"YES" 
"NO"  
Sec. 4.15. - Results of recall election. 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the councilman named on the ballot, he shall continue in office. If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election be for the recall of the councilman named on the ballot, he shall be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled in the manner prescribed in Article II, section 2.04 of this charter.  
Sec. 4.16. - Limitations on recalls. 
No petition shall be filed against a councilmember within six (6) months after he takes office nor against a councilmember who has been subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby until at least six (6) months after such election. Should a regular election occur during the time when a recall petition is current and should the person(s) being recalled be reelected, the recall petition shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Sec. 4.17. - District judge may order election. 
Should the city council fail or refuse to order any recall election when all of the requirements for such election have been complied with by the petitioning electors in conformity with this Article of the charter, then it shall be the duty of the District Judge of Denton County, upon proper application therefor, to order such election and effectuate the provisions of this Article of the charter.  
ARTICLE V. - THE CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 5.01. - The city manager: Qualifications. 
The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office, as hereinafter set forth, provided that any person who is appointed city manager must have had at least two (2) years of experience as a city manager or assistant city manager, or the equivalent thereof. At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the city or state but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Sec. 5.02. - The city manager: Term and salary. 
(a)  The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him by a majority vote of its members. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall become effective, the council shall by a majority vote of its members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his removal. The city manager may reply in writing and may request a hearing at a public meeting of the council, which shall be held not earlier than twenty (20) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such request. Pending such hearing the council may suspend the city manager from duty but may not suspend or reduce his salary. After such public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the council by majority vote of its members may adopt a final resolution of removal. 
(b)  The city manager's salary shall be fixed by the council.  
Sec. 5.03. - The city manager: Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city placed under his control by this Charter or by ordinance or resolution of the council, and to that end he shall: 
(a)  Appoint and remove any employee of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter and except as he, or she may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department. 
(b)  Prepare the annual budget and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(c)  Prepare and submit to the council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(d)  Attend all meetings of the council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. 
(e)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable. 
(f)  Appoint, subject to the approval of the council, the city secretary. 
(g)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by the council not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 8, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 5.04. - Absence of city manager. 
To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the [city] manager shall designate by letter filed with the city secretary a qualified administrative officer of the city. The administrative officer thus designated shall perform the duties of the [city] manager until he shall return or his disability shall cease or until the council by resolution designates another officer of the city to perform such duties.  
Sec. 5.05. - Administrative departments. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to organize the employees of the city into various departments and divisions with the concurrence of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Secs. 5.06, 5.07. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and ratified Jan. 19, 1980, deleted former sections 5.06 and 5.07 which pertained to directors of departments and departmental divisions and were derived unamended from the Charter adopted Feb. 24, 1959.  
ARTICLE VI. - CITY ATTORNEY, MUNICIPAL COURT AND CITY AUDITOR 
 
Sec. 6.01. - City attorney: appointment. 
The city attorney, who shall be head of the legal department, shall be a qualified attorney-at-law licensed to practice in the State of Texas. He, or she shall be appointed by the council, and serve at the pleasure of the city council. He, or she shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 9, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 6.02. - City attorney: powers and duties. 
(a)  The city attorney shall represent the city in all litigation and controversies and shall prosecute all cases brought before the municipal court. He, or she shall draft, approve or file his, or her written opinion on the legality of every proposed ordinance before it is acted upon by the council, and shall pass upon all documents, contracts and other legal instruments in which the city may have an interest. 
(b)  He, or she shall be the legal advisor of the city manager, city council, and of all boards, commissions, agencies, officers and employees with respect to any legal question involving their official powers or duties. He, or she shall perform such other duties as may be required by statute, by this Charter or by ordinance. 
(c)  The council may authorize the appointment of such assistant city attorneys as may be needed to perform the duties of this department. The city attorney may designate an assistant city attorney to act as city attorney in case of his or her temporary absence of not more than three weeks. The council may authorize the appointment of a temporary city attorney to act for the city attorney in the case of a longer temporary absence or disability. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 9, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 6.03. - Municipal court. 
(a)  There is hereby established a court which shall be known as the "Municipal Court No. 1 of the City of Denton." Municipal Court No. 1 shall have the jurisdiction and be conducted as a municipal court of record in accordance with Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated Texas Government Code subchapter FF, chapter 30, §§ 30.1211 through 30.01233 inclusive and applicable state law as these laws may now read or hereafter be amended. All costs and fines imposed by the municipal court shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. The city council may, by ordinance, create additional municipal courts or municipal courts of record if so authorized under the provisions of applicable law. 
(b)  The municipal judge shall preside over the municipal court. The municipal judge shall be a qualified attorney-at-law licensed to practice in the State of Texas in good standing and shall have such other qualifications as required by subchapter FF of chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code and other applicable laws as these laws may now read or hereafter be amended. He or she shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The municipal judge shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council. The municipal judge shall have all the powers and duties assigned to a municipal judge by the Charter, other city ordinances, subchapter FF of chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code, or other applicable state laws. 
(c)  There shall be one regularly scheduled session of the court each week and as many other sessions as, in the discretion of the municipal judge, may be necessary for the timely transaction of the business of the court. 
(d)  The council may appoint such assistant municipal judges or additional municipal judges as may be necessary to perform the duties of the municipal court or a temporary municipal judge to act for the municipal judge in the case of his or her temporary absence or disability, and such assistant, additional, or temporary municipal judge shall receive such compensation as may be set by the council. All such assistant, additional, or temporary municipal judges, when appointed, shall have all of the other powers and duties assigned to the municipal judge herein. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 10, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 6.04. - City Internal Auditor. 
The City Internal Auditor shall be appointed by the City Council, shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, and shall perform such auditing duties herein described or as may be assigned by the Council. The position of the City Internal Auditor is to be held on a continuous, fulltime basis. On an interim basis, the City Council may engage external independent auditing resources to accomplish the Internal Audit function. 
The City Internal Auditor is responsible for providing (a) an independent appraisal of City operations to ensure policies and procedures are in place and complied with, inclusive of purchasing and contracting; (b) information that is accurate and reliable; (c) that assets are properly recorded and safeguarded; (d) that risks are identified and minimized; and (e) that resources are used economically and efficiently, and that the City's objectives are being achieved. 
The City Internal Auditor is responsible for directing all internal audit functions for the City of Denton to eliminate waste, fraud, and abuse. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 9, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06; Ord. No. 2017-237 , § 1(Amend. C), 8-15-17, ratified 11-7-17; Ord. No. 2017-373 , § 2(Prop. C), 11-20-17)  
ARTICLE VII. - REVENUE AND TAXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and ratified Jan. 19, 1980, deleted former sections 7.01—7.15 and 7.17—7.23 which pertained to the director of finance; procedures relative to accounting, payment of claims, purchasing, disbursement of funds, payment of claims and audits; the treasurer; the tax assessor-collector; the board of equalization and procedures relative to taxation and were derived from the Charter adopted Feb. 24, 1959, as amended by Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 5, adopted April 5, 1976. Section 2 of Ord. No. 79-86 also renumbered former sections 7.16 and 7.24—7.29 as sections 7.01—7.07. 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Property subject to tax. 
The city council is authorized to levy and collect taxes, to seize and sell property for delinquent taxes, to create tax liens, and to exercise all other powers and authority pursuant to the Tax Code, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated and all other applicable laws as they now read or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 11, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 7.02. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 1, adopted February 16, 1999, ratified May 1, 1999, repealed § 7.02, which pertained to payment, delinquencies, and penalties, and derived from Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, ratified Jan. 19, 1980.  
Sec. 7.03. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 11, adopted February 16, 1999, ratified May 1, 1999, repealed § 7.02, which pertained to seizure and sale of property for delinquent taxes, and derived from Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, ratified Jan. 19, 1980.  
Sec. 7.04. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 11, adopted February 16, 1999, ratified May 1, 1999, repealed § 7.02, which pertained to tax liens, and derived from Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, ratified Jan. 19, 1980.  
Sec. 7.05. - Ratification. 
All taxes heretofore assessed by the City of Denton are ratified and all ordinances relating to taxes now in force shall continue until amendment or repeal by the council. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Sec. 7.06. - General powers. 
In addition to the powers herein conferred with reference to the assessment and collection of taxes, the City of Denton shall have and may exercise all powers and authority now conferred or that may hereafter be conferred upon cities having a population of more than five thousand (5,000) inhabitants by the general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Sec. 7.07. - Borrowing in anticipation of property taxes. 
In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection of the property tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "Tax Anticipation Note for the Year 19___" (stating the budget year). Such notes shall not be renewable but shall mature and be paid not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
ARTICLE VIII. - BUDGET 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government which began on June 1, 1958, shall end on May 31, 1959. The next succeeding fiscal year shall begin on June 1, 1959, and end on September 30, 1959, and shall constitute an interim fiscal period. After September 30, 1959, the fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September of each calendar year. The fiscal year established by this charter shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.  
Sec. 8.02. - Interim budget. 
The city manager shall submit to the council an interim budget which shall be prepared, as nearly as practicable in accordance with the requirements for the budget document herein prescribed, for the interim fiscal period hereinabove established. Following the approval of such interim budget, the council shall enact such appropriation or other ordinances as may be necessary for the effectuation of the interim budget.  
Sec. 8.03. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
Within the time period required by law, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and the budget shall be prepared on the basis of policy priorities defined by the council for the city manager at least one hundred twenty (120) days before the end of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 6, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 10, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 8.04. - Public hearing on budget. 
The council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget.. Any taxpayer of the municipality may attend and may participate in the hearing, which shall be set for a date after the fifteenth day after the date the proposed budget is filed with the city secretary but before the date the city council makes its tax levy. The council shall provide for public notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing. In addition to this notice, the city council shall publish notice before the public hearing related to the budget in at least one newspaper of general circulation in Denton County. This notice shall be published not earlier than the thirtieth or later than the tenth day before the date of the public hearing. The city council shall provide such other notice as may be required by state and all other applicable law. The city council may make such changes in the budget that it considers warranted by the law or by the best interests of the municipal taxpayers and may increase or decrease the items of the budget provided the total proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total anticipated revenue. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 12, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 8.05. - Adoption of budget. 
The budget shall be finally adopted by the favorable votes of at least a majority of all members of the council after the conclusion of the public hearing. Should the council take no final action at the conclusion of the public hearing and before the end of the fiscal year, the budget as submitted by the city manager shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 13, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 8.06. - Budget establishes appropriations and tax levy. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. Final adoption of the budget by the council shall constitute the official appropriation of the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures for the budget year. A copy of the budget as finally adopted shall be filed with the city secretary, the county clerk of Denton County and the state comptroller of public accounts in Austin. All appropriations that have not been expended or lawfully encumbered shall lapse at the end of the budget year. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Sec. 8.07. - Transfer of appropriations. 
At any time during the fiscal year, the city manager may transfer any part of the unencumbered appropriation balance or the entire balance thereof between programs or general classifications of expenditures within an office, department, agency, or organizational unit. At any time during the fiscal year, at the request of the city manager the council may by resolution transfer any part of the unencumbered appropriation balance or the entire balance thereof from one office, department, agency, or organizational unit to another. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 14, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 8.08. - Amending the budget. 
The budget may be amended for municipal purposes by the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the council, in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 11, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 8.09. - Budget a public record. 
The budget, budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city secretary open to public inspection. The city manager shall cause sufficient copies of the budget and budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested persons.  
ARTICLE IX. - BORROWING FOR PERMANENT IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Power to issue bonds. 
(a)  The City of Denton shall have the right and power to issue general obligation bonds to finance any capital project which it may lawfully construct or acquire or for any other legitimate public purpose. The general obligation bonded debt of the city shall only be increased by the consent of the majority of the qualified voters of the city voting at an election held for that purpose. A bond election shall be ordered and notice given by ordinance, consistent with the requirements for holding elections set forth in Article III of this Charter and in accordance with the applicable laws of the State of Texas as they now read or may hereafter be amended. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to issue revenue bonds against the anticipated revenues of any municipally-owned utility or other self-liquidating municipal function to pay the debt incurred on account of such utility or function. In no event shall revenue bonds be considered an indebtedness of the city nor be repaid from bonds secured by taxation. 
(c)  No bonds or warrants shall be issued to fund any overdraft or indebtedness incurred for current expenses of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 15, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 9.02. - Bond ordinance and election. 
(a)  After approval by a majority of the qualified voters voting at a general obligation bond election called for the purpose of authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonded debt, the city shall authorize the issuance of such bonds by a bond ordinance passed by an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the council. The city council may approve the issuance of revenue bonds without an election by authorizing the issuance of such bonds by bond ordinance passed by an affirmative vote of the majority of all members of the council. 
(b)  Before any bond ordinance is passed by the council an attorney or attorneys specializing in municipal bonds shall be retained by the city to advise with the council in all matters pertaining to the proposed bond ordinance, and no action shall be taken until a written instrument has been prepared by the bond attorneys certifying the legality of the proposal. The bond attorneys shall assist the city attorney and the council in preparing all ordinances and other legal instruments required in the execution and sale of any bonds issued. 
(c)  The election ordinance on a bond proposal shall provide for proper notice, the calling of the election and the propositions to be submitted. It shall distinctly specify: 
(1)  The purpose for which the bonds are to be issued, and where possible, the probable period of usefulness of the improvements for which the bond funds are to be expended. 
(2)  The amount thereof. 
(3)  The rate of interest, if known. 
(4)  The levy of taxes sufficient to pay interest and sinking fund. 
(5)  That the bonds to be issued shall mature serially within a given number of years. 
(6)  A determination of the net debt of the city after issuance of the bonds thereby authorized, together with a declaration that the bonds thereby authorized will be within all debt and other limitations prescribed by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 16, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 12, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 9.03. - Execution of bonds. 
All bonds shall be signed by the mayor, countersigned by the city secretary, and imprinted with the seal of the city, and shall be payable at such time as may be fixed, not more than forty (40) years from their date.  
Sec. 9.04. - Sale of bonds. 
All bonds shall be sold in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 13, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 9.05. - Sinking fund for general obligation bonds. 
It shall be the duty of the council each year to levy a tax sufficient to pay the interest and provide the necessary sinking fund required by law on all general obligation bonds outstanding, and if a deficiency appears at any time in such fund the council shall, for the next succeeding year, levy an additional tax sufficient to discharge such deficiency.  
Sec. 9.06. - Bond register. 
The director of finance shall prepare, maintain and cause to be filed in the office of the city secretary a complete bond register, showing all bonds, the date and amount thereof, the rate of interest, a schedule of maturity dates, and a record of all bonds and all other transactions of the council having reference to the refunding of any indebtedness of the city. When bonds or their coupons are paid, their payment or cancellation shall be noted in the register.  
Sec. 9.07. - Misapplication of bond funds. 
Any officer or employee of the city who shall wilfully or knowingly, direct or use any funds arising from the issuance of any bond or sinking fund for any other purpose than that for which the fund is created or is herein otherwise authorized, shall be subject to prosecution as provided by the laws of the state on the diversion and conversion of funds belonging to any of the municipalities of the state.  
Sec. 9.08. - Assessments for improvements. 
All of the terms, powers and applicable provisions of Chapter 9, Title 28, of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended, relating to assessments for street improvements are hereby adopted as a part of this charter and hereby constitute an alternative authority and method which the City of Denton may use in improving streets, alleys, and public places and levying assessments therefor; provided, the city shall have the power in all cases to make such improvements with its own forces if, in the opinion of the council, the work can be done more expeditiously or economically.  
ARTICLE X. - PLANNING AND ZONING 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and ratified Jan. 19, 1980, deleted former section 10.01 which pertained to the director of planning and was derived unamended from the Charter adopted Feb. 24, 1959.  
Sec. 10.02. - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  There shall be a planning and zoning commission which shall consist of seven (7) members, who, during their respective terms of office and for at least one year prior to beginning thereof, shall be residents of the City of Denton. They shall be appointed by the council for a term of two (2) years, provided four (4) members shall be appointed each odd-numbered year and three (3) members each even-numbered year. 
(b)  None of the appointed members shall hold any other public office or position in the city while serving on the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. Seven (7) members shall serve without pay and shall adopt such rules and regulations as they deem best governing their actions, proceedings, deliberations, and the times and places of meetings, subject to council review. 
(c)  If a vacancy occurs in the city planning and zoning commission the council shall appoint a commissioner to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 7, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 14, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 10.03. - Planning and zoning commission: Powers and duties. 
(a)  In addition to the powers and duties set forth in this charter, the planning and zoning commission shall have the powers and duties of a planning and zoning commission under state law, including without limitation those under Chapters 211 and 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as may be amended from time to time, and shall perform such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the council. The planning and zoning commission may: 
(1)  Make, amend, extend and add to the master plan for the physical development of the city. 
(2)  Recommend to the council regulations governing the platting or subdividing of land within the city. (The applicable provisions of Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted and made a part of this charter, and shall be controlling on the planning and zoning commission.) 
(3)  Make recommendations to the council regarding proposed changes to the official map of the city and keep such map up-to-date so as to reflect any changes in the boundary or the zoning plan of the city. 
(4)  Make and recommend plans for the clearance and rebuilding of any slum districts or blighted areas within the city. 
(5)  Make recommendations to the council regarding proposed changes in the zoning plan and ordinance of this city and have all the power, duty and authority of a zoning commission as provided in Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as now or as hereinafter amended, all of which are hereby adopted as a part of this charter. 
(6)  Submit annually to the City Manager prior to the beginning of the budget year, a list of recommended general obligation capital improvements which in the opinion of the Commission ought to be constructed during the forthcoming five (5) year period. (Such list shall be arranged in order of preference, with recommendations as to which projects should be constructed in which year, and the City Manager shall forthwith furnish a copy of such recommendations to each member of the Council.) 
(7)  Promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan and of planning, zoning, clearance of blighted areas and development of the city. 
(8)  Meet not less than once each month and keep a public record of its resolutions, findings and determinations. 
(9)  Hold such public hearings as it may deem desirable in the public interest and advise the council upon such matters as the council may request its advice. 
(b)  For the accomplishment of the foregoing purposes the planning and zoning commission is hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Require information which shall be furnished within a reasonable time from the other departments of the city government in relation to its work. 
(2)  Request additional assistance for special survey work of the city manager, who may at his discretion assign to the planning and zoning commission, employees of any administrative department or direct such department to make special studies requested by the commission. 
(3)  In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys. 
(4)  Make and recommend plans for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods or of any area or district which may be destroyed in whole or in part or seriously damaged by fire, earthquake, flood or disaster. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 17, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 15, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 10.04. - The master plan. 
The master plan for the physical development of the city, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of city territory, and may include, among other things: 
(a)  The general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, parks, waterways and other public ways, grounds and spaces. 
(b)  The general location of public buildings and other public property. 
(c)  The general location and extent of public utilities, whether publicly or privately owned. 
(d)  The removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of such existing or future public ways, grounds, spaces, buildings, property or utilities. 
(e)  The general extent and location of public housing projects and slum-clearance projects.  
Sec. 10.05. - Legal effect of master plan. 
Except in circumstances where plat approval is not required or the public improvement is so small as not to appear on the master plan, no street, park, or other public way, ground or space, no public building or structure and no public utility whether publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed or authorized in the City until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission; provided that, in case of disapproval, the Commission shall within thirty (30) days communicate its reasons to the Council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval, and, upon such overruling, the Council or the appropriate office, department, or agency shall have the power to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 18, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 16, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 10.06. - Zoning. 
(a)  For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals or the general welfare of the community, the council may by ordinance regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes. Such ordinance shall provide that the board of adjustment may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate principles, standards, rules, conditions and safeguards set forth in the ordinance, authorize variances from and make special exceptions to the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent. 
(b)  For any or all of said purposes the council may divide the city into districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this section; and within such districts it may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land. All such regulations shall be uniform for each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
(c)  Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and be designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health or the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, public convenience and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration of the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.  
Sec. 10.07. - Board of adjustment. 
The city council shall by ordinance establish a board of adjustment which shall consist of at least seven (7) members who shall have the qualifications, powers, and duties and serve for the terms provided by the city council in an ordinance creating the board. All current members of the board of adjustment and the board shall continue to serve under the current provisions of the City Charter until such ordinance creating the board is enacted and effective. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 19, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 10.08. - Platting or subdivision control. 
The planning and zoning commission shall recommend to the council the adoption of regulations governing the platting or subdividing within the city or within the area under the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, and the owner of every such subdivision shall comply with all of the provisions of Article 974a and 6626, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, 1948, [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.002 et seq. and V.T.C.A., Property Code § 12.001 et seq.] as now or hereafter amended. Such regulation may provide for the harmonious development of the city within the subdivided land with other existing or planned streets and ways or for conformance with the master plan or official map, for adequate open spaces, spaces for traffic, utilities, recreation, light and air and for the avoidance of congestion of population. Such regulations may include requirements as to the extent to which and the manner in which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and water, sewer and other utility mains, piping, connections or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 17, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 10.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and ratified Jan. 19, 1980, deleted former section 10.09 which pertained to the tentative approval of plats and was derived unamended from the Charter adopted Feb. 24, 1959.  
Sec. 10.10. - Building permits, use and occupancy certificates. 
(a)  The city shall have the power to prohibit the erection, construction or use of any building or structure of any kind within the city without a permit having first been issued, by the city, for the construction or erection of such building or structure, and without a use and occupancy certificate having been issued for the use actually made of such premises and structure and may authorize a fee to be charged for such permit. In pursuance of this authority the council may authorize the inspection of all buildings and structures during the progress of their construction or thereafter and may require new construction, renovation, or reconstruction to comply with all building regulations. 
(b)  For the purpose of preserving property values, protecting the public health, preventing the blighting of areas within the city, promoting safety and the public welfare the council may fix a minimum standard for the construction and use of housing accommodations and other structures within this city and prohibit the construction, erection and use of substandard housing and other substandard structures. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 18, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 10.11. - Official map. 
The council may by ordinance establish an official map of the city, on which shall be shown and indicated all public streets existing and established by law at the time of the establishment of the official map.  
Sec. 10.12. - Slum clearance and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
The council may, after receiving a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission adopt, modify and carry out plans for the clearance of slum districts and blighted areas within the city and, for the accomplishment of this purpose, may acquire by purchase or condemnation all privately owned lands, buildings and other real property interests within the district; may establish, locate, relocate, build and improve the streets and other public open spaces provided for in the plan; may maintain, operate, lease or sell said buildings or any of them; may sell the land or any part thereof designated for buildings and private open spaces upon such terms and conditions and subject to such restrictions as to building uses and open spaces as will substantially carry out and effect the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 19, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
ARTICLE XI. - PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and ratified Jan. 19, 1980, deleted former section 11.01 which pertained to the director of parks and recreation and was derived unamended from the Charter adopted Feb. 24, 1959.  
Sec. 11.02. - Park and recreation board. 
The city council shall by ordinance establish a board which shall advise the council on parks and recreation and which shall consist of at least seven (7) residents of the city who shall have the qualifications, duties, and powers and serve for the terms provided by the city council in the ordinance creating the board. All current members of the parks and recreation board and the board shall continue to serve under the current provisions of the City Charter until the ordinance creating the board is enacted and effective. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 20, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
ARTICLE XII. - PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 12.01. - General powers respecting utilities. 
(a)  The City of Denton may license, regulate, fix the rates, control and supervise public utilities of all kinds. 
(b)  In addition to such public utilities as it may now own, the City of Denton may own, acquire, construct, maintain, and operate any other public utility that may be approved by a majority of the qualified voters of the City voting therefor at an election held for such purpose; and shall have power for the purpose of operating and maintaining any such utility, and for distributing such service throughout the city or any portion thereof, but in such condemnation proceedings no allowance shall be made for the value of any franchise and only the actual physical assets shall be purchased by the City.  
Sec. 12.02. - Rates. 
The city shall have the power, subject to limitations imposed by state law and this Charter, to fix and, from time to time, revise such rates and charges as it may deem advisable for supplying such utility services as the city may provide. The utilities shall provide no free services; the rates and charges for services to city departments and other public agencies shall be the same as the regular rates and charges fixed for similar services to consumers generally. The rates and charges for services to consumers outside the corporate limits of the city may be greater but shall not be less than the rates and charges for similar service to consumers within the corporate limits of the city.  
Sec. 12.03. - Excess revenues of utility systems. 
(a)  Any money remaining in the "System Fund" after all necessary expenses of operation and maintenance of the utility systems, including salaries, labor and materials, have been paid, upon proper approval, and after all payments have been made into the several funds required and provided to be made by the ordinance or ordinances authorizing the issuance of any revenue bonds of the city, now outstanding or hereafter authorized and issued which may be payable from and secured by a pledge of the net earnings of the light, water or sewer systems, shall be deemed "Excess Revenues" for the purposes of this section. "System Fund" as used herein shall mean the fund (or funds as may be required by outstanding bond issues) into which are deposited the gross incomes derived from the operation of the above named utility systems. 
(b)  Excess Revenues shall be utilized at the times and for the purposes as follows: 
(1)  After all of the requirements of the various funds have been met, there shall be computed a return on the net investment in the utility system. The "Net Investment" figure used in these computations shall be taken from the independent audit of the utility systems for the last fiscal period. The city shall be entitled to receive annually on the net investment from excess revenues, if any, not more than six (6) percent of the net investment. 
(2)  Any remaining excess revenues shall be used for the redemption and retirement of utility revenue bonds, as they become available at not more than fair market value. If utility revenue bonds are not available, these funds shall immediately be invested in short-term United States Government securities or at the option of the city, placed on time deposit in the city depository to draw interest. As utility revenue bonds become available, sufficient United States Government securities shall be sold or time deposits withdrawn to purchase the longest maturities available on the market.  
Sec. 12.04. - Disposal of utility properties. 
No sale, conveyance, lease, or other alienation of the entire assets of any utility system or any part thereof essential to continued effective utility service, shall ever be made unless such sale, lease, or disposal is approved by a majority vote of all the qualified voters voting in an election held for that purpose in the City of Denton. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 22, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 12.05. - Cooperation of other city departments. 
The [public utilities] board shall have the right to request the services of any officer or department of the city government; provided, however, that the utility system shall pay out of its revenues a proportionate part of the expenses of the department used in an amount agreed upon by the city manager and the board. If they fail to agree, the final decision on any such expenses shall be made by the city council.  
Sec. 12.06. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and ratified Jan. 19, 1980, deleted former section 12.06 which pertained to the director of utilities and was derived unamended from the Charter adopted Feb. 24, 1959.  
Sec. 12.07. - The public utilities board. 
(a)  There is hereby created a public utilities board to be composed of seven (7) members, or as many members as there are councilmembers, whichever is greater, appointed by the council for four-year terms and until their respective successors have been appointed and qualified. Members of the board may be removed by the council only for cause and only after charges have been filed and published and the member has been given a reasonable opportunity to defend himself in an open public hearing before the council. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term in the same manner as provided for regular appointments. 
(b)  The city manager and director of utilities shall be ex officio members of the board. They shall attend all meetings of the board and shall have the right to discuss any matter that is under consideration by the board but shall have no vote. 
(c)  Members of the public utilities board shall have the same qualifications as are required by membership on the city council. 
(d)  At its organizational meeting, and annually thereafter as soon as the newly appointed member (or members) has qualified; the board shall select from its own membership a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary. A majority of the regularly appointed members shall constitute a quorum. The board shall determine its own rules and order of business. The board shall meet at least once each month; all meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code, as it may now read or hereafter be amended and all other applicable laws and a permanent record of proceedings shall be maintained, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, Amend. No. 8, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 23, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 20, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 12.08. - Powers and duties of the public utilities board. 
(a)  The board shall serve the department of utilities and city council as a consulting, and advisory board. 
(b)  The annual budget for the department of utilities shall be prepared by the director and submitted to the board in the form required by the city manager. The board shall review the budget, make such changes therein as they deem appropriate, then return it to the director who shall deliver it to the city manager for incorporation without any changes, in the proposed general budget of the city and transmission to the council. 
(c)  The public utilities board is hereby authorized to expend such funds for information and advertising as shall be budgeted for this purpose. 
(d)  All actions recommending expansion of the system and the making of additions and betterments thereto or extensions thereof, the incurring of indebtedness, the issuance of bonds, and the fixing of rates and charges for utility services shall be submitted to the board for review and approval; provided, that in case of disapproval, the board shall within thirty (30) days communicate the reasons for its disapproval to the council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval, and, upon such overruling, the council or the appropriate department shall have power to proceed; and provided further that all rates and charges for utility services shall be reviewed by the board and revised or reenacted by the council at intervals not exceeding five (5) years and beginning with the year 1960. 
(e)  The board shall submit annually to the planning and zoning commission (for incorporation in its report), prior to the beginning of the budget year, a list of recommended capital improvements, which in the opinion of the board ought to be constructed during the forthcoming five (5) year period. Such list shall be arranged in order of preference, with recommendations as to which projects should be constructed in which year. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the board to act in an advisory capacity to the council, with authority to hold public hearings and to study and recommend policies relating to the operation, promotion, enlargement, future planning and such other matters involving city-owned utilities as may be referred to it by the council. At intervals not exceeding ten (10) years the council shall at the expense of the utilities involved, cause a general management survey to be made of all utilities under the jurisdiction of the board by a competent management consulting or industrial engineering firm, the report and recommendations of which shall be made public; provided, that the first such survey shall be made within three (3) years of the effective date of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 21, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
ARTICLE XIII. - FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Franchises: public utilities. 
(a)  The city council may by ordinance grant, renew and extend all franchises of all public utilities operating within the city, and, with the consent of the franchise holder, amend such franchise. No franchise shall ever be granted for a longer term than twenty (20) years. No franchise for a term of twenty (20) years shall be granted except upon the condition that the City of Denton shall have the right, at any time after the expiration of eighteen (18) years, to purchase the property of such franchise holder, or cause a purchaser to buy such property and thereby terminate or transfer the franchise and all privileges enjoyed thereunder, provided that the purchase when made by the city shall not in the case of a fixed term franchise take effect until the expiration of twenty (20) years from the time such franchise was granted. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to provide and fix in any franchise the amount or amounts (or the basis for determining the same), to be paid in case it shall buy or cause a purchaser to buy any such property. 
(c)  Every ordinance granting, amending, renewing or extending a public utility franchise shall be passed by a majority vote of the entire city council at three (3) regular meetings of the council; no such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage; pending such time the full text of the ordinance shall be published once each week for three (3) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper published in the City of Denton, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the grantee of the franchise; and such ordinance shall be subject to referendum as provided in Article IV of this Charter. No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance. 
(d)  After due notice and hearing, the council may by ordinance cancel or repeal a public utility franchise for failure of the grantee to comply with the terms of the franchise.  
Sec. 13.02. - Franchises: use of streets. 
The city may by ordinance grant franchises or permits for the use and occupancy of streets, avenues, alleys or other public grounds belonging to or under the control of the city. Before such ordinance can become effective it shall be passed by a majority vote of the entire city council at two (2) regular meetings of the council; no such ordinance shall take effect until twenty-one (21) days after its final passage; pending such time the full text of the ordinance shall be published once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the City of Denton, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the grantee of the franchise and such ordinance shall be subject to referendum as provided in Article IV of this Charter.  
Sec. 13.03. - Franchise fee. 
The holder or grantee of any franchise or license to use public streets, alleys, highways, or other public property may be required, as compensation for the right or privilege enjoyed, to pay to the City of Denton each year such reasonable sum (not less than two (2) percent of the gross receipts of the business pursued by the holder of the franchise earned for service rendered in the City of Denton), or to pay compensation, rent, or any other fee or charge authorized by law, including, without limitation, specific charges per service line, access line fees, and all other legally permissible charges for the use of its streets, alleys, highways, and other public property, as the council may determine by ordinance or by contract with any such utility, which compensation shall be in addition to all ad valorem and corporation taxes paid by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 24, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 13.04. - Regulation of utilities. 
The city council shall have the power and the duty to: 
(a)  Determine, fix and regulate the charges, fares or rates of all public utilities operating within the city, provided the council shall not prescribe any rate of compensation which will yield more than a fair return upon the fair value of the physical property used and useful in rendering service to the public. 
(b)  Require such franchise holders who request an increase in rates, charges or fares to reimburse the city for reasonable expenses incurred in employing independent rate consultants to conduct investigations, present evidence and advise the council on such requested increase. 
(c)  Prescribe reasonable standards of service and quality of products to be furnished by each utility and prevent unjust discrimination. 
(d)  Require such extensions of plant and service and such maintenance of plant and fixtures as may be necessary to provide adequate and efficient service. 
(e)  Collect from every public utility operating in the city its fair and just proportion of the expense of excavating, grading, paving, repaving, constructing, reconstructing, draining, repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping and sprinkling such portions of the alleys, bridges, culverts, viaducts and other public places and ways of the city as may be occupied or used in whole or in part by such utilities; or compel such public utility to perform, at its own expense, its just share of such excavating, grading, paving, repaving, constructing, reconstructing, draining, repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping and sprinkling. 
(f)  Prescribe the form of accounts which shall be kept by each utility; provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for said utility as prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, or their respective successors, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph. 
(g)  Examine or cause to be examined at any time the accounts and other records of any utility operating within the city for the purpose of ascertaining any fact relating to the business done by such utility and pertinent to the council's power of regulation. 
(h)  The council shall provide means and prescribe regulations for independent testing of all gas, water, light and other public utility meters on complaint of any person who may be dissatisfied with the readings of the employees of those utilities, whether owned by private corporations or by the City of Denton. 
(i)  Enact and enforce such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
(j)  The City of Denton shall have power to prohibit the use of any street, alley, highway, boulevard or grounds of the city by any telegraph, telephone, electric light, street railway, interurban railway, gas company or any other character of public utility without first obtaining the consent of the governing authorities expressed by ordinance, and upon paying such compensation as may be prescribed and upon such conditions as may be provided for by such ordinances, and the City of Denton shall have the power to require all telegraph, telephone and electric light companies to place their wires underground. 
(k)  Require each utility operating in the city to file with the city such reports and other information pertaining to its operations that are required by its franchise agreement with the city, this Charter, city code, other applicable laws, or that may be required from time to time by the council. 
(l)  Fix appropriate penalties to enforce compliance with all rules and regulations enacted by the council. 
(m)  Give due notice and a fair hearing to persons or corporations to be affected by such rules and regulations before they shall be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 22, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06; Ord. No. 2006-297, § 2, 10-3-06, ratified 11-7-06)  
Sec. 13.05. - Other conditions. 
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Denton and the grantee, and the contractual right as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the City of Denton to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a grantee which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all of the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this Article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the council or the electors of the city in imposing such terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant.  
Sec. 13.06. - Franchise records. 
The city secretary shall compile and maintain a public record of all franchises heretofore or hereafter granted by the City of Denton.  
ARTICLE XIV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and ratified Jan. 19, 1980, deleted former section 14.01 which pertained to the health officer and was derived unamended from the Charter adopted Feb. 24, 1959.  
Sec. 14.02. - Publicity of records. 
All public records collected, assembled, or maintained by the city in accordance with the transaction of official business shall be available to the public during normal business hours, subject to the exceptions and regulations authorized by applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
Sec. 14.03. - Official newspaper. 
The city council shall annually select and designate by resolution the official newspaper of the city in which all ordinances and official notices that are required to be published shall be published.  
Sec. 14.04. - Ethics Ordinance Requirement. 
The City Council shall adopt an ethics ordinance. The ethics ordinance shall prohibit the use of public office for private gain and shall incorporate the conflict of interest standards that appear in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Ch. 171 and all state law as presently exist or may be hereafter amended or adopted. The Council may adopt more stringent standards than those that appear in state law, but the ethics ordinance shall at a minimum include the following components: 
(1)  Definition of a prohibited improper economic interest and personal gain; 
(2)  Definition of recusal and improper participation when a potential conflict of interest is present; 
(3)  Avoidance of appearance of conflict of interest; and 
(4)  Administration and enforcement of ethics ordinance, including the power to subpoena witnesses and documents, coupled with strong and meaningful remedies for infraction. 
( Ord. No. 2017-237 , § 1(Amend. D), 8-15-17, ratified 11-7-17; Ord. No. 2017-373 , § 2(Prop. D), 11-20-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-237 , § 1(Amend. D), adopted August 15, 2017, ratified 11-7-17 repealed the former §§ 14.04, 14.05 and enacted a new § 14.04 as set out herein. The former §§ 14.04, 14.05 pertained to personal interest and nepotism and derived from Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80; Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 25, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99; Ord. No. 2006-232, Amend. No. 23, 8-28-06, ratified 11-7-06.  
Sec. 14.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See Editor's Note for § 14.04.  
Sec. 14.06. - Oath of office. 
Every officer of the city shall before entering upon the duties of his office take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary: 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of ___________ of the City of Denton, Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States and of this State and the Charter and ordinances of this City; and I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm) that I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered or promised to pay, contributed or promised to contribute any money, or valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward for the giving or withholding a vote at the election at which I was elected. (or if the office is one of appointment, "to secure my appointment.") So Help Me God."  
Sec. 14.07. - Continuation of present offices. 
All persons holding administrative office either by election or appointment at the time this Charter becomes effective shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made in accordance therewith for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the city by the laws of the state shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this Charter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by the council unless otherwise provided herein.  
Secs. 14.08, 14.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and ratified Jan. 19, 1980, deleted former sections 14.08 and 14.09 which pertained to the commissioners and mayor holding office when the present Charter was adopted and which were derived unamended from said Charter adopted on Feb. 24, 1959.  
Sec. 14.10. - Continuance of contracts and public improvements. 
All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws or charter provisions existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws and charter provisions.  
Sec. 14.11. - Effect of charter on existing law. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under the city government and not in conflict with any provisions of this Charter shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended or repealed by the council after this Charter takes effect.  
Sec. 14.12. - Severable provisions. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions or applications of this Charter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Charter are declared severable.  
Sec. 14.13. - Amending the charter. 
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided by Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, Texas Local Government Code Chapter 9 and all other applicable laws, as they now read or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 99-057, Amend. No. 26, 2-16-99, ratified 5-1-99)  
Sec. 14.14. - Submission of charter to electors. 
The Charter Commission in preparing this Charter finds and decides that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons the Charter Committee directs that this Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Denton at an election to be held for that purpose on the 24th day of February, 1959.  
Sec. 14.15. - When provisions take effect. 
If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter the present city commission, after canvassing the returns, shall enter an official order upon the records of the city declaring the same adopted and this Charter shall be in full force and effect on and after the date of official adoption. 
We, the undersigned members of the Denton Charter Commission, heretofore duly elected to prepare a Charter for the City of Denton, Texas, do hereby certify that this publication constitutes a true copy of the proposed Charter for the City of Denton, Texas, as unanimously adopted by the members thereof. 
SAM B. McALISTER, Chairman 
STANLEY A. MUNSON, Vice Chairman 
ETHELYN DAVIS, Secretary 
Tom Harpool 	Walter B. McClurkan 
Don Robinson 	H. W. Kamp 
Roland Laney 	James R. Reed 
M. G. Ramey 	David Mulkey 
W. D. Barrow 	Mrs. W. F. "Pat" Hamilton 
Lee E. Johnson 	Paul P. Young 
  
Sec. 14.16. - Boards and commissions. 
Members of boards and commissions of the City of Denton shall serve at the pleasure of the council. Members of such boards and commissions may be removed by the council only for cause and only after being given notice by the council. 
(Ord. No. 79-86, § 2, 12-11-79, ratified 1-19-80)  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Date 	Election 
Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Code 
	 2-24-59 		1.01—14.16 	1.01—14.16 
76-12 	 4- 5-76 		Amend. No. 1 	2.01 
				3.04 
			Amend. No. 2 	2.04 
			Amend. No. 3 	2.06 
			Amend. No. 4 	2.08 
			Amend. No. 6 	8.03 
			Amend. No. 7 	10.02 
			Amend. No. 8 	12.07 
79-86 	12-11-79 	 1-19-80 	2 	2.01—2.03 
				2.05, 2.06 
				2.08 
				3.01 
				3.04 
				4.13 
				4.16 
				5.01 
				5.05 
				6.02, 6.03 
				7.01—7.07 
				8.06 
				8.08 
				9.01 
				10.08 
				14.02 
				14.04 
				14.16 
99-057 	 2-16-99 	 5- 1-99 	Amend. No. 2 	1.05 
			Amend. No. 3 	1.06 
			Amend. No. 4 	1.07 
			Amend. No. 5 	2.02 
			Amend. No. 6 	2.04 
			Amend. No. 7 	3.01 
			Amend. No. 8 	3.02 
			Amend. No. 9 	3.04 
			Amend. No. 10 	6.03 
			Amend. No. 11 	7.01 
			      Rpld 	7.02, 7.03, 7.04 
			Amend. No. 12 	8.04 
			Amend. No. 13 	8.05 
			Amend. No. 14 	8.07 
			Amend. No. 15 	9.01(a) 
			      Dltd 	9.01(d) 
			Amend. No. 16 	9.02(a) 
			Amend. No. 17 	10.03(a)(6) 
			Amend. No. 18 	10.05 
			Amend. No. 19 	10.07 
			Amend. No. 20 	11.02 
			Amend. No. 22 	12.04 
			Amend. No. 23 	12.07(a), (d) 
			Amend. No. 24 	13.03 
			Amend. No. 25 	14.04 
			Amend. No. 26 	14.13 
2006-232 	 8-28-06 	11- 7-06 	Amend. No. 2 	1.06(f) 
			Amend. No. 3 	2.05(a) 
			Amend. No. 4 	2.07 
			Amend. No. 5 	2.08 
			Amend. No. 6 	2.09(b) 
			Amend. No. 7 	3.01(a) 
			Amend. No. 8 	5.03 
			Amend. No. 9 	6.01 
				6.02 
				6.04 
			Amend. No. 10 	8.03 
			Amend. No. 11 	8.08 
			Amend. No. 12 	9.02(a) 
			Amend. No. 13 	9.04 
			Amend. No. 14 	10.02 
			Amend. No. 15 	10.03 
			Amend. No. 16 	10.05 
			Amend. No. 17 	10.08 
			Amend. No. 18 	10.10(a) 
			Amend. No. 19 	10.12 
			Amend. No. 20 	12.07(d) 
			Amend. No. 21 	12.08(a) 
				12.08(e) 
			Amend. No. 22 	13.04 
			Amend. No. 23 	14.05 
2006-297 	10- 3-06 	11- 7-06 	2 	13.04 
2009-199 	 9- 1-09 	11- 3-09 	Amend. No. 1 	2.01(a) 
			Amend. No. 2 	2.02(a)(2) 
			Amend. No. 3 	2.03 
				2.04 
			Amend. No. 4 	2.10 
2017-237 
 8-15-17 	11- 7-17 	Amend. A 	2.02(a) 
			Amend. C 	6.04 
			Amend. D       Rpld 	14.04, 14.05 
			      Added 	14.04 
			Amend. E       Added 	2.02(c) 
2017-373 
11-20-17 	11- 7-17 	Prop. A 	2.02(a) 
			Prop. C 	6.04 
			Prop. D       Rpld 	14.04, 14.05 
			      Added 	14.04 
			Prop. E       Added 	2.02(c) 
  
Subpart A - CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the Code of the City of Denton, Texas and may be so cited. 
(Code 1966, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Denton, Texas. 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Denton in the County of Denton and State of Texas. 
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city manager," "city secretary," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Denton, Texas. 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas, as such Code may be amended from time to time. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., Texas Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 4. 
Council. Whenever the words "council" or "this council" or "the council" are used, they shall mean the City Council of the City of Denton, Texas. 
County. The words "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Denton, Texas. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty, unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square and bridges, viaducts, tunnels, underpasses, overpasses and causeways in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Shall. The word "shall" shall always be mandatory and never permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The word "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square and bridges, viaducts, underpasses, overpasses, tunnels and causeways in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." shall mean the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." shall mean and refer to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1966, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1966, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-4. - References to parts of Code. 
All references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code, as may be amended from time to time, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(11)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances designating one-way streets, no-parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(12)  Any ordinance approving plats of subdivisions or additions to the city, prescribing restrictions or regulations for the same or otherwise relating to a specific subdivision or addition; 
(13)  Any ordinance zoning or rezoning property or granting specific use permits or amending the zoning map; 
(14)  Any ordinance levying fees, charges or rates. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. All ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office.  
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that the Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Denton, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Denton, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1966, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1966, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-11. - Procedure for enforcement of Code. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to issue citations into municipal court for any violation of this Code. Such authority is in addition to and cumulative of other enforcement remedies provided for in this Code or by law. It shall be unlawful for a person or corporation to intentionally and knowingly fail to appear in accordance with the terms of a citation issued hereunder, which was personally served on the person or corporation failing to appear. 
(Code 1966, § 1-5.1; Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
(a)  Where no specific penalty is provided for in this Code for a violation of a provision of this Code or where any provision of this Code or any ordinance provides for a maximum fine in the amount which is in conflict or inconsistent with the maximum fine provided for herein, the maximum fine shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a violation of any provision governing fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, excluding vegetation and litter violations; 
(2)  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a violation of any provision regulating the parking of motor vehicles, any provision enacted pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, or any provision of chapter 6 of this Code; 
(3)  The amount fixed by state law if the provision is one for which state law establishes a fine; 
(4)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any other violation not otherwise provided for in this section. 
(b)  A person violating a provision of this Code or other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted, unless otherwise provided. 
(c)  The provisions in this section are cumulative of all other remedies, including but not limited to injunctions and other extraordinary writs. This section shall govern all penalties for any violation of this Code, notwithstanding any language to the contrary contained in any other section of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 1-5; Ord. No. 88-010, § I, 1-5-88; Ord. No. 88-143, § I, 9-6-88) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City boundary book. 
(a)  The city secretary or such officer as the city manager may direct shall maintain a well-bound book which shall be entitled Official Corporate Limits of the City of Denton, Texas. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city secretary or of such officer as the city manager may direct to enter in the book a correct description of the boundaries of the city, together with all annexation ordinances and other ordinances pertaining to the official boundaries of the city. 
(c)  An official map of the city shall also be kept with such book showing the boundaries of the city, and the city secretary or such officer as the city manager may direct shall indicate upon the map the number of any ordinance changing the boundaries of the city and updating the map, the date of annexation and a reference to the ordinance records in which the ordinance is recorded in full. 
(d)  The book and map shall be the official record of the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-1) 
Charter reference— Boundaries, § 1.02; extension of city limits, § 1.03. 
State Law reference— Annexations and boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 41.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2. - City seal. 
The seal of the city shall be a star of five (5) points within two (2) concentric circles, with the words, "City of Denton, Denton, Texas," engraved between the two (2) concentric circles. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2)  
Secs. 2-3—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 2-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-227, § 9, adopted September 17, 2013, repealed § 2-26, which pertained to city manager and derived from § 2-16 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 2-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-227, § 9, adopted September 17, 2013, repealed § 2-27, which pertained to administrative departments and derived from § 2-17 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 2004-156, § 2, 5-18-04.  
Sec. 2-28. - Policies, procedures and directives. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative directive means a written statement from the city manager to city employees establishing rules and regulations concerning internal operational matters of the city. 
Administrative procedure means a specific and detailed statement of the means and methods by which management implements a policy. 
Policy means a statement of overall philosophy and direction, describing goals to be accomplished and programs to be established. 
(b)  Review by city attorney and approval by council. Policies and any amendments thereto shall be reviewed by the city attorney for legal compliance and approved by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Authority to issue. The city manager is hereby authorized to issue such administrative procedures and directives as he deems necessary to implement approved policies relating to personnel and internal operational matters. Such procedures and directives shall be contained in a manual available for inspection by city employees. 
(Code 1966, § 2-18)  
Sec. 2-29. - City council rules of procedure. 
(a)  Authority. 
(1)  Charter: Pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.07 of the Charter of the City of Denton, Texas, the City Council hereby enacts these rules of procedure for all meetings of the City Council of the City of Denton, Texas. 
During any meeting, a reasonable opportunity shall be given for citizens to be heard under these rules. These Rules of Procedure are enacted as guidelines to be followed by all persons in the Council Chamber including the city administrative staff, news media, and visitors. 
(b)  General rules. 
(1)  Meetings to be public: All official meetings of the Council and Council committees and subcommittees, except closed meetings permitted by the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A. Government Code Ch. 551, (Vernon 2014), as amended, shall be open to the public. 
(2)  Quorum: Four (4) members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Charter, Section 2.06) 
(3)  Compelling attendance: No member shall be excused from attendance at a council meeting except for good and valid reasons. It will be the duty of the council member to notify the city secretary prior to the meeting at which he or she is going to be absent. The city secretary will record each council member as being present or absent as a part of the minutes prepared for each council meeting. 
(4)  Misconduct: The council may punish its own members for misconduct consistent with any ethics policy adopted by the council. 
(5)  Minutes of meetings: An account of all proceedings of the council shall be kept by the city secretary and shall be entered in a book constituting the official record of the council. A certified agenda shall be prepared and shall be approved by the mayor for all closed meetings for which a certified agenda is required to be kept in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(6)  Questions to contain one subject: All questions submitted for a vote shall contain one subject, except the city council may approve all items which are on the consent agenda in one motion, regardless of how many subjects are contained in the consent agenda, so long as all items have been properly posted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and have not been removed from the consent agenda by a council member. If two or more points are involved, any member may require a division, if the question reasonably admits of a division. 
(7)  Right to floor: Any member desiring to speak shall be recognized by the chairperson, and shall confine his or her remarks to the subject under consideration or to be considered. No member shall be allowed to speak more than once on any one subject until every member wishing to speak shall have spoken. 
(8)  City manager: The city manager, or acting city manager, shall attend all meetings of the council unless excused. He or she may make recommendations to the council and shall have the right to take part in all discussions of the council, but shall have no vote. (Charter, Section 5.03 (d)) 
(9)  City attorney: The city attorney, or acting city attorney, shall be available upon request for all meetings of the council unless excused and shall, upon request, give an opinion, either written or oral, on questions of law. The city attorney shall act as the council's parliamentarian. 
(10)  City secretary: The city secretary, or acting city secretary, shall attend all meetings of the council unless excused, and shall keep the official minutes and perform such other duties as may be requested by the council. 
(11)  Officers and employees: Any officer or employee of the city, when requested by the city manager, shall attend any meeting of the council. If requested to do so by the city manager, such employee may present information relating to matters before the council. 
(12)  Rules of order: These rules govern the proceedings of the council in all cases, except that where these rules are silent, the most recent Edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall govern. 
(13)  Suspension of rules: Any provision of these rules not governed by the City Charter or other City Code provisions may be temporarily suspended by the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the council. The vote on any such suspension shall be taken by yeas or nays and entered into the minutes of the council. 
(14)  Amendment of rules: These rules may be amended, or new rules adopted by the affirmative vote of four members of the council, provided that the proposed amendments or new rules shall have been introduced before the city council at a prior council meeting. 
(c)  Code of conduct. 
(1)  Council members: 
a.  During council meetings, council members shall preserve order and decorum and shall neither by conversation or otherwise delay or interrupt the proceedings nor refuse to observe the rules of the council. 
b.  A council member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while speaking unless called to order by the mayor or presiding officer, unless a point of order is raised by another member or the parliamentarian, or unless the speaker chooses to yield to questions from another member. If a council member is called to order while he or she is speaking, he or she shall cease speaking immediately until the question of order is determined. If ruled to be in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed. If ruled not to be in order, he or she shall remain silent or shall alter his or her remarks so as to comply with rules of the council. 
(2)  Administrative staff: 
a.  Members of the administrative staff and employees of the city shall observe the same rules of procedure and decorum applicable to members of the council, and shall have no voice unless and until recognized by the chair. 
b.  While the presiding officer shall have the authority to preserve decorum in meetings as far as staff members and city employees are concerned, the city manager also shall be responsible for the orderly conduct and decorum of all city employees under his or her direction and control. 
c.  The city manager shall take such disciplinary action as may be necessary to insure that such decorum is preserved at all times by city employees in council meetings. 
d.  All remarks and questions addressed to the council shall be addressed to the council as a whole and not to any individual member thereof. 
e.  No staff member, other than a staff member having the floor, shall enter into any discussion either directly or indirectly without permission of the presiding officer. 
(3)  Citizens: 
a.  Citizens and other visitors are welcome to attend all public meetings of the city council, and will be admitted to the city council chamber or other room in which the city council is meeting, up to the fire safety capacity of the room. 
b.  All meeting attendees shall conduct themselves with propriety and decorum. Conversations between or among audience members should be conducted outside the meeting room. Attendees will refrain from excessively loud private conversations while the council is in session. 
c.  Unauthorized remarks from the audience, stamping of the feet, applauding, whistles, yells, and similar demonstrations shall not be permitted. 
d.  Placards, banners, signs, pamphlets, flyers, or political materials of any type will not be permitted in the city council chamber or in any other room in which the city council is meeting. Exhibits, displays, and visual aids used in connection with presentations to the city council, however, are permitted. 
e.  Audience members may not place their feet on any chairs in the city council chamber or other room in which the city council is meeting. 
f.  Only city council members and city staff may step onto the dais. 
g.  All people wishing to address the city council shall first be recognized by the presiding officer and shall limit their remarks to the matter under discussion. 
h.  All remarks and questions addressed to the city council shall be addressed to the city council as a whole and not to any individual members. 
i.  Any person addressing the city council in the city council chamber shall do so from the lectern unless physically unable to do so. People addressing the city council shall not be permitted to approach the dais. If they wish to hand out papers or other materials to the city council, they should express that desire to the presiding officer, and the city manager shall direct a staff member to hand out the materials. 
j.  When the time has expired for a presentation to the city council, the presiding officer shall direct the person speaking to cease. A second request from the presiding officer to cease speaking shall be cause of the removal of the speaker if that person continues to speak. 
k.  Equipment, apparatus, or paraphernalia such as camera tripods, easels, or wheelchairs shall not obstruct, block, or otherwise be located in the doorway, entranceway, or walkways of the city council chambers or of any other room in which the city council may choose to meet. Representatives of the electronic media may set up cameras and other equipment only in the back of the room. It is permissible for television camera operators to film for short periods of time (several minutes) from the entranceway to the city council chambers. Any radio station, which broadcasts the regular city council meetings live, may hook their equipment up at the front of the room as long as it remains out of sight and out of the way. 
l.  There will be a uniformed City of Denton police officer present at all regular meetings of the city council. This police officer shall act in the capacity of a security officer/sergeant-at-arms, and shall enforce the meeting rules and act upon the direction of the presiding officer. 
m.  Any person making personal, impertinent, profane, or slanderous remarks, or who becomes boisterous while addressing the city council or who otherwise violates any of the above-mentioned rules while attending a city council meeting shall be removed from the room at the direction of the presiding officer, and the person shall be barred from further audience before the city council during that session of the city council. If the presiding officer fails to act, any member of the city council may move to require the offending person's removal, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the city council shall require the presiding officer to act. The sergeant-at-arms, if so directed by the presiding officer or an affirmative vote of the majority of the city council, shall remove the offending person from the meeting. 
(4)  Enforcement: The city manager, in the absence of a designated law enforcement officer, shall act as sergeant at arms for the council, and shall furnish whatever assistance is needed to enforce the rules of decorum herein established. 
(5)  Seating arrangement: The city secretary, city manager and city attorney shall occupy the respective seats in the council chamber assigned to them by the mayor, but any two (2) or more members of the council may exchange seats. 
(6)  Videoconferencing: City council members may elect to participate in a city council meeting by videoconference in the event the member is traveling or unable to attend a meeting due to illness. 
a.  Procedures for meeting by videoconference if a quorum will be in one physical location: 
The council meeting notice shall specify where the quorum of the governmental body will be physically present, and the intent to have a quorum present at that location. The video and audio feed of a remote councilmember or employee shall be broadcast live at the meeting. Each portion of the meeting held by videoconference call that is required to be open to the public shall be visible and audible to the public at the location where the quorum is present. The location at which the quorum is present, and each remote location from which a member of the governmental body participates, shall have two-way audio and video communication with each other location during the entire meeting. Each participant's face in the videoconference call, while speaking, shall be clearly visible and audible to each other participant and, during the open portion of the meeting, to the members of the public in attendance at the location where a quorum is present, and at any other location of the meeting that is open to the public. The audio and video signals perceptible by members of the public at each location of the meeting shall meet or exceed minimum standards established by Texas Department of Information Resources (DIR) rules. The audio and video signals perceptible by members of the public at the location where the quorum is present and, any other location open to the public, shall be of sufficient quality so that members of the public at each location can observe the demeanor and hear the voice of each participant in the open portion of the meeting. If a problem occurs that causes a meeting to no longer be visible and audible to the public at the location where a quorum is present, the meeting shall be recessed until the problem is resolved, and if the problem is not resolved in six hours or less, the meeting shall be adjourned. The city shall make at least an audio recording of the meeting, and the recording shall be made available to the public. 
b.  Procedures for meeting by videoconference if a quorum will not be in one physical location: 
The city shall make available to the public at least one suitable physical space in the city that is equipped with videoconference equipment that provides an audio and video display, as well as a camera and microphone, by which a member of the public can provide testimony or otherwise participate in the meeting. The member of the governmental body presiding over the meeting shall be present at this site, and the location must be open to the public. The meeting notice shall specify the physical space provided, and shall also specify the intent to have the presiding officer present at the location. Any member of the public present at this location shall be provided the opportunity to participate in the meeting by means of a videoconference call in the same manner as a person who is physically present at a meeting of the governmental body that is not conducted by videoconference. 
Each portion of the meeting held by videoconference call that is required to be open to the public shall be visible and audible to the public. The video and audio feed of a remote councilmember or employee shall be broadcast live at the meeting. The site provided in the city and each remote location from which a member participates, shall have two-way audio and video communication with each member who is participating by videoconference during the entire meeting. Each participant's face in the videoconference, while speaking, must be clearly visible and audible to each other participant and, during the open portion of the meeting, to the members of the public in attendance at the meeting location in the city, and at any other location of the meeting that may be open to the public. The audio and video signals perceptible by members of the public at each location of the meeting shall meet or exceed minimum standards established by DIR rules. The audio and video signals perceptible by members of the public at each location of the meeting that is open to the public, and each remote location, must be of sufficient quality so that members of the public at each location can observe the demeanor and hear the voice of each participant in the open portion of the meeting. If a problem occurs that causes the meeting to no longer be visible and audible to the public at the meeting site in the city, the meeting must be recessed until the problem is resolved, and if the problem is not resolved in six hours or less, the meeting shall be adjourned. The city shall make at least an audio recording of the meeting, and the recording shall be made available to the public. 
c.  Council members wishing to participate in a meeting by videoconference shall provide notice to the city manager and the agenda committee not less than seven (7) days prior to the meeting. 
(d)  Types of meetings. 
(1)  Regular meetings: The council shall meet on the first and third Tuesday of each month, at such time as may be set by the city council, unless the meeting is postponed or cancelled for valid reasons. All regular meetings of the council will be held in City Hall at 215 East McKinney Street, Denton, Texas or at such other location as the city council may, from time to time by proper posting under the Open Meetings Act and so long as the location is open to the public, designate. In the event a regular meeting falls on a day the city observes a paid holiday, or the day after, no regular meeting shall be scheduled. Furthermore, no regular meetings shall be held the first two weeks in July, nor the last two weeks of November and December. The limitations in this provision do not apply to other types of meetings which may be called under section 2-29(d). 
(2)  Special meetings: Special meetings may be called by the mayor, the city manager, or by any three (3) members of the council. The city secretary shall post notice thereof as provided by the Texas Open Meetings Act. The mayor, city manager, or three (3) of the council members may designate a location for the special meeting other than City Hall, as long as the location is open to the public. 
(3)  Workshop meetings: Workshop meetings (also referred to as "work sessions") may be held on the first and third Tuesday of each month at such time as may be set by the city council, or on such other day as the city council may designate and at such time as may be set by the city council, to discuss near to mid or long range issues and to answer city council questions concerning all agenda items. Workshops or work sessions may be called using the same procedure required for special meetings as provided for in subsection (2) above. The purpose of the workshop meeting is to discuss or explore matters of interest to the city, to meet with city boards, commissions, or committee members, city staff or officers of civic organizations, governing bodies or individuals specifically invited to the session by the mayor, council or city manager. These meetings are informational and normally no final action shall be taken unless the posted agenda indicates otherwise. However, the city council may, by consensus, provide general direction to staff with regard to matters of interest or concern, understanding such matters ultimately may require a formal vote of the council for implementation. 
(4)  Luncheon meetings: Luncheon workshop or work session meetings may be held on the first Monday of each month at such time as may be set by the city council, or on such other day as the city council may designate. Such meetings may be called using the same procedure required for special meetings as provided for in subsection (2) above. The purpose of the luncheon meeting is to discuss or explore matters of interest to the city, to meet with city boards, commissions, or committee members, city staff or officers of civic organizations, governing bodies or individuals specifically invited to the session by the mayor, council or city manager. These meetings are informational and normally no final action shall be taken unless the posted agenda indicates otherwise. However, the city council may, by consensus, provide general direction to staff with regard to matters of interest or concern, understanding such matters ultimately may require a formal vote of the council for implementation. 
(5)  Emergency meetings: In case of emergency or urgent public necessity, which shall be expressed in the notice of the meeting, an emergency meeting may be called by the mayor, the city manager or by three (3) members of the council, and it shall be sufficient if the notice is posted two (2) hours before the meeting is convened. 
(6)  Closed meetings: The council may meet in a closed meeting pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(7)  Recessed meetings: Any meeting of the council may be recessed to a later time, provided that no recess shall be for a longer period than until the next business day. 
(8)  Notice of meetings: The agenda for all meetings, including council committee or subcommittee meetings, shall be posted by the city secretary on the city's official bulletin board and notice of all meetings shall be given by the city secretary pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(e)  Presiding officer and duties. 
(1)  Presiding officer: The mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro-tem, shall preside as chairman, or presiding officer at all meetings of the council. In the absence of the mayor and the mayor pro-tem, the council shall elect a temporary presiding officer. (Charter, Section 2.03) 
(2)  Call to order: The meetings of the council shall be called to order by the mayor, or in his or her absence, by the mayor pro-tem. In the absence of both the mayor and the mayor pro-tem, the meeting shall be called to order by the city secretary, and a temporary presiding officer shall be elected as provided above. 
(3)  Preservation of order: The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, and confine members in debate to the question under discussion. The presiding officer shall call upon the sergeant-at-arms as necessary to enforce compliance with the rules contained herein. 
(4)  Points of order: The presiding officer shall determine all points of order, subject to the right of any member to appeal to the council. If any appeal is taken, the question shall be, "Shall the decision of the presiding officer be sustained?" If a majority of the members present vote "No," the ruling of the chair is overruled; otherwise, it is sustained. 
(5)  Questions to be stated: The presiding officer shall state all questions submitted for a vote and announce the result. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member, and upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions. 
(6)  Substitution for presiding officer: The presiding officer may call any other member to take his or her place in the chair, such substitution not to continue beyond adjournment. 
(7)  Call for recess: The presiding officer may call for a recess of up to fifteen (15) minutes at regular intervals of approximately one hour at appropriate points in the meeting agenda, or if requested by any two (2) members. 
(f)  Order of business. 
(1)  Agenda: The order of business of each meeting shall be as contained in the agenda prepared by the city manager, which shall be reviewed and approved by an agenda committee composed of the mayor, the mayor pro-tem, and the city manager. When items are removed from the consent agenda and placed on the regular agenda by members of the council, the removed items shall be taken up in the order of removal right after the consent agenda. Placement of items on the agenda shall be governed by this ordinance; provided that if a council member has an "emergency" item that the council member believes should be placed on the next regular or special meeting agenda, the placement must be approved by two members of the agenda committee or at the direction of a majority of the council. Conduct of business at special meetings will likewise be governed by an agenda and these rules of procedure. 
(2)  Pledge of Allegiance: Each agenda shall provide an item for the recital of the "Pledge of Allegiance" at the regularly scheduled city council meetings. This item shall begin with the recital of the pledge of allegiance for the United States flag and shall follow with a recital of the pledge of allegiance for the Texas state flag in accordance with V.T.C.A. Government Code § 3100.101. 
(3)  Presentations by members of council or city manager: The agenda shall provide a time when the mayor or any council member may bring before the council any business that he or she feels should be deliberated upon by the council at a future council meeting. These matters need not be specifically listed on the agenda, but discussion and formal action on such matters shall be deferred until a subsequent council meeting. Any member may suggest an item for discussion at a future work session. The city manager or city staff shall only respond preliminarily on this item at the work session. If the city council believes the item requires a more detailed review, the council will give the city manager or city staff direction to place the item on a future regular meeting agenda and advise staff as to the background materials to be desired at such meeting. The city council may receive from the city manager or city staff or a member of the city council reports about items of community interest including expressions of thanks, congratulations, or condolence; information regarding holiday schedules; an honorary or salutary recognition of a public official, public employee, or other citizen, except that a discussion regarding a change in the status of a person's public office or public employment is not an honorary or salutary recognition for purposes of this subdivision; a reminder about an upcoming event organized or sponsored by the governing body; information regarding a social, ceremonial, or community event organized or sponsored by an entity other than the governing body that was attended or is scheduled to be attended by a member of the governing body or an official or employee of the municipality; and announcements involving an imminent threat to the public health and safety of people in the municipality that has arisen after the posting of the agenda so long as authorized by the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(4)  Presentations from members of the public: 
a.  Reports from members of the public: Reports from members of the public shall be received through two (2) methods: 1) prior registration or 2) open microphone. A total of up to seven (7) speakers are permitted to provide public comment and may include any combination of prior registration and open microphone speakers. Public comment is provided during regular meetings of the city council, which typically occur on the first and third Tuesday of each month. 
1)  Prior registration. Any person who wishes to place a subject on the council agenda at regular council meetings shall advise the city manager's office of that fact and the specified subject matter which he or she desires to place on the agenda no later than 12:00 p.m. Thursday prior to the council meeting at which he or she wishes the designated subject to be considered. Such reports shall be heard at the beginning of the regular meeting of the city council pursuant to an agenda posting allowing a period of public comment. 
Each speaker providing a report shall speak for no longer than four (4) minutes. At the conclusion of each report, council may pose questions to the speaker concerning his or her report. Council may also engage in discussion concerning each report. If the city council believes that a speaker's report requires a more detailed review, the council will give the city manager or city staff direction to place the item on a future work session or regular meeting agenda and advise staff as to the background materials to be desired at such meeting. 
2)  Open microphone. At the beginning of the regular meeting of the city council, persons who have not registered to speak as above described may make comments through the open microphone procedure. Such person(s) shall have filed a "Blue Card" requesting to speak during this period prior to the calling of this agenda item. At the time the city council calls the Open Microphone comment period, a person may present himself or herself and make public comments regarding public business; provided however, such persons shall not be allowed to speak to items on the current agenda in light of other established procedures for taking such comments as specified in these rules. 
No person may fill out a "request to speak" form in order to speak or comment on another person's report, which is given at the same council meeting. An announcement may be made, prior to the time for reports from members of the public on the agenda, summarizing the main portions of the rules and the "code of conduct" as they may apply to members of the public speaking to the council. Any speaker providing a report shall speak for no longer than four (4) minutes on all items that he or she may bring before the council at each meeting. 
b.  Work session or workshop items: As it concerns the workshop agenda, citizens or other interested persons may not participate in the session unless invited to do so by the mayor. If the mayor invites citizens to participate in a work session, their participation will cease at the point the mayor closes the session to public input to allow the council to give city staff direction as to needed information for the possible future meeting on the item. Citizens should be advised of the nature of the work session, but that their input on these items is premature until such item is placed upon a city council agenda for final action. The purpose of this procedure is to allow the citizens attending the regular meeting the opportunity of hearing the views of their fellow citizens in a more formal setting. Any citizen may supply the city council a written statement or report regarding the citizen's opinion on a matter being discussed in a work session. 
c.  Speaking on consent and regular agenda items: Any person who wishes to address the council regarding a non-public hearing regular or consent agenda item that is on the council's agenda, shall complete a "request to speak" form asking to speak regarding the item and shall return it to the city secretary. On consent items, the request to speak card shall be submitted prior to the citizen comment on consent agenda items at the beginning of the city council meeting. On regular agenda items, the request to speak card shall be submitted prior to the time the city council considers the item. The mayor will call upon the person who desires to speak. 
1)  Consent agenda items: When consent agenda items are posted on an agenda, citizens or other interested persons will be allowed to make citizen comment immediately after the opening of the city council meeting and prior to workshop or work session items on the agenda by filling out a "request to speak" card (aka a "blue card") asking to speak on any or all consent agenda items and returning the form to the city secretary. In the event a person is unable to attend the city council workshop or work session, he or she may contact the city secretary prior to the opening of the meeting and request that a consent agenda item be pulled from the consent agenda in order to allow comment as an individual item at the regular meeting of the city council. The city secretary shall make any such request known to the city council. Consent agenda items are generally routine nature, so comment at this time facilitates the regular council meeting where no citizen comment on consent agenda items will be permitted, unless the item is removed from the consent agenda by a member of the council to be considered as an individual item during the regular meeting. Speakers will be allowed three (3) minutes per speaker and may comment on any or all consent agenda items so long as any speaker's time does not exceed a total of three (3) minutes. 
2)  Regular agenda items: During the regular session of the city council meeting, any citizen or interested person may comment on an item posted on the agenda for final action. Any person who wishes to address the council regarding a non-public hearing item that is on the council's agenda, shall complete a "request to speak" form asking to speak regarding the item and shall return it to the city secretary before the council considers the item. This procedure applies to speakers desiring to speak to items for individual consideration on the agenda during the regular meeting of the city council. The mayor will call upon the person to speak. Speakers will be allowed three (3) minutes per speaker as to any particular agenda item being considered by the city council. 
d.  Public hearings: 
1)  Any person who wishes to address the council at a public hearing is encouraged to complete a "request to speak" form and return it to the city secretary before the applicable hearing. The mayor will call upon the person to speak. Speakers will be allowed up to four (4) minutes per speaker as to speak on any public hearing item. However, if numerous speakers desire to comment on an item, council may limit speakers to three (3) minutes per speaker. Only those speakers who previously provided input on a specific item will be permitted to provide a final rebuttal of up to two (2) minutes per speaker. Applicants and their agents on public hearing items shall be allowed to speak for no longer than ten (10) minutes per speaker with a total of twenty (20) minutes for all speakers representing the applicant. Speakers will have the opportunity to make a single, final rebuttal after hearing the applicant's rebuttal as set forth in section 2-29(f)(4)d.2)g). 
2)  To facilitate the public hearing process in zoning cases the following procedure will be used: 
a)  The mayor reads the zoning case caption, and then opens the public hearing. 
b)  The city manager introduces the city staff for presentation. 
c)  City staff presents facts relevant to the matter. 
d)  The applicant presents his or her case, with potential questions of the applicant from the city council. 
e)  The council receives input from the public, with potential questions of speakers from the city council. 
f)  The applicant will be given an opportunity to make rebuttal comments. 
g)  Members of the public who previously provided input on a specific item will have the opportunity to make a single, final rebuttal. 
h)  The city staff and/or the applicant will answer any questions of the city council. 
i)  Upon conclusion of these questions and answers, the mayor will continue or close the public hearing. 
e.  Groups or organizations: Any group or organization comprised of four (4) or more members present in the city council chambers who wishes to address the council at a public hearing or on a non-public hearing agenda item shall designate a representative to address the city council and shall limit their remarks to ten (10) minutes or less. The group or organization shall turn in a written designation to the city secretary, on cards prepared by the city secretary of a different color from cards submitted by individual speakers, prior to the commencement of the meeting identifying the representative who will address the city council on behalf of the group or organization. At the time the representative is recognized by the mayor to speak, the group or organization will be asked to stand to be recognized prior to the receipt of comments by the representative. 
f.  Discretionary time: At the discretion of the presiding officer or a majority of the city council, any speaker may be granted an extension of time to speak. 
g.  Audio/Visual aids: Any citizen desiring to use audio/visual aids during presentations to council shall submit such presentation to the city secretary twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting where the presentation will occur. 
h.  Use of a translator: Any member of the public addressing the city council through a translator will be given twice the amount of time to present to the council as a member of the public who does not require the assistance of a translator. 
(5)  Presentation of proclamations: The agenda may provide a time for the presentation of proclamations. The mayor or presiding officer may deliver and present proclamations upon the request of citizens. Proclamations may encompass any activity or theme except that proclamations with a theme religious or partisan in nature shall not be presented. Moreover, proclamations shall not be used for any commercial or advertising purpose. 
(g)  Consideration of ordinances, resolutions, and motions. 
(1)  Printed or typewritten form: All ordinances and resolutions shall be presented to the council in printed, typewritten or electronic form. The council may, by proper motion, amend any ordinance or resolution presented to it at the meeting at which it is presented or direct that the amended ordinance be placed on the next or any future council agenda for adoption. 
(2)  City attorney to approve: All ordinances, resolutions, and contracts and amendments thereto, shall be approved as to form and legality by the city attorney, or he or she shall file a written opinion on the legality of such ordinance, resolution or contract prior to submission to the council. (Charter, Section 6.02) 
(3)  Distribution of ordinances and resolutions: The city manager shall prepare copies of all proposed ordinances and resolutions for distribution to all members of the council at the meeting at which the ordinance or resolution is introduced, or at such earlier time as is expedient. 
(4)  Recording of votes: The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and the vote of each member shall be recorded in the minutes and within each respective ordinance and resolution. (Charter, Section 2.06 (b)) 
(5)  Majority vote required: An affirmative vote of four (4) members is necessary to repeal any ordinance or take any official action in the name of the city except as otherwise provided in the Charter, by the laws of the State of Texas, or these rules. (Charter, Section 2.06) 
a.  Tie-vote: 
1.  City council: Matters voted on by the city council which end in a tie-vote due to absence(s) shall automatically be placed on each subsequent council meeting agenda until the full council is present or the matter does not end in a tie-vote. Matters voted on by the city council when the full council is present, which end in a tie-vote due to recusal(s) shall be considered a denial. 
2.  Boards, commissions, and committees: With the exception of the planning and zoning commission, matters voted on by boards, commissions, and committees, which end in a tie-vote, regardless of the cause, shall be considered a denial. This provision applies to all task forces, ad hoc committees, or other limited duration groups established by the city council. 
i.  The Denton Development Code outlines the process for city council review and decision of any recommendations made by the planning and zoning commission. 
(6)  Demand for roll call: Upon demand of any member, the roll shall be called for yeas and nays upon any question before the council, with the exception of those circumstances set forth in subsection (12), the previous question. It shall not be in order for members to explain their vote during the roll call. 
(7)  Personal privilege: The right of a member to address the Council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his or her integrity, character, or motives are assailed, questioned, or impugned. 
(8)  Dissents and protests: Any member shall have the right to express dissent from or protest against any ordinance or resolution of the council and have the reason therefor entered upon the minutes. Such dissent or protest may be filed in writing, and presented to the council not later than the next regular meeting following the date of passage of the ordinance or resolution objected to. 
(9)  Voting required: No member shall be excused from voting except for lack of information and except on matters involving the consideration of his or her own official conduct, or where his or her personal interests are involved in accordance with V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 171 (Vernon 2014), and in these instances he or she shall abstain. Any member prohibited from voting by personal interest shall announce this at the commencement of consideration of the matter and shall not enter into discussion or debate on any such matter, shall leave the meeting room, and shall file an affidavit of recusal. The member having briefly stated the reason for his or her request, the excuse from voting shall be made without debate. 
(10)  Order of precedence of motions: 
a.  The following motions shall have priority in the order indicated: 
1.  Adjourn (when unqualified) and is not debatable and may not be amended; 
2.  Take a recess (when privileged); 
3.  Raise a question of privilege; 
4.  Lay on the table; 
5.  Previous question (? vote required); 
6.  Limit or extend limits of debate (? vote required); 
7.  Postpone to a certain time; 
8.  Commit or refer; 
9.  Amend; 
10.  Postpone indefinitely; 
11.  Main motion. 
b.  The first two motions are not always privileged. To adjourn shall lose its privilege character and be a main motion if in any way qualified. To take a recess shall be privileged only when other business is pending. 
c.  A motion to adjourn is not in order: 
1.  When repeated without intervening business or discussion; 
2.  When made as an interruption of a member while speaking; 
3.  While a vote is being taken. 
d.  Only certain motions may be amended as provided in the most current edition of Robert's Rules of Order, revised. A motion to amend shall be undebatable when the question to be amended is undebatable. 
(11)  Reconsideration: A motion to reconsider any action of the council can be made not later than the next succeeding official meeting of the council. Such a motion can only be made by a member who voted with the prevailing side. It can be seconded by any member. In order to comply with the Texas Open Meetings Act, any council member who wishes to make such a motion at a meeting succeeding the meeting where the action was taken shall notify the city manager to place the item for reconsideration on the council agenda. No question shall be twice reconsidered, except by unanimous consent of the council, except that action related to any contract may be reconsidered at any time before the final execution thereof. A matter which was not timely reconsidered in the manner provided by this section or was reconsidered but the action originally taken was not changed by the council cannot be reintroduced to the council or placed on a council meeting agenda for a period of six (6) months unless this rule is suspended as provided for in these rules of procedure. 
(12)  The previous question: When the previous question is moved and seconded, it shall be put as follows: "Shall the main question be now put?". There shall then be no further amendment or debate; except that nothing herein shall allow the previous question to be called prior to a least one opportunity for each member of the council to speak on the question before the council. Any pending amendments shall be put in their order before the main question. If the motion for the previous question is lost, the main question remains before the council. An affirmative vote of ? of the council shall be required to move the previous question. To demand the previous question is equivalent in effect to moving "That debate now cease, and the council shall immediately proceed to vote on the pending motion". In practice, this is done with the phrase "Call for the question", or simply saying "Question". 
(13)  Withdrawal of motions: A motion may be withdrawn, or modified, by its movant without asking permission until the motion has been stated by the presiding officer. If the movant modifies his or her motion, the seconding council member may withdraw his or her second. After the question has been stated, the movant shall neither withdraw it nor modify it without the consent of the council. The subject different from that under consideration shall be admitted under color of amendment. A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be in order. 
(14)  Appropriations of money: Before formal approval by the council of motions providing for appropriation of money, information must be presented to the council showing purpose of the appropriation. In addition, before finally acting on such an appropriation, the council shall obtain a report from the city manager as to the availability of funds and his or her recommendations as to the desirability of the appropriation. 
(15)  Transfer of appropriations: At the request of the city manager, at any time during the fiscal year, the council may by resolution transfer an unencumbered balance of an appropriation made for the use of one department, division, or purpose; but no transfer shall be made of revenues or earnings of any non-tax supported public utility to any other purpose. 
(h)  Creation of committees, boards and commissions. 
(1)  Council committees: The council may, by resolution and as the need arises, authorize the appointment of council committees. Any committee so created shall cease to exist when abolished by resolution of the council. Council committees shall comply with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(2)  Citizen boards, commissions, and committees: The council may create other citizen boards, commissions, and committees to assist in the conduct of the operation of the city government with such duties as the council may specify not inconsistent with the City Charter or Code. Creation of such boards, commissions, and committees and memberships and selection of members shall be by council resolution if not otherwise specified by the City Charter or Code. Any board, commission, or committee so created shall cease to exist when abolished by a resolution approved by the council. No committee so appointed shall have powers other than advisory to the council or to the city manager, except as otherwise specified by the Charter or Code. All citizen boards, commissions, and committees shall comply with the procedural requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. Any reference in this article to "citizen boards, commissions, and committees" includes citizen task forces and citizen ad hoc boards, commissions, and committees unless otherwise indicated herein. 
(3)  Appointments: 
a.  Individual city council members making nominations for members to citizen boards, commissions, and committees will consider interested persons on a citywide basis. 
b.  The city council will make an effort to be inclusive of all segments of the community in the board, commission, and committee appointment process. City council members will consider ethnicity, gender, socio-economic levels, and other factors to ensure a diverse representation of Denton citizens. 
c.  The city council will take into consideration an individual's qualifications, willingness to serve, and application information in selecting nominations for membership to each board, commission, and committee. 
d.  In an effort to ensure maximum citizen participation, city council members will continue the general practice of nominating new citizens to replace board members who have served three (3) consecutive terms on the same board per the provisions of Denton Code of Ordinances, section 2-65. This provision does not apply to citizen task forces and citizen ad hoc committees. 
e.  Each city council member will be responsible for making nominations for board, committee, and commission places assigned to him or her, which shall correspond to the city council member's place. Individual city council members will make nominations to the full city council for the governing body's approval or disapproval. 
(4)  Rules of procedure: 
a.  All board, commission, and committee members, including citizen board, commission, and committee members, shall comply with the provisions of article II of chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. All board, commission and committee members, including citizen board, commission, and committee members, shall be provided a copy of these rules of procedure and a copy of the City of Denton Handbook for Boards, Commissions and Committees, which shall govern operational procedures of all boards, commissions and committees, including citizen boards, commissions, and committees. All boards, commissions, and committees, including citizen boards, commissions and committees, shall comply with these rules as to the preparation of minutes of meetings, and such minutes shall be prepared in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city secretary. 
b.  All citizen board, commission, and committee members shall comply with the procedural requirements of the V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code Chapter 551, also known as the "Texas Open Meetings Act" as they appear now or may be amended in the future. Notice of all meetings shall be posted in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and minutes and records will be maintained in accordance with requirements of the city secretary's office. Each citizen board, commission, and committee member shall be provided a copy of the Texas Open Meetings Act. Penalty provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act shall only apply to citizen boards, commissions, and committees with rule making or quasi-judicial power, as set forth in the Texas Open Meetings Act and as interpreted by Texas Courts. 
c.  Unless otherwise provided by law, each board, commission, or committee, shall adopt a regular meeting schedule by no later than the body's first meeting of the calendar year. All regular meeting schedules shall be sent to the city secretary's office for official record keeping purposes upon adoption. Regular meeting schedules should include all planned meetings the body intends to have during the calendar year. 
(i)  Votes required. Questions on which the voting requirement is varied by the Charter, State Statutes and these rules are listed below: 
(1)  Charter and state statutory requirements: 
a.  Charter amendment—Five (5) votes: Ordinances submitting proposed Charter amendments must be adopted by a two-thirds (?) vote of the council. (TEX. CONST. art. XI, § 3 and V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 9 (Vernon 2014.)) For a seven-member council, this means five (5) members must vote affirmatively. 
b.  Levying taxes—Five (5) votes: Ordinances providing for the assessment and collection of certain taxes require the approval of two-thirds (?) of the members of the council (V.T.C.A. Tax Code § 302.101 (Vernon 2014)). 
c.  Changing paving assessment plans—Five (5) votes: Changes in plans for paving assessment require a two-thirds (?) vote of the council (V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 313.053(e) (Vernon 2014)). 
d.  Changes in zoning ordinance or zoning classifications: In cases of a written protest of a change in a zoning regulation or zoning classification by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of the lots immediately adjoining the same and extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (¾) of all members of the city council; further, three-fourths (¾) of all the members of the city council is required to override the decision of the planning and zoning commission that a zoning change be denied (V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 211.066 (Vernon 2014)) and section 35.3.4.C.(4) Denton City Code (Development Code)). ("All" members of the city council is construed to mean all who are qualified to vote on a matter, and any legal disqualification of a member could change the requisite number of votes required for passage. City of Alamo Heights v. Gerety et al., 264 S.W. 2d 778 (Ct. App. — San Antonio (1954)). 
e.  Amendment of tax abatement policy: The guidelines and criteria adopted as the city's tax abatement policy may be amended or repealed by a vote of three-fourths (¾) of all members of the city council (V.T.C.A. Tax Code § 312.002(c) (Vernon 2014)). 
(j)  Severability clause. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this section, or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance, and the City Council of the City of Denton, Texas, hereby declares it would have enacted such remaining portions despite any such invalidity. 
(Ord. No. 2001-193, § 1, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 2001-204, § 1, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 2002-018, § 1, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 2003-235, § 1, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 2003-373, §§ 1(6.3), 2; Ord. No. 2004-033, § 1(6.4b., c.), 1(6.5), 2-3-04; Ord. No. 2004-182, § 1, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2004-298, § 2, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2005-174, § 1, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2006-175, § 1, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 2008-159, § 1, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2009-174, § 1, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2010-258, § 1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 2010-312, § 1, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2011-038, § 1, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 2015-231, § 1, 8-4-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-197 , § 1, 7-19-16; Ord. No. 2018-551 , § 2, 4-17-18; Ord. No. 2018-574 , § 2, 4-17-18; Ord. No. 2018-1376 , § 2(Att. A), 8-28-18; Ord. No. 2019-2128 , § 1, 9-17-19; Ord. No. 19-2862 , § 1, 1-28-20; Ord. No. 19-2863 , § 1, 1-28-20; Ord. No. 19-2864 , § 1, 1-28-20; Ord. No. 19-2865 , § 1, 1-28-20; Ord. No. 20-229 , § 1, 1-28-20)  
Sec. 2-30. - City council requests for information or work sessions. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  For purposes of section 2-30 the following definitions apply: 
a.  "Request for information." Requests made by a member of the city council to seek clarification on board, commission, committee or city council agenda items; address perceived service issues, infrastructure maintenance, or construction concerns caused by or impacting city operations and/or the quality of life for Denton residents; and requests for policy-related research to evaluate policies implemented by other agencies and/or assess the impact a new policy or potential program may have if implemented by the City of Denton. 
b.  "City staff." Includes employees of the City of Denton consisting of, or reporting to, the city manager or city attorney. 
(b)  City council requests for information from city staff. 
(1)  All city council requests for information from city staff, must be submitted to the city manager's office via email and include at a minimum, the following details: 
a.  Request type; 
b.  Purpose; 
c.  Time sensitivity; and 
d.  Preferred response format. 
(2)  The city manager's office and/or the city attorney's office will estimate the amount of time required to respond to each request. 
(3)  Requests estimated to take more than a total of two hours to complete will be brought forward within the next 30 calendar days, to a city council work session to seek consensus from the full city council regarding the use of city staff time to fulfill the request. Requests for information referred to a work session will follow the procedures provided in subsection (b) of section 2-30. 
(c)  City council requests for information referred to a work session. 
(1)  A standing work session item will be added to each city council agenda for city council requests to be considered. 
a.  The requesting council member will be required to provide a clear, written explanation describing the reason for the information requested. This description will be included as an attachment to the work session agenda materials and must be provided to the city secretary in time to fully comply with Texas Open Meeting Act requirements. 
(2)  During the work session, the requesting council member will have a maximum of one minute to describe and justify their request. 
a.  Remaining council members will then have a maximum of one minute each to provide feedback and indicate their support for the use of city staff time to respond to the request. 
(3)  City staff will respond to all requests where a consensus of at least four elected officials is established. Each elected official will also have the option to request city staff respond to a maximum of two requests per quarter where a consensus is not met, provided each request in this category is not estimated to take more than a total of ten city staff hours to complete. To the extent possible, responses will be made in the requested format including informal staff reports, legal status reports, city council work session topics, or ordinances and resolutions to be considered on future city council agendas. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2026 , § 1, 8-27-19)  
Secs. 2-31—2-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 14.16. 
Cross reference— Library board, § 2-176 et seq.; downtown development advisory board, § 2-211 et seq.; beautification advisory commission, § 2-241 et seq.; airport advisory board, § 3-2; animal shelter advisory committee, § 6-5 et seq.; cable TV advisory board, § 8-130; human services committee, § 11-61 et seq.; park and recreation board, § 22-1; development review committee, § 34-6; board of adjustment, § 35-41 et seq.; historic landmark commission, § 35-236 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-46—2-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERS 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Requirements generally. 
Each member of a board or commission, in addition to qualifications prescribed by federal or state law or ordinance, shall be a qualified voter of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 1-21(a); Ord. No. 93-140, § I, 8-3-93)  
Sec. 2-62. - Conflict of interest. 
A member of a board or commission of the city having a substantial interest in a business entity or real property, as those terms are defined in chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code as it now reads or may hereafter be amended, shall comply with chapter 171 and, if necessary, shall abstain from voting on a matter involving the business entity or real property and file an affidavit setting forth the substantial interest in the matter to be voted upon. 
(Code 1966, § 1-22; Ord. No. 96-154, § II, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 99-268, § 1, 8-3-99) 
Charter reference— Personal interest of officers and employees, § 14.04. 
State Law reference— Conflict of interest, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2-63. - Removal from office. 
Should a board or commission member cease to meet the qualifications prescribed in section 2-61 or 2-62, if applicable, or should such member be convicted of a felony during his term of service, such failure or conviction, as the case may be, shall be cause for removal. 
(Code 1966, § 1-23)  
Sec. 2-64. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to task forces, ad hoc committees or other commissions established by the city council from time to time to make recommendations with respect to a particular subject or issue and which are not intended to be permanent in nature. 
(Code 1966, § 1-24)  
Sec. 2-65. - Term of office. 
No board or commission member shall be eligible for appointment to a board or commission for more than three (3) consecutive terms on such board or commission. A board or commission member who has served three (3) consecutive terms shall not be eligible for reappointment to that same board or commission for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 93-140, § II, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 93-212, § I, 11-16-93)  
Secs. 2-66—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RULES AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Definition. 
The word "board," "boards," "commission" or "commissions," as used in this division, shall be construed to mean any managerial, administrative or quasi-judicial body of persons which has an advisory or deliberative character and whose members are appointed by or serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 1-42) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-82. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall govern and control the rules, procedures and operation of all boards and the removal of members thereof; provided, however, wherever any provision of the state constitution, state statutes, the Charter or a city ordinance conflicts or is inconsistent with any provision of this division, the conflicting or inconsistent provision of this division shall not be applicable. 
(Code 1966, § 1-43)  
Sec. 2-83. - General rules. 
(a)  Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business of a board shall be a majority of the members appointed to the board. 
(b)  Voting required. No attending member of a board shall be excused or shall abstain from voting on any matter before the board on which a vote is called or required, except where a board member's personal interest is involved. When such member's personal interest is involved, such member shall announce such interest at the commencement of consideration of the matter, and such member shall not enter into discussion or debate on such matter and shall abstain from voting thereon and shall fill out an affidavit stating such interest in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code § 171.004. A member shall be considered to have a personal interest in a matter whenever any matter before the board could or does affect the member's financial interest. The phrase "financial interest" when used herein shall have the same meaning as "substantial interest in a business entity" as that phrase is defined in V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code § 171.002. 
Charter reference— Personal interest, § 14.04. 
(c)  Absences. Every board, commission, and committee member shall attend all regular scheduled meetings of the board, commission, or committee of which he or she is a member. For purposes of section 2-83(c), the phrase "board, commission, or committee" includes subcommittees, panels, ad hoc groups and task forces. Members who cannot attend the meeting must contact the chairperson or an appropriate staff liaison to report his or her absence before the start of the meeting and provide the reason why he or she is unable to attend the meeting. 
(1)  All absences will be categorized as either excused or unexcused, according to the following criteria: 
a.  Excused absences: An excused absence of any board, commission, committee member shall include the following: personal or family illness, death of a family member, jury duty, service in the armed forces, testifying before the legislature, attending a seminar involving municipal matters of importance to the member's duties, or an absence necessary for the member's business or employment. Members should submit documentation for the excused absence to the city secretary for approval. in the event the city secretary finds it is not clear whether an absence meets the criteria above, she shall promptly notify the member in writing, that if the member wants the absence excused they will be required to go through the process outlined in section 2-83(c)(1)b. 
b.  Request for absence to be excused: In the event the absence does not meet any of the above noted criteria for an excused absence, the member may submit a request to have the absence excused to the city secretary's office in writing no later than ten (10) business days after the date the absence occurred. The city secretary will then place an item on the next available city council agenda for their consideration, in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
c.  Unexcused absences: Any absence which does not qualify as an excused absence under another subsection herein shall be considered an unexcused absence. 
(2)  Calculating ten (10) business days: For purposes of calculating ten (10) business days, the "computation of time" provision in section 1-2 of the Denton Code of Ordinances shall apply. 
(3)  Absences resulting in cause for removal: An unexcused absence of any board, commission, committee, member from more than three (3) regularly called and scheduled meetings of which he or she is a member in any one (1) year, or lack of attendance at fifty (50) percent of the number of regular/scheduled meetings in a year, shall be considered "cause," as that term is used in Section 14.16 of the Charter, for removal by the city council. An office that has been vacated under the provisions of this section shall be filled for the remainder of the term using the standard appointment process. 
(4)  Reporting and violations: Attendance reports will be provided by boards, commissions, committees, subcommittees, or panels to the city council via the city secretary's office on a quarterly basis. The staff liaison shall immediately notify the city secretary's office of any member's violation of the attendance requirements and shall not wait until the quarterly reporting process. Copies of this ordinance shall be forwarded to existing members of all of the standing boards, commissions, committees, subcommittees, or panels and to new members as they are appointed. 
(Code 1966, § 1-44; Ord. No. 96-154, § III, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 00-046A, § 1, 2-1-00; Ord. No. 19-2866 , § 1, 1-28-20)  
Sec. 2-84. - Nominating and appointing members to certain boards. 
All nominations to the public utilities board and parks and recreation board shall be by procedures established by the city council to fairly allow each member of the city council an opportunity to nominate a member to each of these boards. All appointments to the public utilities board and parks and recreation board shall be by affirmative vote of four (4) members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 96-169, § I, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 99-268, § 2, 8-3-99)  
Secs. 2-85—2-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF PROPERTY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Finance and taxation generally, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Sale or lease of municipally owned property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 253.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Sales of personal property of the city. 
The purchasing agent of the city is authorized to sell worn-out, scrap, obsolete or unused personal property ("surplus property") other than items routinely discarded as waste, of the city by any of the following methods: 
(a)  A public auction held on-site or through utilization of the internet and conducted by an auctioneer licensed by the State of Texas. 
1.  All sales to be sold to the highest bidder unless determined by the purchasing agent to be not sufficient. In this instance, he may refuse the bid and hold the item(s) for sale at another time. 
2.  After determining the time and place for a public auction, the purchasing agent shall give notice of the auction by advertising in the official newspaper of the city for at least once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks. The date of the first publication must be before fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the auction and the second publication must be no sooner than seven (7) days prior to the auction or posting on the City of Denton website for a period of ten (10) days prior to the auction. 
(b)  Offer the property as a trade-in for new property of the same general type if the purchasing agent considers that action to be in the best interest of the city. 
(c)  Dispose of the property by donating it to a civic or charitable organization or another governmental entity, if allowed by law. However in such case, city council approval will be necessary unless the item has value of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Order any of the property to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as worthless, if the city undertakes to sell that property and is unable to do so because no bids are received. 
(e)  Competitive sealed bid following the guidelines of V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 252 for competitive bidding. 
(f)  For surplus property items having a value less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), the sale may be made at an advertised location where members of the public may purchase the item for not less than the amount received for a similar item at an auction held by the city within the preceding two (2) years. 
(Code 1966, § 20-1; Ord. No. 2008-113, § 2, 6-3-08)  
Sec. 2-107. - Impounded property. 
(a)  Authority to sell. If any impounded property remains unclaimed with the city for a period of thirty (30) days, whether or not the owner or lienholder is known, the city may utilize such property or it may be sold by the city in the manner provided by this section. Items of personal property, the sale of which is restricted by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.01 et seq., are not subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Method of sale. All sales of impounded property shall be by public auction and sold to the highest bidder. The director of purchasing shall conduct such auction sales, and if, in the opinion of the director of purchasing, the highest bid on a particular item is not sufficient, he may refuse the bid and hold the item for sale at another time. 
(c)  Time and place of sale; notice. After determining the time and place for a public auction, the director of purchasing shall give notice of the auction by: 
(1)  Advertising in the official newspaper of the city for three (3) consecutive days, the last publication date to be not less than seven (7) days immediately before the date of the auction; and 
(2)  Posting notice of such auction sale in three (3) public places within the city not less than seven (7) days immediately preceding the sale. 
The notice of the public auction shall contain the exact time and place of the auction and a description list of the property to be sold. 
(d)  Records; disposition of funds. The director of purchasing shall keep accurate records of all sales and shall submit reports to the department of finance and taxation containing: 
(1)  A descriptive list of all items sold; 
(2)  The time and place of the sale; and 
(3)  The price paid for the items. 
All funds received for sales must be delivered to the department of finance and taxation who shall deposit the funds to the credit of the appropriate fund. 
(e)  Purchase by officers and employees prohibited. An officer or employee of the city shall not, directly or indirectly, submit a bid for, purchase or acquire ownership of personal property sold pursuant to the provisions of this section. In addition to other penalties, an officer or employee who violates this section forfeits his office or employment. 
(Code 1966, § 20-2(a)—(d), (g))  
Secs. 2-108—2-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-007, § 1, adopted January 3, 2006, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 2-126, 2-127, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 2-70, 2-71 of the 1966 Code. 
 
Sec. 2-126. - Disposal or abandonment of real property. 
The sale, conveyance, granting, or abandonment of city real property interests shall be authorized by city council and be in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007, § 1, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 2-127—2-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LIBRARY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-156. - Operating policies and procedures. 
The library director shall be responsible for day to day operations of the library. The library will be operated in accordance with administrative directives and procedures issued by the city manager or his designee, the library director. All policies as that term is defined in section 2-28 of the City Code shall be recommended by the library board and approved by the city council, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1966, § 2-52; Ord. No. 2006-306, § 2, 11-7-06)  
Sec. 2-157. - Library cards. 
An adult applicant is eligible for a library card free of charge upon making proper application if they reside within the city limits of the city of Denton, Texas. City employees and nonresidents who own real property within the city limits and nonresidents who operate a business within the city limits and who render business personal property for ad valorem taxes and who pay those taxes will also be eligible to obtain a library card free of charge. An annual non-resident fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) or a six month nonresident fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for those living outside of the city limits of Denton, Texas who wish to purchase full access to library services. The nonresident fee will be charged per household and not per person. The non-resident applicant shall have the burden of proving real property ownership, rendition and payment of personal property taxes for taxation purposes and household membership which will be determined by proof of residency. The fees may be amended and changed by the city council as is deemed necessary. 
(Code 1966, § 2-53; Ord. No. 2001-266, § 1, 8-7-01; Ord. No. 2005-157, § 1, 6-7-05; Ord. No. 2006-172, § 1, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 2006-305, § 1, 11-7-06; Ord. No. 2007-283, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2010-216, § 1, 9-21-10)  
Sec. 2-158. - Return of borrowed materials. 
It is unlawful for any person, including the parent or guardian of a child under the age of seventeen (17) years who shall take or borrow from the public library any item to neglect, refuse or fail to return the property within twenty-one (21) days of the date noted on the charge receipt at the time of check out. A notification will be sent to his or her address, telephone number or email address as noted on the current customer record after the item has been overdue for five (5) days. 
(Code 1966, § 2-54; Ord. No. 2006-305, § 1, 11-7-06; Ord. No. 2015-281 , § 1, 9-15-15)  
Sec. 2-159. - Presumptions. 
It shall be presumed that the person whose name appears on the library card is the person who took or borrowed the book or other library material and equipment from the library. 
(Code 1966, § 2-55)  
Sec. 2-160. - Maximum fines. 
Fines accrued for the non-return of checked out items shall be limited to a maximum amount of ten dollars ($10.00) when the item is returned in good condition as determined by library staff. Provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to items with an original acquisition cost of ten dollars ($10.00) or less. In such event the fines shall be limited to the amount of the original acquisition cost of the said item. 
(Ord. No. 2013-236, § 1, 9-17-13)  
Secs. 2-161—2-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LIBRARY BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 14.16. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-176. - Creation, members, chairman, compensation, rules and regulations. 
There is hereby created a library board which shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the city council. The members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, provided three (3) members shall be appointed each odd-numbered year and four (4) members each even-numbered year. Each member shall be a resident and qualified voter of the city. The board shall elect its chairman from among its members and shall serve for one (1) year or until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The board shall serve without pay and shall adopt such rules as may be necessary for the regulation of its business and affairs. 
(Code 1966, § 2-50)  
Sec. 2-177. - Powers and duties. 
The library board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the director of the library and the city council. The board may make recommendations concerning operating policies and programs of the library, long-range capital improvement planning and policy and such other matters pertaining to the library and its operation as the board determines necessary. The board shall also have the responsibilities and duties conferred upon it by written policies expressly adopted and as from time to time amended by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-51)  
Secs. 2-178—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-201—2-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-021, § I, adopted Feb. 5, 1991, amended the 1966 Code by the addition of provisions which have been designated at the discretion of the editor as Art. VI, Div. 2, §§ 2-211 and 2-212. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Established; terms; rules. 
The Denton Downtown Development Advisory Board is hereby established. The board shall consist of eleven (11) members appointed by the city council to serve two-year terms. Each term shall commence July 1 of the year appointed, provided that six (6) members shall be appointed to serve each odd-numbered year and five (5) members each even-numbered year. All members must be residents of Denton. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. The board shall elect from among its members a chair, who shall serve in that capacity for one (1) year or until a successor is elected. The board shall serve without pay and shall adopt such rules as may be necessary for the regulation of its business and affairs. 
(Ord. No. 91-021, § I, 2-5-91; Ord. No. 91-071, § I, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 95-259, § I, 12-19-95)  
Sec. 2-212. - Duties and functions. 
The downtown development advisory board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council and shall make recommendations to the city council and other appointed boards or commissions regarding issues and ordinances affecting the organization, promotion, appearance, revitalization and economic development of the downtown area and the central business district. The board may establish such committees as necessary to carry out the purpose of the advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 91-021, § I, 2-5-91)  
Secs. 2-213—2-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BEAUTIFICATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-231—2-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TREE CITY USA[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-437, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2000, repealed former art. VII, div. 2, §§ 2-241, 2-242 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Prior to amendment, §§ 2-241, pertained to Keep Denton Beautiful Board and derived from Ord. No. 91-031, §§ I(2-80, 2-81), adopted Feb. 19, 1991; Ord. No. 91-195, § I, adopted Dec. 17-1991; and Ord. No. 92-093, § I, adopted June 2, 1992. 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Tree City USA; created. 
The council hereby designates Keep Denton Beautiful, Inc. to serve as the board to provide implementation for the "Tree City USA" program. The recommendations to implement the "Tree City USA" program will be made with the cooperation of the appropriate city staff. 
(Ord. No. 2000-437, § 2, 11-28-00) 
Note— See editor's note following div. 2 footnote.  
Sec. 2-242. - Reserved. 
Note— See editor's note following div. 2 footnote.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LEGAL DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, May 1, 2007, amended article VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VIII, §§ 2-243—2-250, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 950128, § I, 7-11-95. 
 
Sec. 2-243. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the term "employee" shall include all city council members, members of all city boards and committees, and all officers and employees of the city and any other persons, including volunteers, former officers, volunteers or employees and the estate of any such officer, volunteer or employee encompassed within the definition of "employee" in Chapter 102 of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, hereinafter referred to as the "Code." 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the term "actual damages" shall be limited to an amount not to exceed five million dollars ($5,000,000). 
(Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 2-244. - Indemnification and limitations. 
(a)  The City of Denton shall, as hereinafter provided, indemnify and pay actual damages, court costs, and reasonable attorney's fees for which the city or employee shall be determined to be liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, excluding punitive damages, awarded against any employee of the city but only if the damages are based on an act or omission by the employee in the course and scope of employment. The phrase "course and scope of employment" shall not include any action which occurs during a period of time when the employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual services to someone other than the city, unless otherwise expressly set forth in such contract, or engaged in activities unrelated to his or her municipal employment or services. Whether the actions for which damages are awarded were performed during the employee's course and scope of employment shall be determined by the city, and this determination shall be final; provided however, if the indemnity and payment of damages and legal representation has been denied by the city, if a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the employee was acting in the scope and course of his or her employment and the employee was not engaged in official misconduct, a willful or wrongful act or omission, or an act or omission constituting gross negligence, the city shall pay any actual damages, court costs and reasonable attorney's fees as set forth in this article. 
(b)  The city shall pay the actual damages arising from any claim, lawsuit or judgment against an employee, whether or not the city is a party defendant, if said damages: 
(1)  Arise from a cause of action for negligence; 
(2)  Arise out of a cause of action for deprivation of a right, privilege or immunity secured by the constitution or laws of this state or the United States; or 
(3)  Arise out of any incident for which indemnification is in the interest of the city as determined by the city council, and may be legally paid by the city. 
(c)  In addition to the coverage provided hereinabove, the city will pay all reasonable costs and expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees and court costs, incurred in investigating and defending the claim or lawsuit 
(d)  Payments under this article shall be subject to all limitations imposed by the Texas constitution and laws as well as ordinances and policies adopted by the city council and shall in no case exceed the amount allowable thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 2-245. - Exclusions. 
This article shall not apply and the city shall not pay damages awarded against an employee that arise from: 
(1)  Acts or omissions constituting gross negligence, criminal negligence, conscious indifference or reckless disregard; 
(2)  Acts conducted in bad faith; 
(3)  Claims or lawsuits brought by the city against an employee including, without limitation, suits to collect delinquent taxes, assessments, and fines; 
(4)  Claims or lawsuits for official misconduct; 
(5)  Damages arising out of a willfully wrongful act or omission, including but not limited to a violation of a penal statute or ordinance, committed by or with the knowledge or consent of the employee including damages arising out of a cause of action for official misconduct; 
(6)  Damages arising out of acts committed by or at the direction of the employee with affirmative dishonesty, or actual intent to injure, deceive or defraud; 
(7)  Any act or omission committed by an employee while the employee is operating a city vehicle without permission or authority; 
(8)  Any act or omission committed while the employee is operating a city vehicle in the course of personal or private business provided, however, that this exclusion shall not apply to the limited extent that such use is explicitly allowed by, pursuant to, and in accordance with, applicable Texas law, city ordinance and the written policies set forth in the city's policy manual: 
(9)  Liability assumed by the employee under a contract or agreement, unless the contract or agreement has been entered into with the consent or at the request of the city; 
(10)  Any obligation for which the city may be liable under the Texas Worker's Compensation Act, Unemployment Compensation laws or any similar law; 
(11)  Any act or omission which occurs during a period of time in which the employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual services to someone other than the city, unless otherwise expressly set forth in such contract; 
(12)  Any employee who is already covered by an insurance contract or other plan of self-insurance authorized by statute, but not provided by the city, for acts or omissions occurring while in the scope and course of his employment or duties, up to the limits of said insurance contract or plan; or 
(13)  Damages covered under an insurance contract of the city authorized by statute. 
Nothing in this subsection shall obligate or prohibit the city, at its discretion, on a case by case basis from providing legal representation and paying actual damages, court costs and attorney's fees required to be paid by an employee in any claim or lawsuit, to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 2-246. - Subrogation. 
The city shall be subrogated to the employee's rights of recovery against any person, firm, corporation or organization, and the employee shall execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are necessary to secure those rights and shall do nothing to prejudice those rights. 
(Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 2-247. - Legal defense. 
The city shall provide legal counsel to represent any employee, for whom the city may pay damages under this article, including any appeal resulting from the litigation under which damages were or may be assessed. The legal counsel provided by the city may be the city attorney, or any member of the city attorney's staff, or the city's regularly employed counsel, unless there is a potential conflict of interest between the city and the defendant, in which case, the city shall employ other legal counsel to defend the suit. Such legal representation shall be provided at no cost to the employee. Any employee may have his own counsel assist in the defense at the sole expense of the employee. The employee shall cooperate fully with the city, the city attorney, or the city appointed legal counsel in the preparation and presentation of the case. The failure of the employee to so cooperate shall constitute a waiver of the employee's right to representation and indemnity under this article. Any legal counsel provided under this section may settle the portion of the suit that may result in the payment of damages by the city under this article with approval of the city council. The city shall not be liable for any settlement of any such claim or suit affected without the consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 2-248. - Preservation of defenses. 
Nothing contained in this article shall waive any defenses which are available to the city or the officer or employee under the Tort Claims Act or any other applicable laws, including, without limitation, the defense of governmental or sovereign immunity, the limitations on governmental officers' and employees' liability or the limitations on the amount of recoverable damages as set forth in the Tort Claims Act and Chapters 102 through 104 of the Code, as those laws may now read or may be amended in the future. This article does not impose liability or waive immunity for an employee who has common law, statutory, or other immunity. Nothing contained in this article shall create any rights on behalf of third parties who are not officers or employees of the City of Denton. 
(Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 2-249. - Notice. 
The provisions of this article shall apply only if the city has been given notice of the action brought against the city employee in writing, which has been received by the city manager within thirty (30) calendar days of the service of process on the employee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 2-250. - Disciplinary action. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from taking any disciplinary action against any employee for conduct defended or indemnified by the city under this article, either before or after the conclusion of the litigation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-088, § 1, 5-1-07)  
ARTICLE IX. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-203 , § 2, adopted July 18, 2017, repealed the former Art. IX, §§ 2-251—2-254, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Creation, members, qualifications, and tenure. 
(a)  There is hereby created a City of Denton board entitled the Denton Economic Development Partnership Board (the "board"). The board shall consist of twelve (12) members. Six (6) members shall be appointed for a two-year term in even-numbered years, and six (6) members shall be appointed for a two-year term in the odd-numbered years. No member shall serve more than three (3) consecutive terms; members who have served three (3) consecutive terms are eligible for re-nomination after one year off the board. The President of the University of North Texas ("UNT") and the Chancellor of Texas Woman's University ("TWU") or his or her designee may serve unlimited terms but must be re-nominated upon the expiration of each term. 
(b)  The board members shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at the city council's pleasure. To aid the city council in making appointments to the board, the city council will appoint two city council members and one Chamber of Commerce ("Chamber") member to act as a nominating committee ("committee"). The committee members are qualified for appointment to the board. The committee will solicit nominations, contact nominees to relate duties and responsibilities, and to confirm willingness to serve. The committee will solicit recommendations from the Chamber Board of Directors, the President of UNT, the President and Chancellor of TWU, the Denton Black Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors, and the Denton Hispanic Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors. If any such recommendation is not submitted, the committee will consider the racial, ethnic, and gender diversity objectives of the city council, as well as the knowledge, skills, and abilities of the nominees to assist in any one or all of the functions of the board when making its nomination recommendations to the city council. After evaluating the recommended nominees, the committee will present to the city council a slate of board nominees for city council approval. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the membership makeup of the board shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Two (2) members of the board shall be city council members at the time of their appointment. If such a member is no longer on the city council, their appointment to the board is terminated and their unexpired term shall be filled by a currently serving city council member. Such members must be residents of the City of Denton. 
(2)  Two (2) members of the board shall be members of the Denton Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors ("Chamber Board"), which are nominated by the Chamber Board, at the time of their appointment. If such a member is no longer on the Chamber Board, their appointment to the board is terminated and their unexpired term shall be filled by a currently serving Chamber Board member. Such members must reside or work in the City of Denton. 
(3)  Two (2) members will be, or must be currently employed by, a top twenty (20) City of Denton ad valorem or sales tax payer. Such members must reside or work in the City of Denton. If such a member is no longer a top twenty (20) City of Denton taxpayer or employed by one, their appointment to the board is terminated and their unexpired term shall be filled by a current City of Denton top twenty (20) taxpayer or City of Denton top twenty (20) taxpayer employee. 
(4)  One member will be the President of UNT or a UNT faculty or staff member designated by the President. Such member need not reside in the City of Denton. 
(5)  One member will be the Chancellor and President of TWU or a TWU faculty or staff member designated by the Chancellor and President. Such member need not reside in the City of Denton. 
(6)  One member will have knowledge or experience in general aviation-related matters and shall have no financial interest in matters at the Denton Enterprise Airport. This member must reside or work in the City of Denton. 
(7)  One member will be a citizen of the City of Denton who, in the discretion of the city council, has specific knowledge, skills, and abilities to assist in all or any one of the functions and responsibilities of the board. 
(8)  One member will be nominated by the Denton Black Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors. This member must reside or work in the City of Denton. 
(9)  One member will be nominated by the Denton Hispanic Chamber of Commerce. This member must reside or work in the City of Denton. 
(10)  The city manager, the President of the Chamber, and the Superintendent of the Denton Independent School District will serve as ad hoc ex officio (non-voting) members of the board. 
(d)  The board shall elect its chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members, who shall serve for one-year terms or until his or her successor is elected or qualified. The board may remove and reelect a chairperson or vice-chairperson at any time with an affirmative vote of at least ten members. 
(e)  Board members shall serve without compensation. Board members may be allowed out-of-pocket expenses for activities performed in furtherance of their duties to the board. Such expenses must be pre-approved by the city manager if paid for out of city funds, or the Chamber President if paid for out of Chamber funds. 
( Ord. No. 2017-203 , § 2, 7-18-17)  
Sec. 2-252. - Meetings. 
The board shall meet on a regular basis and no less than on a quarterly basis. Monthly meetings are encouraged. The chairperson, vice-chairperson, or any five (5) board members may call any regular or special meeting. Notice of the meetings shall be posted and the meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings law, being V.T.C.A., Government Code Ch. 551, as amended. A majority of the qualified voting members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the board. The act of a majority of the qualified voting members of the board present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the board. 
( Ord. No. 2017-203 , § 2, 7-18-17)  
Sec. 2-253. - Rules of procedure. 
The board shall adopt rules of procedure governing the operation of the board incorporating section 2-29 of city council rules of procedure insofar as it is possible. 
( Ord. No. 2017-203 , § 2, 7-18-17)  
Sec. 2-254. - Duties and responsibilities of the board. 
The role of the board is to provide economic development policy guidance. The board may make recommendations to the city council and Chamber Board of Directors. The board's duties include: 
(a)  The board may create committees or task forces consisting of board members and/or non-board members to assist with the implementation of projects or activities. Committee or task force chairpersons shall be appointed by the board and will serve at the pleasure of the board. 
(b)  The board will be responsible for designing economic development incentive policies and recommending those policies to the city council for adoption. These policies may include tax abatement, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 380 agreements, infrastructure assistance, etc. In making any recommendations, the board shall comply with applicable law. It will be the board's responsibility to review policies of other cities and to be informed as to legislative changes affecting state and local incentive programs. 
(c)  The board shall act as the recommending body to the city council for economic development incentives authorized by law for specific projects, including without limitation tax abatements and incentives authorized under V.T.C.A., Tax Code Ch. 312, economic development agreements authorized under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 380, public improvement districts authorized under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 372, and certain Downtown Reinvestment Grants under Ordinance No. 2012-001. However, utility incentives based on thresholds, such as Denton Municipal Electric's Economic Growth Rider and the Water/Wastewater Plan Line Extension may be made without board review or recommendation. Nothing herein shall be construed so as to invalidate an economic development incentive authorized by the city council that did not receive a recommendation from the board. 
(d)  The board will review, consider, and make recommendations to the city council regarding marketing and branding for the Denton Enterprise Airport. The board will review, consider, and make recommendations to the city council regarding Denton Enterprise Airport incentive policies, as assigned by the city council or requested by the city manager, and will act as a recommending body to the city council for specific airport economic development incentives, as assigned by city council or requested by the city manager and permitted by city and state law. 
( Ord. No. 2017-203 , § 2, 7-18-17)  
Secs. 2-255—2-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - HEALTH AND BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-260. - Purpose. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official, code official, or fire marshal relative to the application and interpretation of the requirements of this Code and all other applicable codes of the City of Denton, there shall be a health and building standards commission. The commission shall also hear any other matters that are appealable pursuant to chapters 13, 14, 17, 28, and 29 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-133, § 2, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 2-261. - Created. 
The health and building standards commission consists of seven (7) members, each to be appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years, commencing July 1 of the year appointed. A member may be removed for cause by the council after a public hearing. All seven (7) members shall serve until their successors are appointed. To the extent that persons are available within the city, the commission shall consist of one (1) general contractor, one (1) architect or engineer, one (1) person from the plumbing industry, one (1) person from the electrical industry, two (2) individuals who are associated with the construction, development or real estate industry, and an additional member. All cases shall be heard by a minimum of four (4) members except for when consideration of variances as described in section 2-262(a)(3) are involved, such cases shall be heard by a minimum of six (6) members. The building official shall be an ex officio member to this commission and shall act as secretary to said commission but shall have no vote on any matter before the commission. 
Ex officio members for fire cases. In cases involving the International Fire Code, the fire marshal, or his or her designee, shall be an ex officio member to this commission, but shall have no vote on any matter before the commission. 
Alternate members. The city council shall appoint two (2) or more alternate members who shall be called by the commission chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for commission membership. 
(Ord. No. 2010-133, § 2, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 2-262. - Procedures and powers. 
(a)  The health and building standards commission shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings, provided the rules are consistent with all adopted codes and statutes of the state. The commission shall: 
(1)  Elect a chairperson, who may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(2)  Elect a vice chairperson, who will chair in the absence of the chairperson. 
(3)  Hear and determine, by a majority vote of the members, appeals from any decision of the building official, code official, or fire marshal made pursuant to chapters 13, 14, 17, 28 and chapter 29 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas after proper notice has been given. 
(4)  The concurring vote of seventy-five (75) percent of the members of the commission is necessary to grant variances to any provisions of chapters 13, 14, 28, and 29 of the Code of Ordinances, subject to appropriate safeguards, and after a determination by the commission that a hardship exists which would be cured by the particular variance sought. 
(5)  Maintain jurisdiction of questions involving article XIII of chapter 17 of the Code of Ordinances, as authorized therein. 
(b)  The powers of the commission are hereby extended so as to authorize the commission to make reasonable interpretations or rulings in matters properly before it pursuant to section 2-460. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the Code of Ordinances or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The commission shall have no authority to waive requirements of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, other than the limited authority to grant variances as provided in this section. 
(c)  The appeal procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building official, code official, or fire marshal under this chapter may appeal such decision or order to the health and building standards commission. Every appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days from the date of the decision or order appealed from and shall be filed with the building official. Such notice shall contain appropriate reference to the decision or order appealed from, as well as the grounds of the appeal. It shall be the duty of the building official to notify the chairman of the health and building standards commission and the proper code official. 
(2)  The amount of the fees for appeals shall be set by the city council by separate ordinance and shall be on file in the office of the building official and the city secretary. 
(3)  The building official shall transmit to the commission all relevant records and data upon which the appeal was taken. 
(4)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in connection with the decision or order appealed from, unless and until the building official certifies to the commission, after notice of appeal has been filed, that a stay would cause hazard to life or property. In such case, proceedings pursuant to the decision or order of the building official shall not be stayed except by order of the commission or by a restraining order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(5)  The commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, giving notice in writing to the parties in interest, and shall reach its decision within three (3) days from the close of the hearing. The appellant may appear before the commission in person, by agent or by attorney and may present material witnesses. The commission may require additional data and tests necessary for adequate decision of the appeal and may continue the hearing therefor. 
(6)  The commission shall have the power in all cases appealed to it from decisions or orders of the building official to reverse or affirm or modify, in whole or in part, the decision or order appealed from. No decision of the commission shall vary or be inconsistent with the terms or provisions of this article. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the commission to make an annual review of the provisions of this chapter and to recommend any necessary changes and/or improvements to the city council. This review shall include consideration of suggestions from contractors and the public at large, which may be obtained by means of open hearings as well as through regular channels. 
(e)  That any and all references to the building code board, electrical code board, and plumbing and mechanical code board as may be found in the Code of Ordinances, City of Denton, Texas shall hereinafter be construed to mean the health and building standards commission for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-133, § 2, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 2-263, 2-264. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ETHICS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-265. - Authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the city under section 14.04 of the Charter. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-266. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to foster an environment of integrity for those that serve the City of Denton and our citizenry. The city council enacted this article in order to increase public confidence in our municipal government. It is the policy of the city that all city officials and employees shall conduct themselves in a manner that assures the public that we are faithful stewards of the public trust. City officials have a responsibility to the citizens to administer and enforce the City Charter and city ordinances in an ethical manner. To ensure and enhance public confidence in our municipal government, each city official must strive not only to maintain technical compliance with the principles of conduct set forth in this article, but to aspire daily to carry out their duties objectively, fairly, and lawfully. Furthermore, this article was enacted to ensure that decision makers provide responsible stewardship of city resources and assets. 
It is not the purpose of this article to provide a mechanism to defame, harass or abuse their political opponents, or publicize personal grudges. Rather, this article is intended to provide a framework within which to encourage ethical behavior, and enforce basic standards of conduct while providing due process that protects the rights of the complainant and the respondent. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-267. - Prospective. 
This article shall apply prospectively, and shall not sustain any complaints based on acts or omissions alleged to have taken place prior to May 15, 2018. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-268. - Applicability. 
This article applies to the following persons: 
(a)  City officials; 
(b)  Former city officials whose separation from city service occurred less than one (1) year from the date of the alleged violation of this article. Application of this article to former city officials shall be limited to alleged violations: 
(1)  That occurred during the term as a city official; 
(2)  Of the prohibition on representing others for compensation (section 2-273(d)(2)); or 
(3)  Of the prohibition of subsequent work on prior projects (section 2-273(h)); 
(c)  Vendors; and 
(d)  complainant(s), who must comply with this article's procedures and the prohibition on frivolous complaints. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-269. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accepted complaint: A sworn allegation of a violation of this article after the required documentation has been submitted to the city auditor and determined to be administratively complete. 
Actionable complaint: An accepted complaint that has been deemed by a panel to contain allegations and evidence that, if accepted as true, would support a finding that a violation of this article occurred. 
Advisory opinions: Written rulings regarding the application of this article to a particular situation or behavior. 
Article: This chapter 2, article XI of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Denton. 
Baseless complaint: A complaint that does not allege conduct that would constitute a violation of this article, or that does not provide evidence that, if true, would support a violation of this article. 
Board of ethics: The oversight entity established by the council to administer this article. 
Business entity: A sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, political subdivision, government agency, university, or any other entity recognized by law. 
Candidate: A person who has filed an application for a place on a ballot seeking public office, or one who has publicly announced the intention to do so. 
Charged: To be charged with a violation of this article is to have an accepted complaint deemed actionable. 
City: The City of Denton in the County of Denton and State of Texas. 
City auditor: The person appointed to serve in the capacity provided for by section 6.04 of the City Charter, or their designee and clerical staff acting in the city auditor's absence. 
City official: For purposes of this article, the term consists of the council members, department heads, or member of the board of ethics, planning and zoning commission members, board of adjustment, historic landmark commission, or public utilities board. 
Code: The Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas, as such Code may be amended from time to time. 
complainant: The human individual who submitted a complaint to the city. 
Complaint: Written documentation submitted to the city accusing a city official of violating this article. 
Confidential information: Any written information that could or must be excepted from disclosure pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, if such disclosure has not been authorized; or any non-written information which, if it were written, could be excepted from disclosure under that Act, unless disclosure has been authorized by the city council or city manager. 
Council: The governing body of the City of Denton, Texas, including the mayor and city council members. 
Deliberations: Discussions at the dais; voting as a member of the board or commission; or presentations as a member of the audience before any city board or commission; conversing or corresponding with other city officials or staff. This term does not apply to a general vote on a broad, comprehensive, or omnibus motion, such as approval of the city budget or polling places. 
Department heads: The employees appointed by the city council, those being the city manager, city auditor, city attorney, and municipal court judge. 
Former city official: A city official whose separation from city service occurred less than one (1) year from the date of an alleged violation of this article. 
Frivolous complaint: A sworn complaint that is groundless and brought in bad faith, or groundless and brought for the purpose of harassment. 
Interfere: A person interferes with a process or activity pertaining to this article when they intentionally and wrongfully take part in, or prevent, a city process or activity from continuing or being carried out properly or lawfully. 
Panel: An ad hoc subcommittee of the board of ethics consisting of three (3) members assigned by the chairperson or designated by the city auditor (as applicable) on a rotating basis, at least one (1) of which is an attorney or retired jurist. 
Pending matter: An application seeking approval of a permit or other form of authorization required by the city, state, or federal law; a proposal to enter into a contract or arrangement with the city for the provision of goods, services, real property, or other things of value; a case involving the city that is (or is anticipated to be) before a civil, criminal, or administrative tribunal. 
Person: Associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, bodies politic, and corporate, as well as individuals. 
Recklessly: A person acts recklessly when they are aware of but consciously disregard a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a certain result is probable from either their conduct, or in light of the circumstances surrounding their conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and degree that to disregard it constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that an ordinary person would exercise under the circumstances. 
Relative: A family member related to a city official within the third (3rd) degree of affinity (marriage) or consanguinity (blood or adoption) in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code, Title 5, Subtitle B, Chapter 573. 
Respondent: A city official who has been charged in a complaint with having violated this article. 
Shall: A mandatory obligation, not a permissive choice. 
Special counsel: An independent, outside attorney engaged by the city to advise the city as an organization and/or the board of ethics. 
Vendor: A person who provides or seeks to provide goods, services, and/or real property to the city in exchange for compensation. This definition does not include those property owners from whom the city acquires public right-of-way or other real property interests for public use. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-270. - Cumulative and non-exclusive. 
This article is cumulative of and supplemental to all applicable provisions of the City Charter, other City Ordinances, and state/federal laws and regulations. Compliance with this article does not excuse or relieve any person from any obligation imposed by any other rule. Attempts to enforce this article shall not be construed as foreclosing or precluding other enforcement options provided by other law. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF CONDUCT 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Expectations. 
The following list conveys the city council's expectations for city officials. These expectations are aspirational, and shall not serve as the basis for a complaint. 
(a)  City officials are expected to conduct themselves in a manner that fosters public trust. 
(b)  City officials are charged with performing their public duties in a way that projects a high level of personal integrity and upholds the integrity of the organization. 
(c)  City officials must avoid behavior that calls their motives into question and erodes public confidence. 
(d)  City officials shall place the municipality's interests and the concerns of those the city serves above private, personal interests. 
(e)  Those who serve the city are expected to value honesty, trustworthiness, diligence, objectivity, fairness, due process, efficiency, and prudence as values the city professes. 
(f)  City officials must balance transparency with the duty to protect personal privacy and preserve the confidential information with which the city has been entrusted. 
(g)  It is neither expected nor required that those subject to this article relinquish or waive their individual rights. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-272. - Mandates. 
(a)  Duty to report. City officials shall report any conduct that the person knows to be a violation of this article. Failure to report a violation of this article is a violation of this article. For purposes of this section, submittal of a complaint or a report made to the fraud, waste, or abuse hotline shall be considered to be a report under this section. A report to the hotline may remain anonymous unless disclosed by the caller. 
(b)  Financial disclosures. All candidates for city council, including candidates for mayor, shall file financial information reports as required by, and in accordance with, state law. All prospective vendors and city officials shall file disclosure forms as required by, and in accordance with, state law. 
(c)  Business disclosures. When a pending matter is before the city official, and the city official has knowledge of being a partner with one of the owners of the business interest with the pending matter, all city officials shall file with the city auditor a report listing the known names of human individuals with whom the city official or the city official's spouse is named partner in the following types of businesses: General partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, or limited liability corporation, or professional corporation. Annual reports shall be submitted within ninety (90) days of taking office. Failure to submit a report shall not serve as a basis for a complaint unless the city official fails to submit a report within thirty (30) days of being provided written notification of the omission. Neither the existence of a business relationship as described in this section, nor the submission of a report required by this section shall prevent a city official from participating in deliberations on matters pending before the city absent a conflicting interest. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-273. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Conflicts of interest: 
(1)  Deliberation prohibited. It shall be a violation of this Code for a city official to knowingly deliberate regarding a pending matter for which the city official currently has a conflicting interest. City officials with a current conflicting interest in a pending matter must recuse themselves and abstain from deliberations. It is an exception to this recusal requirement if the city official serves on the city council, planning and zoning commission, board of ethics, historic landmark commission, public utilities board, or board of adjustment; where a majority of the members of that body is composed of persons who are likewise required to file (and who do file) disclosures on the same pending matter. 
(2)  Disclosure required. If a city official has a conflicting interest in a pending matter, the city official shall disclose the nature of the conflicting interest by filing a sworn statement with the city auditor. Disclosures under this subsection shall be for the time period, including the previous calendar year, and up to date where the conflicting interest arises before the city official. 
(3)  Definition of conflicting interest. For purposes of this article, the term is defined as follows: 
Conflicting interest: A stake, share, equitable interest, or involvement in an undertaking in the form of any one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Ownership of five (5) percent or more voting shares or stock in a business entity; 
b.  Receipt of more than six hundred dollars ($600.00) in gross annual income from a business entity, as evidenced by a W-2, 1099, K-1, or similar tax form; 
c.  Ownership of more than six hundred dollars ($600.00) of the fair market value of a business entity; 
d.  Ownership of an interest in real property with a fair market value of more than six hundred dollars ($600.00); 
e.  Serves on the board of directors or as an officer of a business entity, unless the city official was appointed to that position by the city council; and/or 
f.  Serves on the board of directors (i.e., governing body) or as an officer of a nonprofit corporation or an unincorporated association, unless the city official was appointed to that position by the city council. 
A city official is considered to have a conflicting interest if the city official's relative has a conflicting interest. 
The term conflicting interest does not include ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or assets unless the city official participates in the management of the fund. 
(b)  Gifts. 
(1)  General. It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to accept any gift that might reasonably tend to influence such officer in the discharge of official duties. 
(2)  Specific. It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to accept any gift for which the fair market value is greater than fifty dollars ($50.00). It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to accept multiple gifts for which the cumulative fair market value exceeds two hundred dollars ($200.00) in a single fiscal year. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this article for a vendor to offer or give a gift to a city official exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) per gift, or multiple gifts cumulatively valued at more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per a single fiscal year. 
(4)  Definition of gift. Anything of monetary value, including but not limited to cash, personal property, real property, services, meals, entertainment, and travel expenses. 
(5)  Exceptions. This definition shall not apply to the following, which are allowed under this article: 
a.  A lawful campaign contribution; 
b.  Meals, lodging, transportation, entertainment, and related travel expenses paid for (or reimbursed by) the city in connection with the city official's attendance at a conference, seminar or similar event, or the coordinator of the event; 
c.  Meals, lodging, transportation, or entertainment furnished in connection with public events, appearances, or ceremonies related to official city business, nonprofit functions, or charity functions, or community events, if furnished by the sponsor of such events (who is in attendance); 
d.  Complimentary copies of trade publications and other related materials; 
e.  Attendance at hospitality functions at local, regional, state, or national association meetings and/or conferences; 
f.  Any gift that would have been offered or given to the city official because of a personal, familial, professional relationship regardless of the city official's capacity with the city; 
g.  Tee shirts, caps, and other similar promotional material; and 
h.  Complimentary attendance at political, nonprofit, or charitable fund raising events. 
(6)  Donations. It is not a violation under this article for a city official to accept a gift prohibited by this article on behalf of the City of Denton. Conveyance of a gift prohibited by this article to the City of Denton or a nonprofit corporation cures any potential violation. 
(7)  Reimbursement. It is not a violation under this article for a city official to accept a gift prohibited by this article and promptly reimburse the person the actual cost or fair market value of the gift. 
(c)  Outside employment. 
(1)  Applicability of section. This subsection applies to department heads. 
(2)  Prohibition. It is a violation of this article for a department head to solicit, accept, or engage in concurrent outside employment which could reasonably be expected to impair independence of judgment in, or faithful performance of, official duties. 
(3)  Disclosure and consent. It is a violation of this article for a department head to accept employment from any person other than the city without first disclosing the prospective employment arrangement in writing to the mayor and receiving the mayor's written consent. 
(d)  Representation of others. 
(1)  Current city officials. It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to represent for compensation any person, group, or entity before a board or commission of the city. For purposes of this subsection, the term compensation means money or any other thing of value that is received, or is to be received, in return for or in connection with such representation. 
(2)  Former city officials. It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to represent for compensation any person, group, or entity before the city council or a board, commission, or staff of the city for a period of one (1) year after termination of official duties. This prohibition applies to representation in the form of advocacy or lobbying regarding discretionary approvals of the city, not routine, ministerial actions. For purposes of this subsection, the term compensation means money or any other thing of value that is received, or is to be received, in return for or in connection with such representation. The prohibition in this subsection solely applies to the former city official, and shall not be construed to apply to other affiliated persons. This subsection does not apply to former city officials who represent others for compensation in the course of applying for non-discretionary, ministerial permits and routine approvals. It shall be an exception to this article when the former city official is employed by or owns a small business which existed before the former city official commenced service as a city official and is the sole source of specialized knowledge or expertise necessary within that small business, and that knowledge or expertise is necessary to transact business with the city. 
(e)  Improper influence. It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to use such person's official title/position to: 
(1)  Secure special privileges or benefits for such person or others; 
(2)  Grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen, individual, business organization, or group beyond that which is normally available to every other citizen, individual, business organization, or group; 
(3)  Assert the prestige of the official's or employee's city position for the purpose of advancing or harming private interests; 
(4)  State or imply that the city official is able to influence city action on any basis other than the merits; or 
(5)  State or imply to state or local governmental agencies that the city official is acting as a representative of the city, as an organization, or as a representative of the city council without first having been authorized by the city council to make such representation (except the mayor, city manager, and city attorney). 
(f)  Misuse of information. 
(1)  Personal gain. It shall be a violation of this article for a former city official to use any confidential information to which the city official had access by virtue of their official capacity and which has not been made public concerning the property, operations, policies, or affairs of the city, to advance any personal or private financial interest of any person. 
(2)  Confidential information. It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly disclose any confidential information gained by reason of the city official's position concerning the property, operations, policies, or affairs of the city. This rule does not prohibit the reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to authorities designated by law. 
(g)  Abuse of resources. It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to use, request, or permit the use of city facilities, personnel, equipment, software, supplies, or staff time for private purposes (including political purposes), except to the extent and according to the terms that those resources are generally available to other citizens and the city officials for official city purposes. 
(h)  Abuse of position. It shall be a violation of this article for any city official to engage in the following: 
(1)  Harassment and discrimination. Use the official's position to harass or discriminate against any person based upon ethnicity, race, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, or religion. 
(2)  Interference. Interfere with any criminal or administrative investigation alleging the violation of any provision of this article, the City Charter, administrative policy, or executive order in any manner, including but not limited to seeking to persuade or coerce city employees or others to withhold their cooperation in such investigation is a violation of this article. 
(i)  Subsequent work on prior projects. It shall be a violation of this article for any former city official, within one (1) year of the cessation of official duties for the city, to perform work on a compensated basis relating to a city contract or arrangement for the provision of goods, services, real property, or other things of value, if while in city service the former city official personally and substantially participated in the negotiation, award or administration of the contract or other arrangement. This section does not apply to a city official whose involvement with a contract or arrangement was limited to deliberations as a member of the city council, planning and zoning commission, board of adjustment, historic landmark commission, or public utilities board. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
DIVISION 3. - IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Sec. 2-274. - Staffing. 
(a)  City auditor. The city auditor's office shall be responsible to provide staff and clerical support to the board of ethics to assist in the implementation and enforcement of this article. The degree of support required shall be at the discretion of the city auditor. Nothing herein creates a duty for the city auditor to enforce this article. Furthermore, this article shall not be construed as requiring the city auditor to investigate allegations of violations of this article submitted via the fraud, waste, or abuse hotline. 
(b)  Conflicts log. The city auditor's office shall, in cooperation with the city secretary's office, maintain a conflicts log on an ongoing basis listing the conflicting interests disclosed by city officials in accordance with this article. The log is a public record. The city auditor is neither authorized nor required to inspect or act upon the content of the conflicts log. 
(c)  City manager. If a complaint accuses the city auditor of violating this article, the duties of the city auditor under this article shall be performed by the city manager for purposes of processing that complaint. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-275. - Legal counsel. 
(a)  City attorney. The city attorney shall provide legal support to the city auditor and the board of ethics in the administration of this article. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of the city attorney to render legal guidance in accordance with the city attorney's professional obligations and standards. 
(b)  Special counsel. Independent, outside legal services shall be engaged by the city attorney on the city's behalf to provide legal support to the city auditor and the board of ethics when: 
(1)  In the city attorney's discretion it is necessary in order to comply with the Texas Disciplinary Rules of Professional Conduct (for lawyers), or is in the best interest of the city; 
(2)  When the city council deems special counsel is necessary; or 
(3)  When action is being taken by the board of ethics regarding any council member. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-276. - Training. 
(a)  Curriculum. The city auditor shall approve a training program that provides an introduction and overview of the expectation, mandates, and prohibitions provided for by this article. 
(b)  Orientation. City officials shall complete a training session regarding this article within ninety (90) days of commencing their official duties. 
(c)  Annual. City officials shall complete an annual training session regarding this article. 
(d)  Exiting officials. Information shall be provided to city officials terminating their city service regarding the continuing restrictions on the representation of others by certain former city officials. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-277. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created a board of ethics for the City of Denton. 
(b)  Appointment. The board of ethics shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council. 
(c)  Number. The board of ethics shall consist of seven (7) regular members, and three (3) alternate members. 
(d)  Terms. Board of ethics members (regular and alternates) shall be appointed for two-year, staggered terms. Members may be reappointed for successive terms. Appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members of the inaugural board of ethics shall draw straws to determine which three (3) members shall receive an initial term of one (1) year in order to stagger terms. In total, members may only serve three (3) consecutive terms. A member may be reappointed no sooner than one (1) year after expiration of a previous term. 
(e)  Eligibility. Membership on the board of ethics is limited to residents of the City of Denton. Preference in appointments shall be given to professionals such as attorneys, architects, engineers, doctors, teachers, pastors, mediators, retired jurists, licensed professional counselors, and those with licenses demonstrating high levels of education or master craftsmanship in the building trades. The board shall be comprised of at least three (3) members who are attorneys or retired jurists. 
(f)  Ineligibility. The following shall disqualify a person from serving on the board of ethics: 
(1)  Current service as a city official; 
(2)  Separation from city service as a city official within two (2) years of the appointment; 
(3)  Familial relations to a city official within the third degree of affinity (marriage) or consanguinity (blood or adoption); 
(4)  Current service as an elected official in Denton County; and/or 
(5)  Conviction of a felony or crime of moral turpitude. 
(g)  Alternates. Alternate members of the board of ethics shall attend meetings only upon request by the city auditor's office. The role of an alternate is to participate in meetings of the board of ethics as a replacement for a regular member who is absent or abstaining. 
(h)  Scope of authority. The board of ethic's jurisdiction shall be limited to implementation and enforcement of this article, and shall include the authority to administer oaths and affirmations, issue and enforce limited subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of testimony, evidence, and/or documents as is reasonably relevant to the actionable complaint, as provided by the City Charter. The issuance and enforcement of subpoenas shall be only upon a majority vote of the board of ethics, in accordance with the rules of procedure, and enforcement shall be through any of the sanction options listed herein. 
(i)  Amendments. The board of ethics may recommend amendments to this article. A recommendation from the board of ethics is not required for the city council to exercise its discretion in amending this article. 
(j)  Officers. At the first meeting of each fiscal year the board of ethics shall select from among its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
(k)  Rules of procedure. The board of ethics shall adopt rules of procedure governing how to conduct meetings and hearings. Such procedural rules are subject to confirmation or modification by the city council. 
(l)  Removal. The city council may, by a vote of two-thirds (?), remove a member of the board of ethics for cause. Justifications warranting removal for cause shall include neglect of duty, incompetence, gross ignorance, inability or unfitness for duty, or disregard of the Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 2018-1043 , § 2(Att. A), 6-26-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-278. - Advisory opinions. 
(a)  Requests. Any city official may request an advisory opinion on a question of compliance with this article. Requests shall be submitted in writing to the city auditor, who shall assign the request to a panel or special counsel. 
(b)  Issuance. A panel of the board of ethics shall issue advisory opinions upon request. Advisory opinions shall be issued within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. This time limitation is tolled and shall not run until the board of ethics is empaneled and its rules of procedure are confirmed by the city council. 
(c)  Reliance. It shall be an affirmative defense to a complaint that the respondent relied upon an advisory opinion. In making a determination on the proper disposition of a complaint, the board of ethics may dismiss the complaint if the board finds that: 
(1)  The respondent reasonably relied in good faith upon an advisory opinion; 
(2)  The request for an advisory opinion fairly and accurately disclosed the relevant facts; and 
(3)  Less than five (5) years elapsed between the date the advisory opinion was issued and the date of the conduct in question. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-279. - Complaints. 
(a)  complainants. Any person who has first-hand knowledge that there has been a violation of sections 2-272 and 2-273 of this article may allege such violations by submitting a complaint. The persons who may submit complaints includes (but is not limited to) members of the board of ethics. 
(b)  Form. Complaints shall be written on, or accompanied by, a completed form promulgated by the city auditor. 
(c)  Contents. A complaint filed under this section must be in writing, under oath, must set forth in simple, concise, direct statements, and state: 
(1)  The name of the complainant; 
(2)  The street or mailing address, email address, and the telephone number of the complainant; 
(3)  The name of each person respondent of violating this article; 
(4)  The position or title of each person respondent of violating this article; 
(5)  The nature of the alleged violation, including (whenever possible) the specific provision of this article alleged to have been violated; 
(6)  A statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation and the dates on which, or period of time in which, the alleged violation occurred; and 
(7)  All documents or other material available to the complainant that are relevant to the allegation. 
(d)  Violation alleged. The complaint must state on its face an allegation that, if true, constitutes a violation of this article. 
(e)  Affidavit. A complaint must be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the complaint is true and correct or that the complainant has good reason to believe and does believe that the facts alleged constitute a violation of this article. The complainant shall swear to the facts by oath before a notary public or other person authorized by law to administer oaths under penalty of perjury. 
(f)  Limitations period. To be accepted, a complaint must be brought within six (6) months of the complainant becoming aware of the act or omission that constitutes a violation of this article. A complaint will not be accepted more than two (2) years after the date of the act or omission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to extend the one (1) year limitation of activity applicable to former city officials. The time for filing a complaint regarding an alleged violation of this article where the alleged violation occurred after the effective date but before the board of ethics is empaneled shall be tolled and not begin to run until such time as the board of ethics is empaneled and its rules of procedure are confirmed by the city council. 
(g)  Filing. Complaints shall be submitted to the city auditor. Submission of complaints may be made by hand delivery, U.S. Mail, or email directed to an email address publicly listed by the city auditor. 
(h)  Acceptance of complaint. Within five (5) business days of receiving a complaint, the city auditor shall determine if it is administratively complete and timely. 
(1)  Administratively complete. A complaint is administratively complete if it contains the information described above. If the complaint is administratively complete, the city auditor shall proceed as described in this article. If the complaint is incomplete, the city auditor shall send a written deficiency notice to the complainant identifying the required information that was not submitted. 
The complainant shall have ten (10) business days after the date the city auditor sends a deficiency notice to the complainant to provide the required information to the city auditor, or the complaint is automatically deemed abandoned and may not be processed in accordance with this article. Within five (5) business days of a complaint being abandoned, the city auditor shall send written notification to the complainant and the respondent. 
(2)  Timely. To be timely, a complaint must be brought within six (6) months of the complainant becoming aware of the act or omission that constitutes a violation of this article. A complaint will not be accepted more than two (2) years after the date of the act or omission. 
(i)  Notification of acceptance. Within five (5) business days of determining that a complaint is administratively complete and timely, the city auditor shall send a written notification of acceptance to the complainant, the respondent, and the city attorney; and a copy of the complaint to the respondent/accused. 
For purposes of this provision, a complaint shall be considered accepted when the city auditor has deemed the submittal administratively complete and timely. 
(j)  Confidentiality. A complaint that has been submitted to the city is hereby deemed confidential until such time as the complaint is either dismissed or placed on an agenda for consideration by the board of ethics in accordance with this article. Clerical and administrative steps shall be taken to identify and manage confidential information in accordance with this article. The confidentiality created by this article includes the fact that a complaint was submitted and the contents of that complaint. It shall be a violation of this article for a city official to publicly disclose information relating to the filing or processing of a complaint, except as required for the performance of official duties or as required by law. Requests for records pertaining to complaints shall be responded to in compliance with the state law. The limited confidentiality created by this article is limited in scope and application by the mandates of the Texas Public Information Act, V.T.C.A. Government Code, Ch. 552. 
(k)  Ex parte communications. After a complaint has been filed and during the pendency of a complaint before the board of ethics, it shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)  For the complainant, the respondent, or any person acting on their behalf, to engage or attempt to engage directly or indirectly about the subject matter or merits of a complaint in ex parte communication with a member of the board of ethics or any known witness to the complaint; or 
(2)  For a member of the board of ethics, to knowingly allow an ex parte communication about the subject matter or merits of a complaint, or to communicate about any issue of fact or law relating to the complaint directly or indirectly with any person other than a member of the board of ethics, the city auditor's office, the city attorney's office, or special counsel. 
(l)  Retaliation prohibited. After a complaint has been filed, and during or after the pendency before the board of ethics, it shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)  For a city official, former city official, or vendor to directly or indirectly discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm, damage, penalize, or otherwise retaliate against any person who: 
a.  Files a complaint regarding an alleged violation of this article, or 
b.  Testifies, assists, or participates in any manner in a proceeding or hearing under this article. 
(2)  The outcome of the original ethics complaint shall not be deemed relevant to the complaint of retaliation itself. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-280. - Preliminary assessment. 
(a)  Referral to chairperson. Accepted complaint(s) shall be referred to the chairperson of the board of ethics within five (5) business days of being determined administratively complete. 
(b)  Assignment of panel. Within five (5) business days of receiving an accepted complaint, the chairperson of the board of ethics shall assign the complaint to a panel for preliminary assessment. The chairperson shall order a meeting of the panel, which shall be conducted in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. Each panel shall select a presiding officer to conduct panel deliberations. 
(c)  Panel determination. Within ten (10) business days of being assigned an accepted complaint, the panel shall review the complaint on its face and determine whether the complaint is: 
(1)  Actionable: The allegations and evidence contained in the complaint, if true, would constitute a violation of this article. 
(2)  Baseless: The allegations and evidence contained in the complaint, if true, would not constitute a violation of this article. 
Actionable complaints shall be returned to the chairperson for listing on an agenda for a public hearing. Baseless complaints shall be dismissed. Written notification of the panel's determination shall be filed with the city auditor and sent to the chairperson, complainant, the respondent, and the city attorney within two (2) business days. Written notifications of dismissal shall include notice of the right to appeal. 
(d)  Appeals. A panel's preliminary assessment under this section 2-280 may be appealed to the board of ethics by either the complainant or the respondent, as applicable. An appeal shall be perfected by filing a written notice of appeal with the city auditor within ten (10) business days of the date of the written notification. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-281. - Meetings. 
(a)  Calling meetings. Meetings of the board of ethics shall be called upon request of the chairperson, three (3) members, or the city auditor. 
(b)  Quorum. The quorum necessary to conduct meetings of the board of ethics shall be four (4). The chairperson (or acting chairperson) shall count toward the establishment of a quorum and retains the right to vote. 
(c)  Hearings. 
(1)  Scheduling: Hearings shall be scheduled by the city auditor upon the filing of: 
a.  A panel determination that a complaint is actionable; or 
b.  An appeal challenging a panel's dismissal of a complaint as baseless. 
(2)  Purpose: The purpose of the hearing(s) shall be solely to determine whether: 
a.  A violation of this article occurred, and if so to assess the appropriate sanction; 
b.  An accepted complaint was erroneously dismissed as baseless by a panel; and/or 
c.  An accepted complaint is frivolous. 
(3)  Sworn testimony: All witness testimony provided to the board of ethics shall be under oath. 
(4)  Burden of proof: Because the burden of showing that a violation of this article occurred is placed on the complainant, it is the complainant that has the obligation to put forth evidence, including testimony, supporting the complaint. The complainant is required to testify at the hearing. A complainant's failure to testify at a hearing shall be grounds for dismissal of a complaint. 
(5)  Representation: The respondent shall have a right to present a defense. Both the complainant and the accuser have a right to be represented by legal counsel. 
(d)  Open meetings. All meetings and hearings of the board of ethics, including panel deliberations, shall be conducted pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act. The board of ethics may convene in executive session (i.e., conduct a closed meeting) as allowed by the act. All final actions of the board of ethics shall take place in open session. 
(e)  Postponement in certain instances. 
(1)  Board: Proceedings may be postponed upon majority vote by the members of the board of ethics. 
(2)  Parties: The complainant and the respondent are each entitled to one (1) postponement without cause. Additional postponements shall be solely for good cause and at the discretion of the board of ethics. 
(3)  Criminal proceedings: If a complaint alleges facts that are involved in a criminal investigation or a criminal proceeding before a grand jury or the courts, the board of ethics may, when a majority of its members deem appropriate, postpone any hearing or any appeal concerning the complaint until after the criminal investigation or criminal proceedings are terminated. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-282. - Disposition. 
(a)  Dismissal. If the board of ethics determines at the conclusion of a hearing by simple majority vote of its members that a complaint should be dismissed, it may do so upon finding: 
(1)  The complaint is baseless; 
(2)  The alleged violation did not occur; 
(3)  The respondent reasonably relied in good faith upon an advisory opinion, as provided in this article; or 
(4)  The complainant failed to testify at the hearing. 
(b)  Sanctions. If the board of ethics determines by simple majority vote of those present and voting at the conclusion of a hearing that a violation has occurred, it may within ten (10) business days impose or recommend any of the following sanctions: 
(1)  Letter of notification. If the violation is clearly unintentional, or when the accuser's action was made in reliance on a written advisory opinion, a letter of notification shall advise the respondent of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations. 
(2)  Letter of admonition. If the board of ethics finds that the violation is minor and may have been unintentional, but calls for a more substantial response than a letter of notification. 
(3)  Letter of reprimand. If the board of ethics finds that the violation: 
a.  Was minor and was committed knowingly, intentionally, or in disregard of this article; or 
b.  Was serious and may have been unintentional. 
(4)  Recommendation of suspension. If the board of ethics finds that a violation was committed by a member of the planning and zoning commission, zoning board of adjustment, board of ethics, public utilities board, historic landmark commission, or a department head, and it: 
a.  Was serious and was committed knowingly, intentionally, or in disregard of this article or a state conflict of interest law; or 
b.  Was minor but similar to a previous violation by the person, and was committed knowingly, intentionally or in disregard of this article. The final authority to impose a suspension rests with the city council. 
(5)  Ineligibility. If the board of ethics finds that a vendor has violated this article, the board may recommend to the city manager that the vendor be deemed ineligible to enter into a city contract or other arrangement for goods, services, or real property, for a period of one (1) year. 
Notice of all sanctions imposed by the board of ethics shall be transmitted to the respondent, complainant, city auditor, city attorney, and city council. 
(c)  Frivolous. 
(1)  Prohibition. It is a violation of this article for a person to submit a frivolous complaint. 
(2)  Super-majority vote. If the board of ethics determines at the conclusion of a hearing by a vote of two-thirds (?) of its members that a complaint was frivolous, the board may impose a sanction as provided by section 2-282(b). 
(3)  Factors. In making a determination on frivolity, the board of ethics shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The timing of the sworn complaint with respect to when the facts supporting the alleged violation became known or should have become known to the complainant, and with respect to the date of any pending election in which the respondent is a candidate or is involved with a candidacy, if any; 
b.  The nature and type of any publicity surrounding the filing of the sworn complaint, and the degree of participation by the complainant in publicizing the fact that a complaint was filed; 
c.  The existence and nature of any relationship between the respondent and the complainant before the complaint was filed; 
d.  If the respondent is a candidate for election to office, the existence and nature of any relationship between the complainant and any candidate or group opposing the respondent; 
e.  Any evidence that the complainant knew or reasonably should have known that the allegations in the complaint were groundless; and 
f.  Any evidence of the complainant's motives in filing the complaint. 
(4)  External remedies. complainants who submit frivolous complaints are hereby notified that their actions may subject them to criminal prosecution for perjury (criminal prosecution), or civil liability for the torts of defamation or abuse of process. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-283. - Reconsideration. 
The complainant or respondent may request the board of ethics to reconsider its decision. The request must be filed with the city auditor within five (5) business days of receiving the final opinion of the board of ethics. The request for reconsideration shall be sent to the chairperson of the board of ethics and the non-filing party (complainant or respondent). If the chairperson finds, in the chairperson's sole discretion, that the request includes new evidence that was not submitted at a prior hearing, and that the new evidence bears directly on the board of ethic's previous determination, the chairperson shall schedule a hearing on the request for reconsideration to occur within thirty (30) business days after filing with the city auditor. Absent new evidence, the chairperson shall unilaterally dismiss the request for reconsideration and provide notice to the parties. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-284. - Nepotism. 
(a)  City council. No person shall be employed by the city who is a relative of any member of the city council within the third degree of affinity or consanguinity. 
(b)  Preexisting employment. The prohibitions of this section do not apply to a person who was employed by the city more than six (6) months prior. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-285. - General procedural matters. 
(a)  Deadlines. Any deadline provided in this article shall be construed as expiring at 5:00 p.m. local time on the last day. 
(b)  Mailbox rule. Under this article, a deadline for any response or request for appeal is met when the date the response or request for appeal is mailed falls within the timeline requirements of this article. The posted date of any mailing will control whether it meets the timeline requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-757 , § 2(Att. A), 5-1-18; Ord. No. 20-1035 , § 2(Att. A), 6-2-20)  
Sec. 2-286. - Lobbyists. [reserved]  
Chapter 3 - AIRPORTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted February 11, 2020, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-22, 3-31—3-48, 3-86—3-89, 3-100, 3-101, and enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention generally, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Aeronautics, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 46C-1 et seq.; airport zoning, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 3-1—3-100. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3-101. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter or documents promulgated hereunder, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly ascribed to the use of such words or phrases. All definitions contained in 49 U.S.C. § 40101 et seq. (previously known as the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, hereinafter cited as "FAA Act") and all amendments thereto shall be considered as included herein; and all definitions shall be interpreted on the basis and intention of the FAA Act and amendments thereto, unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly ascribed to the use of such words or phrases. 
Abate or abatement means to put an end to or correct a violation of this chapter. 
Aeronautical activity means any activity or service which involves, makes possible, or is required for the operation of aircraft, or contributes to, or is required for, the safety of such operations. "Aeronautical activities" include, but are not limited to, charter operations (under either Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) Part 121 or 135), charter brokerage, aircraft hangar leasing, pilot training, aircraft rental and sight-seeing, aerial photography, crop dusting, fire suppression, aerial advertising and surveying, aircraft sales, leasing, and servicing, aircraft management, and sale of aviation petroleum products, whether or not conducted in conjunction with other included activities which have a direct relationship to the operation of aircraft, repair and maintenance of aircraft, sale of general aviation aircraft parts, and any other activities which because of their relationship to the operation of aircraft can appropriately be regarded as an "Aeronautical Activity." 
Airport means all of the city-owned or leased real or personal property comprising Denton Enterprise Airport as now exists or as may hereafter be expanded and developed. "Airport" includes all of its facilities as shown on the most current airport layout plan. 
Airport advisory board means the duly appointed seven-member airport advisory board of the city. 
Airport appeals board means a body consisting of the chairman of the airport advisory board, another airport advisory board member appointed by the chairman, and a city representative appointed by the city manager or his designee. 
Airport business permit means administrative approval issued by the airport manager to a person to conduct commercial aeronautical activity and to provide such services to based and transient aircraft on the airport exclusively within facilities on the airport at which such services are authorized. 
Airport manager means the duly appointed manager of the city's airport or the city manager's designee. 
Based means an aircraft: (1) which the owner physically locates at the airport with the intent and purpose to remain for an undetermined period; (2) which, whenever absent from the airport, its owner intends to return to the airport for permanent storage; and (3) whose presence in the airport is not transitory in nature. Based includes an aircraft that is located at the airport for a limited or seasonal duration. 
City means the City of Denton, a Texas home-rule municipal corporation. 
City attorney means the duly-appointed attorney for the city or his designee. The city attorney's office includes both the civil and criminal divisions. 
Commercial activity means the conduct of any aspect of a business, concession, or service in order to provide goods or services to any person for compensation. An activity is a commercial activity even if it is bartered or the business is nonprofit, charitable, or tax-exempt. 
Council airport committee means the duly appointed three-member council airport committee of the city. 
Permission or permit means permission granted by the city. 
Person means the state, county, a political subdivision of the state, other governmental entity, a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. Person includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative. 
Runway means a defined area on the airport for aircraft landings and takeoffs along its length. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-102. - General conditions of use. 
The conditions under which the airport or any of its facilities may be used shall be as established pursuant to this chapter or otherwise by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-103. - Permission to use airport conditional; denial of permission. 
Any permission granted by the city directly or indirectly, expressly or by implication, to enter upon or use the airport or any part thereof, including but not limited to, operators, off-airport users, crew members and passengers, spectators, sightseers, pleasure and commercial vehicles, officers and employees of airlines, lessees and other persons occupying space at the airport, persons doing business with the airport, its lessees, sublessees, and permittees, and all other persons whatsoever, whether or not of the type indicated, is conditioned upon compliance with this chapter and any rules, regulations, or minimum operating standard promulgated hereunder. Entry upon or into the airport by any person shall be deemed to constitute an agreement by such person to comply with this chapter. The city reserves the right to deny any or all usage of the airport to any person or persons for any cause. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-104. - Consent of city. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, any consent or other permission of the city under this chapter must be obtained in advance, in writing, and signed by the airport manager. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-105. - Notices and applications. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, any notice or application to the city must be given in writing to the airport manager during normal business hours at the airport administration office in the terminal building. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-106. - Adopted by reference. 
The following publications, on file with the city secretary, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this chapter: 
(a)  Denton Enterprise Airport Rules and Regulations and any amendments thereto as may be approved by the airport advisory board. 
(b)  Denton Enterprise Airport Minimum Operating Standards and any amendments thereto as may be approved by the airport advisory board. 
(c)  Denton Enterprise Airport Rates and Fees Schedule and any amendments thereto as may be approved by the airport advisory board and city council. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-107. - Conflicting laws, ordinances, regulations, and contracts. 
(a)  In any case where a provision of this chapter, rules and regulations, minimum operating standards, or rates and fees schedule adopted hereunder is found by the city attorney to be in conflict with any other provision of this chapter or regulations adopted hereunder or in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, health, or other ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(b)  In cases where two (2) or more provisions of this chapter are in conflict, the most stringent or restrictive shall prevail. 
(c)  It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or to excuse any person from performing obligations to the city under any lease or other contract. 
(d)  No existing or future city contract, lease, agreement, or other contractual arrangement, nor any payment or performance thereunder, shall excuse full and complete compliance with this chapter. Compliance with this chapter shall not excuse full and complete compliance with any obligations to the city under any existing or future city contract, lease, agreement, or other contractual arrangement. 
(e)  Compliance with this chapter does not excuse failure to comply with any other law. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-108. - Application. 
Except where expressly limited by its terms, this chapter is effective throughout the city. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-109. - Airport advisory board. 
(a)  There is created an airport advisory board consisting of seven (7) members who shall meet the qualifications and residency requirements as provided in section 2-61 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  All members shall be appointed by the city council for terms not to exceed two (2) years, and continue in office until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  The airport advisory board shall establish bylaws to govern its affairs. The bylaws shall designate: 
(1)  Officers of the airport advisory board, the time and manner of their election, the term of office, and the powers and duties of each officer. 
(2)  The time, place, and manner of notice of all regular and special meetings in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(3)  The manner of adoption, amendment, and repeal of airport advisory board bylaws. 
(4)  Such other provisions as may be deemed necessary or desirable which are not contrary to the provisions of any ordinance or resolution, the City Charter, or the laws of this state or the United States, to aid the airport advisory board in conducting its affairs. 
(d)  The airport advisory board shall, with the assistance of city staff, advise the city council as necessary on matters related to: 
(1)  Airport safety; 
(2)  Flight and ground operations; 
(3)  Safety and security issues arising from the creation and development of long-term master plans; 
(4)  Tenant/stakeholder outreach; 
(5)  Airport business plan and airport master plan as now written or hereafter amended or enacted; 
(6)  Airport infrastructure improvements or other major project impacting the airport; 
(7)  Acquisition, review, and consideration of grant funding for the airport; 
(8)  Long-term financial planning and budgetary issues affecting the airport; 
(9)  Issues raised as a result of interface between citizens, airport tenants, or other interested parties; and 
(10)  Other airport matters as may from time to time, be assigned by the city council, or requested by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(e)  The city manager, or his or her designee, will act as staff liaison to the airport advisory board, and will provide guidance and assistance to the board and shall be responsible for insuring that records are maintained in accordance with the requirements of the city secretary's office. 
(f)  The airport advisory board shall meet not less than monthly unless any such meeting is cancelled by the board chairman after consultation with the city manager, or his or her designee. 
(g)  The airport advisory board shall perform such other duties as are imposed on the airport advisory board by this chapter. 
(h)  The city council shall have the right and prerogative to initiate review of any decision of the airport advisory board and shall uphold, modify, or overrule said decision. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-110. - Effect of agreements with federal government. 
All lease agreements, permits, and other contractual or governmental arrangements to which the city may be a party shall be subordinate to the provisions of any existing or future agreement between the city and the united states relative to the operation and maintenance of the airport. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-111. - Conformance with federal, state, and other rules, regulations, and agreements. 
(a)  No person shall navigate, land aircraft upon, or conduct any aircraft or other operations on or from the airport, nor shall any person engage in any other aviation activity at the airport or elsewhere within the city, otherwise than in conformity with the requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable federal, state, and city laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, and minimum operating standards. 
(b)  Any use of the airport by any person constitutes that person's agreement to conform in all respects to the requirements of any grant agreements by the city with the State of Texas, the United States, and any other governmental entity. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-112. - Liability of city. 
The city is not responsible or liable for any loss, injury, or damage to persons or property on the airport, or using airport facilities, for any reason, including but not limited to fire, civil disorder, criminal activity, theft, vandalism, winds, flood, earthquake, collision, act of third parties or otherwise, or acts contrary to this chapter or any regulations promulgated hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-113. - Indemnification. 
(a)  To the fullest extent permitted by law, any person accessing or using the airport or any of its facilities, and the person's successors, assigns, and guarantors, must indemnify, defend, and hold harmless, the city, its agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, directors, officers, commissioners, board members, and representatives from and against all allegations, demands, proceedings, suits, actions, claims, damages, losses, and expenses (including, but not limited to, claims adjustment, attorney fees, and court costs), related to, arising from or out of, or resulting from: 
(1)  Any negligent or intentional actions, acts, errors, mistakes, or omissions caused in whole or in part by such person, or the person's employees or agents; or 
(2)  The exercise of any rights or privileges under the Denton Code of Ordinances, chapter 3, or under the airport minimum operating standards, and airport rules and regulations. 
(b)  This section includes, but is not limited to, environmental claims for property damage, cleanup, response, removal, and remediation. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-114. - Forms. 
The airport manager shall have authority to specify forms to be used for applications, permits, reports, and other documents required under this chapter and to reject any documents not conforming to said forms. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-115. - Supplementing information. 
Within fifteen (15) calendar days after any discovery of a material misstatement, omission, or other inaccuracy or material change in any information contained in any application, report, or other document provided to the city, the person submitting the information shall inform the city in writing of the inaccuracy or change and shall provide the city with the correct information in writing. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-116. - Payment of fees and charges. 
No person shall perform any activity for which a fee or charge is imposed under this chapter without first reporting the activity to the city and paying the appropriate fee to the city (as identified in the airport minimum operating standards and/or airport rates and fees schedule). Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, when a reporting procedure in this chapter specifically provides for subsequent reporting, prior reporting is not required. Fees, rates, and charges for use of any airport facilities and for any service or accommodations provided by the city shall be established in the same manner as rules and regulations are established under this chapter. Nothing in this chapter impairs or limits the city's ability to impose fees or charges by contract. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-117. - Airport-related fee administration and collection. 
The administration and collection of airport-related fees is vested in the airport manager, or his designee. Except as expressly stated to the contrary in this chapter, all procedures, remedies, requirements, penalties, and other provisions for the determination, administration, and collection of other city fees shall apply to airport-related fees. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-118. - Payment of bills and default of obligations. 
All city billings are payable upon presentation. When any person is formally notified that said person is held in default of any written or implied obligation to the city, whether it be for breach of performance, services, covenants, or nonpayment, the person shall thereafter be billed for all losses of revenue and expenses incurred to reestablish performance or service and other costs, unless the person files with the city, within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the formal notification, a statement that corrective or preventive measures have been initiated and will diligently be carried out. If the promises contained in the statement are not fulfilled, the person will be considered in absolute default and appropriate lawful steps will be initiated by the city. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-119. - Repealer and savings clause. 
The effective date of this chapter shall be fourteen (14) days following the date this chapter is adopted by the city council. All future duties and obligations thereafter arising under the pre-existing chapter 3 of the Denton Code of Ordinances shall cease, but liability for fees and violations of the pre-existing chapter 3 of the Denton Code of Ordinances as of the effective date of this chapter are preserved and continue unaffected by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-120. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter should be declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect; the city council of the City of Denton declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional; and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-121. - Use of city-owned airport property. 
The airport manager may enter into a lease, license, permit, or other such agreement for the use of any city-owned airport property, including but not limited to, land, buildings, office space, counter space, and aircraft storage facilities, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Any lease of city-owned airport property shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and subject to recommendation by the council airport committee and approval of city council. 
(2)  Any airport license or other such agreement shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, with a term of three (3) years or less and a minimum of a thirty-calendar-day cancellation clause. Any license or other such agreement not meeting these criteria shall be subject to recommendation by the council airport committee and approval of city council. 
(3)  Any airport permit shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and shall remain in effect until such time as the permittee requests cancellation in writing, or the permit is revoked pursuant to division 4 of this chapter. 
(4)  Any use of city-owned airport property for commercial aeronautical activities is subject to the requirements of the airport minimum operating standards. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-122. - Access keys/codes/gate access devices/access cards. 
(a)  Persons who have been provided a key, code, gate access device, or access card to obtain access to the airport shall only use airport-issued key/codes/devices/cards and shall not divulge, duplicate, or otherwise distribute the same to any other person, unless otherwise approved in writing by the airport manager. 
(b)  If a gate access key, device, or access card is found in the possession of an unauthorized person, the device/card shall be confiscated by the airport manager and the person shall be escorted off the airside area. 
(c)  A gate access device or access card that has not been used in one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall be deactivated. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-123. - Permit not transferable. 
No lease, license, permit, or agreement shall be assigned, transferred, or in any other manner set over to another person without the prior written consent of the city. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-124. - Council airport committee review. 
(a)  The council airport committee shall have the right and prerogative to initiate its own review of any decision of the airport appeals board, but only upon the affirmative vote of two (2) members taken within twenty (20) days following such decision of the airport appeals board. Notice of such committee-initiated review of any decision of the airport appeals board shall be given by the airport manager to the aggrieved party and airport appeals board members within seven (7) days after initiation of such review by the council airport committee. 
(b)  The airport manager shall schedule such review for a council airport committee agenda not more than forty (40), nor less than fifteen (15), days following initiation of such review by the council airport committee. The council airport committee at its meeting after conducting such review shall uphold, modify, or over-rule the decision of the airport appeals board. The decision of the council airport committee shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Secs. 3-125—3-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RULEMAKING AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 3-201. - Airport rules and regulations. 
The airport manager is authorized to establish or amend such rules, regulations, and minimum operating standards as are necessary or useful to carry out or supplement the provisions of this chapter and provide for the orderly and safe operation of the airport. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-202. - Limitation on rules and regulations by airport manager. 
(a)  No rule, regulation, or minimum operating standard established by the airport manager shall be effective until fourteen (14) calendar days after it is approved by the airport advisory board. Any regulation established by the airport manager shall be posted in the lobby or other area of the airport terminal building open to the public during normal business hours for a period of not less than five (5) calendar days prior to approval by the airport advisory board. 
(b)  No regulation established by the airport manager shall increase fees identified in the airport rates and fees schedule. 
(c)  Creation or modification of any fee is subject to approval by the airport advisory board, council airport committee, and the city council. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-203. - Posting and filing of documents. 
Airport rules, regulations, minimum operating standards, and rates and fees schedule shall be filed with the city secretary. All amendments to these documents shall be filed with the city secretary. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-204. - Emergency rules and regulations. 
With the approval of the city manager, the airport manager has authority to impose emergency regulations. Such emergency regulations are limited to a forty-five-calendar-day duration and take effect immediately upon execution by both the airport manager and the city manager, and posting of copies of the regulations at the airport terminal building and at two (2) other public places within the city. Each emergency rule or regulation shall be reviewed and established as a permanent rule or regulation at the next regularly scheduled airport advisory board meeting. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Secs. 3-205—3-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AIRPORT BUSINESS PERMITS 
 
Sec. 3-301. - Airport business permit required. 
No commercial aeronautical activity shall be conducted by any person at the airport without said person being in possession of a valid airport business permit. Each person holding an airport business permit must hold a valid and current sales and use tax permit issued by the state, if such license is required by the state. Issuance of an airport business permit does not entitle the holder to possess, occupy, or exclusively use any portion of the airport, grant any exclusive right to conduct any business or activity, or authorize any conduct prohibited by zoning laws or any other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-302. - Airport business permit applications. 
Except as specifically stated otherwise in this chapter, an application for an airport business permit is subject to approval by the airport manager as indicated in the airport minimum operating standards, and is subject to ratification by the airport advisory board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The city is not responsible or liable for any loss, injury, or damage as a result of the failure of the airport advisory board to ratify an administrative approval of an airport business permit. Each application for an airport business permit shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  An airport business permit application; 
(2)  All information identified in section 2-1 of the airport minimum operating standards; and 
(3)  Such other information as the airport manager may reasonably request. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-303. - Temporary airport business permits. 
Notwithstanding section 3-302, the airport manager shall have authority to issue temporary airport business permits and to establish procedures relating thereto. Such temporary permits shall cover a single period of not more than sixty (60) consecutive days identified on the permit. No more than one (1) temporary permit shall be issued to any person in any twelve-month period. Each application for a temporary airport business permit shall be accompanied by an airport business permit form and any other applicable documentation as determined by the airport manager. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-304. - Permit display. 
Any person conducting commercial aeronautical activity shall, upon demand, produce the airport business permit to a city representative for inspection. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-305. - Duration of permit. 
An airport business permit shall remain in effect so long as the permittee complies with all of its terms, conditions, and covenants. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-306. - Nonwaiver of defaults. 
The waiver by the city of any breach by the permittee of any term, covenant, or condition of any permit shall not operate as a waiver of any subsequent breach of the same or any other term, covenant, or condition of the permit. No term, covenant, or condition thereof can be waived except by the written consent of the airport manager, and forbearance or indulgence by city, in any regard whatsoever, shall not constitute a waiver of the term, covenant, or condition to be performed by permittee, and until complete performance by permittee of the term, covenant, or condition, the city shall be entitled to invoke any remedy available to it hereunder or by law, despite such forbearance or indulgence. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-307. - General conditions for all permits. 
The city is neither a joint venturer with, nor a partner or associate of, the permittee with respect to any manner provided for in the permit. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create any such relationship between the parties or to subject the city to any obligation of the permittee whatsoever. The permit is a license and not a lease. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-308. - Insurance. 
(a)  The operator, lessee, licensee, permittee, or other person using the airport, required to obtain and maintain insurance under the airport minimum operating standards, shall, at their own expense, obtain and maintain a general liability policy or airport premises policy from an insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, with the minimum coverage required by the applicable airport minimum operating standards. All policies, except workers' compensation, shall name the City of Denton, its agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, directors, officers, commissioners, board members, and representatives as additional insureds. 
(b)  The operator, lessee, licensee, permittee, or other person using the airport, is responsible for working with an informed and reputable insurance representative to understand and obtain all the applicable insurance required by the airport minimum operating standards. 
(c)  The city does not represent or warrant that the types of coverage or minimum limits contained in the applicable airport minimum operating standards are sufficient to protect any airport user from liabilities that might arise out of the access or use of the airport, or any of its facilities. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Secs. 3-309—3-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-401. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, facilitate, aid, or abet any violation of any provision of this chapter, or any rules, regulations, or minimum operating standards promulgated hereunder, or to fail to perform any act or duty required by this chapter or rules, regulations, or minimum operating standards promulgated hereunder. 
(b)  When two (2) or more persons have liability to the city or are responsible for a violation, their responsibility shall be joint and several. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-402. - Enforcement of judgments. 
Any judgment for abatement, restitution, or civil sanctions taken pursuant to this article may be enforced as any other civil judgment. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-403. - Violations not exclusive. 
Violations of this chapter are in addition to any other violation enumerated within this Code and in no way limit the penalties, actions, or abatement procedures which may be taken by the city for any violation of this chapter which is also a violation of any other provisions of this Code or statutes of the state. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-404. - Each day separate violation. 
Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter, or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this chapter, continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-405. - Inspections. 
(a)  The airport manager shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections in the normal course of job duties; or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter may exist; or when there is a reason to believe that a violation of this chapter has been or is being committed. 
(b)  The airport manager may enter onto any property, or into any building or premises, at all reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed upon the airport manager by this chapter, provided that if such property, building, or premises is occupied, the airport manager shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such property, building, or premises is unoccupied, the airport manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property, building, or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the airport manager has recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(c)  When the airport manager shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner, occupant, or person having charge, care, or control of any property, building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry by the airport manager for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  No person shall interfere with, prevent, or attempt to interfere with or prevent an individual employed by the city or other person contracted for by the city, from investigating an alleged violation of this chapter, or from abating a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-406. - False information. 
No person shall knowingly make a false or fraudulent statement, or knowingly misrepresent a fact, or mislead an individual employed by the city or other person contracted for by the city, when that individual is investigating or abating a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-407. - Service of notices. 
(a)  Any notice required to be given for any purposes under this chapter to the city shall be given by the airport manager or his designee by hand-delivery; by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested; by email, return receipt requested; or by facsimile transmission. 
(b)  Notice is deemed effective on the date it is hand-delivered, deposited in the United States mail, emailed, or faxed. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city from giving additional oral or written notice at its discretion. If the city does elect to give any additional notice in any instance, it shall not thereby become obligated to give such additional notice thereafter in the same or other situation. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Secs. 3-408—3-500. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DENIAL OF USE 
 
Sec. 3-501. - Denial grounds. 
(a)  The airport manager may deny access to, and deny the use and privileges of, the airport or any of its facilities to any person: 
(1)  Who violates this chapter or any rules, regulations, or minimum operating standards promulgated hereunder; 
(2)  Whose action would place the airport in violation of 49 U.S.C. § 47160 et seq., 14 C.F.R. Part 1 et seq., or the FAA Grants and Assurances (see 14 C.F.R. Part 152); or 
(3)  Who violates any future conditions which the city may impose by appropriate process or any federal statute or regulations hereafter enacted. 
(b)  The person to whom the aircraft is registered is responsible for the acts of all persons (including, but not limited to, all agents, employees, and pilots) to whom control, operation, or any authority to use said aircraft is granted. The involvement of said aircraft in any act or omission that violates any of the above-enumerated laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, minimum operating standards, or other conditions may result in one (1) or more enforcement actions by the city. 
(c)  The airport manager may deny access for up to five (5) years. After the denial period ends, a person may request access, but the airport manager may continue to deny access if denial is in the best interests of the airport. A denial may be appealed to the airport appeals board as set forth in sections 3-504 and 3-505. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the airport manager may summarily deny airport access, effective immediately, pending the hearing specified in section 3-503, to any person for whom probable cause exists to believe the person committed an act or omission relating to dangerous refueling, dangerous aircraft or vehicle operation, lack of insurance, theft of or damage to property, assault and battery, or such other act or omission as may constitute a danger to the health, safety, or welfare of any individual or the public in general. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-502. - Denial procedure. 
(a)  Upon probable cause to believe that a person has committed acts constituting grounds for denial of access, the airport manager shall provide the affected party with notice of an order to show cause why access should not be denied. The notice shall give at least seventy-two (72) hours' notice of the hearing date and list the grounds for the possible denial of access. 
(b)  Persons subject to subsection 3-501(d) shall be provided a hearing as soon as reasonably practical but in no event shall said hearing be delayed more than seventy-two (72) hours after the effective time of the denial of access, except upon mutual agreement of the airport manager and the affected party. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-503. - Denial hearing. 
Except for the summary denial of access under subsection 3-501(d), access to, and the use and privileges of, the airport or any of its facilities shall be denied at the date and time of the hearing if the affected party fails to appear to contest the denial. The affected party shall have the right to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses. The hearing shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The airport manager may rule on the denial of use at the close of the evidence and argument, but, in any case, shall enter a ruling within ten (10) calendar days after the completion of the hearing. The airport manager shall notify the affected party in accordance with section 3-407. Pending any appeal to the airport appeals board, the airport manager's denial of access shall be effective immediately if the ruling is made by the airport manager at the time of the hearing, or upon notice of the ruling when the ruling is made after the hearing. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-504. - Appeal. 
(a)  A person may appeal the denial of use to the airport appeals board by filing a written notice of appeal with the airport manager not later than ten (10) calendar days after the airport manager has taken the action to be appealed from. The right to appeal is waived if the notice of appeal is not timely filed. Except as provided under subsection 3-501(d), the timely filing of an appeal shall stay enforcement of the denial of access until the appeal is finally determined by the airport appeals board. 
(b)  This division contains all the appellate relief to which an aggrieved party is entitled through city procedures. The exhaustion of appellate remedies at the city level does not preclude an aggrieved party from seeking any other remedies provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-505. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a written notice of appeal, the airport appeals board shall set an appeal hearing within ten (10) calendar days and shall give notice of the hearing as provided in this division. 
(b)  When required in the interest of fairness, the airport appeals board may grant continuances of the hearing, but all hearings on denial of access shall be heard not later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date on which the notice of appeal was filed. 
(c)  Except for the summary denial of access under subsection 3-501(d), access to, and the use and privileges of the airport or any of its facilities shall be denied at the date and time of the hearing unless the affected party or the party's counsel appears to contest the denial. 
(d)  An appellant may be represented by counsel at the hearing and the city may be represented by the city attorney. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Both the appellant and the city shall have the right to present evidence through testimony or exhibits and to cross-examine witnesses. The airport appeals board shall preside over the proceedings and shall determine the order and manner of proof. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the airport appeals board shall rule on the appeal and notify the appellant of the ruling in accordance with section 3-407, within ten (10) calendar days after the hearing, unless all parties stipulate that additional time is required to render a decision. The airport appeals board's decision shall be supported by a preponderance of evidence. The decision of the airport appeals board is final unless the council airport committee initiates review in accordance with section 3-124. 
(f)  Except for the summary denial of access under subsection 3-501(d), the denial of access shall be effective immediately if the ruling is made by the airport appeals board at the time of the hearing, or upon notice of the ruling when the ruling is made after the hearing. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-506. - Settlement agreements. 
(a)  After the airport manager denies access to, and the use and privileges of the airport or any of its facilities, and before the airport manager enters a ruling, the airport manager and affected person may enter into a settlement agreement to allow access. 
(b)  After the affected person appeals the denial of access to the airport appeal board, and before the airport appeals board enters a ruling, the airport appeals board and the affected person may enter into a settlement agreement to allow access. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Secs. 3-507—3-600. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SANCTIONS; PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 3-601. - Remedies. 
The airport manager, the city attorney's office, and the city manager, or their designees, may pursue any or all of the remedies provided in this article. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-602. - Jurisdiction of city court. 
(a)  Jurisdiction of all proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be in the Denton Municipal Court. 
(b)  Civil actions commenced in the Denton Municipal Court to enforce this chapter may be adjudicated by a judge or a court hearing officer. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-603. - Civil violation; commencement of action. 
(a)  A civil violation may be commenced by issuance of a citation or by complaint. 
(b)  The citation shall be substantially in the same form as a traffic citation and shall direct the defendant to appear in municipal court within ten (10) calendar days after issuance of the citation. 
(c)  The citation shall further notify the defendant that failure to appear on or before the date specified in the complaint will result in the entry of a judgment by default against the defendant, and the court may, in its discretion, impose a civil sanction not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(d)  Service of the citation/complaint may be accomplished and shall be deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods: 
(1)  By having the defendant sign the citation/complaint with a promise to appear in court within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of the citation/complaint; 
(2)  By hand delivering a copy of the citation/complaint to the defendant; 
(3)  By mailing a copy of the citation/complaint to the person charged by certified or registered mail, return-receipt requested, to the person's last known address; or 
(4)  In the event service cannot be accomplished as set forth in (d)(1), (2) or (3), the city may serve the defendant by any means allowed by the Texas Rules of Civil Procedure. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-604. - Civil citation, authority to issue. 
The airport manager, the city attorney, or the city manager, or their designees, may issue a civil citation pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-605. - Appearance by defendant. 
The defendant shall, within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of the citation or summons and complaint, appear in person or through the defendant's attorney in the municipal court and shall either admit or deny the allegations contained in the citation. If the defendant admits the allegations, the court shall enter judgment against the defendant and impose a civil sanction for the violation not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and may, in its discretion, deny defendant use of the airport pursuant to section 3-612. If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the court shall set the matter for hearing. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-606. - Default judgment. 
If a defendant fails to appear as directed on the civil citation or complaint or at the time set for hearing by the court, the allegations in the civil citation or complaint shall be deemed admitted and the court shall enter judgment against the defendant and impose a civil sanction for the violation not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and may, in its discretion, deny defendant use of the airport pursuant to section 3-612. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-607. - Rules of procedure for civil violations. 
The Texas Rules of Criminal Procedure shall be followed by the Denton Municipal Court for civil violations of this chapter, except as modified or where inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-608. - Civil sanctions. 
Upon a finding of responsible to a civil violation, the court shall impose a civil sanction not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-609. - Rules of procedure for criminal violations. 
The Texas Rules of Criminal Procedure shall be followed by the Denton Municipal Court for criminal violations of this chapter, except as modified or where inconsistent with provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-610. - Criminal penalty. 
Upon a conviction of a misdemeanor the court may impose a penalty in accordance with subsection 1-8(a) of this Code and state law for class C misdemeanors. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-611. - Restitution. 
In addition to any civil sanction or criminal penalty provided for in this article, any person violating this chapter shall be liable for all costs which may be associated with the city's rectifying any violation of this chapter. The court shall impose restitution in addition to any civil sanction or criminal penalty. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-612. - Denial of airport use. 
In addition to any civil sanction or criminal penalty provided for in this article, the court may issue an order suspending the right of any person violating this chapter to use the airport or any of its facilities. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Secs. 3-613—3-700. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LICENSE AND PERMIT REVOCATION 
 
Sec. 3-701. - Revocation grounds. 
The airport manager may revoke any license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter, upon the happening of any of the following events: 
(1)  A violation of the terms of such license or permit, of any provision of this chapter, or any rules, regulations, or minimum operating standards promulgated pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Falsification of any application or other information provided to the City under this chapter; 
(3)  Any action which would place the airport in violation of 49 U.S.C. § 47160 et seq., 14 C.F.R. Part 1 et seq., or the FAA Grants and Assurances (see C.F.R. Part 152); or 
(4)  A violation of any future rules, regulations, minimum operating standards, or other conditions which the city may impose by appropriate process or any federal statute or regulation hereafter enacted. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-702. - Revocation procedure. 
Upon probable cause to believe that the licensee or permittee has committed acts constituting grounds for revocation as provided in section 3-701, the airport manager shall provide the affected party with notice of an order to show cause why the license or permit should not be revoked. The notice shall give at least seventy-two (72) hours' notice of the hearing date and list the grounds for the possible revocation. The affected party shall have the right to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses. The hearing shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. Except for the summary suspension under subsection 3-703(c), the license or permit revocation is effective at the date and time of the hearing if the affected party fails to appear to contest the revocation. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-703. - Revocation hearing. 
(a)  The airport manager may rule at the close of the evidence and argument, but shall enter a ruling within ten (10) calendar days of the completion of the hearing. Upon the decision of revocation, the aggrieved party shall forthwith surrender the subject license or permit. 
(b)  After a revocation, any person responsible for the acts constituting the ground for the revocation shall be ineligible to reapply for a like license or permit within an appropriate period of time as determined by the airport manager. A partnership, corporation, company, or association which has as a partner, officer, stockholder, or member ineligible for reapplication as provided by this subsection shall itself be ineligible for a like period. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of (b) of this section, the airport manager may summarily suspend, effective immediately, pending a revocation hearing, the license or permit of any person for whom probable cause exists to believe he/she committed an act relating to dangerous refueling, dangerous aircraft or vehicle operation, lack of insurance, theft of or damage to property, assault and battery, or such other act or omission as may constitute danger or threat to the health, safety, or welfare of any person or the public in general. The affected party shall be provided a hearing as soon as reasonably practical but in no event shall said hearing be delayed more than seventy-two (72) hours after the effective time of the summary suspension, except upon mutual agreement of the airport manager and the affected party. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-704. - Appeal. 
(a)  An aggrieved party may appeal the denial of a license or permit renewal or revocation to the airport appeals board by filing a written notice of appeal with the airport manager not later than ten (10) calendar days after the airport manager has taken the action to be appealed from. The right to appeal is waived if the notice of appeal is not timely filed. Except as provided under subsection 3-703(c), the timely filing of an appeal shall stay enforcement of the revocation until the appeal is finally determined by the airport appeals board. 
(b)  This division contains all the appellate relief to which an aggrieved party is entitled through city procedures. The exhaustion of appellate remedies at the city level does not preclude an aggrieved party from seeking any other remedies provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-705. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a written notice of appeal, the airport appeals board shall set an appeal hearing within ten (10) calendar days and shall give notice of the hearing as provided in this division. 
(b)  When required in the interest of fairness, the airport appeals board may grant continuances of the hearing, but all hearings on license or permit revocations and suspensions shall be heard not later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date on which the notice of appeal was filed. 
(c)  An appellant may be represented by counsel at the hearing and the city may be represented by the city attorney. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Both the appellant and the city shall have the right to present evidence through testimony or exhibits and to cross-examine witnesses. The airport appeals board shall preside over the proceedings and shall determine the order and manner of proof. Except for the summary suspension under subsection 3-703(c), the license or permit revocation is effective at the date and time of the hearing unless the affected party or the party's counsel appears to contest the revocation. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the airport appeals board shall rule on the appeal and notify the appellant of the ruling in accordance with section 3-407, within ten (10) calendar days after the hearing, unless all parties stipulate that additional time is required to render a decision. The airport appeals board's decision shall be supported by a preponderance of evidence. The decision of the airport appeals board is final unless the council airport committee initiates review in accordance with section 3-124. 
(e)  Except for summary suspension under subsection 3-703(c), the revocation shall be effective immediately if the ruling is made by the airport appeals board at the time of the hearing, or upon notice of the ruling when the ruling is made after the hearing. 
(f)  The licensee or permittee shall surrender all revoked licenses and permits to the airport appeals board at such time as the revocation becomes effective. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-706. - Settlement agreements. 
(a)  After the airport manager revokes or suspends a license or permit, and before the airport manager enters a ruling, the airport manager and affected person may enter into a settlement agreement regarding the license or permit. 
(b)  After the affected person appeals the revocation to the airport appeals board, and before the airport appeals board enters a ruling, the airport appeals board and the affected person may enter into a settlement agreement regarding the license or permit. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Secs. 3-707—3-800. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 3-801. - Abatement in lieu of or in addition to other actions. 
(a)  In addition to or in lieu of denial of access or filing a civil or criminal complaint, the city may file notice to abate any violation of this chapter. Such abatement shall proceed independently of any denial of access or civil or criminal violation filed pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  If any person, served a notice to abate by the city pursuant to this chapter, fails to comply with such notice or order, the city may abate the conditions subject to the notice. 
(c)  If the city elects to abate the violation, the airport manager or his designee shall prepare a verified statement as to the actual cost of abating the violation, and shall add an additional fifteen (15) percent for costs of inspection and other incidental costs associated with abating the violation. The statement shall be sent in accordance with section 3-407, to the owner(s) or other person(s) upon whom the notice to abate or order was served. That statement shall further set forth the following: 
(1)  The person has fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the statement to pay; and 
(2)  Appeal procedures. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-802. - Emergency abatement. 
If a situation presents an imminent danger or threat to the health, safety, or welfare of any person or the public in general, the city may issue a notice to abate directing the responsible person to take such immediate action as is appropriate to abate the emergency. In addition, the city may act to abate the emergency. In the event the city is unable to contact the responsible person, such inability in no way affects the city's right to abate the emergency. The responsible person shall be granted a review before the airport appeals board on the matter upon that person's request, as soon as practicable, but such appeal shall in no case stay the abatement of such emergency. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-803. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  If, after an inspection, the city finds one (1) or more violations of this chapter, and the city elects to use the abatement process, the city shall, in writing, notify the owner, or agent for the owner. 
(b)  The notice to abate shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The owner has fifteen (15) calendar days from service of notice in accordance with section 3-407 to abate the violation; 
(2)  Identification of the property in violation by street address if known, and if unknown, then by book, map and parcel number; 
(3)  Statement of the violation in sufficient detail to allow a reasonable person to identify and correct the violation(s); 
(4)  Reinspection date and time; 
(5)  Name, address, and phone number of the city inspector who sent the notice to abate; 
(6)  A warning stating that, if the violations are not corrected within the fifteen-calendar-day period, the city can abate the problem and assess the owner the cost of such abatement and record a lien on the property for the assessment; 
(7)  Appeal procedures; and 
(8)  The fifteen-calendar-day notice set forth in this section shall not apply to emergency abatements pursuant to section 3-802. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-804. - Appeal of notice to abate. 
(a)  Any notice to abate or any assessment can be appealed to the airport appeals board. 
(b)  An appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of the service of the notice to abate or the assessment and must be filed with the airport manager's office. 
(c)  Failure of a person entitled to appeal under this chapter to timely file an appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and such person shall be estopped to deny the validity of any notice or assessment which could have been timely appealed. 
(d)  The notice of appeal shall set forth, in writing, the person's reasons for believing no violation of the chapter has occurred or that the assessment is excessive. 
(e)  The individual appealing shall accompany the written appeal with an appeal fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), such sum to be deposited in the airport enterprise fund of the city. 
(f)  In case of financial hardship, the fee may be suspended by the airport manager until the decision on appeal is rendered. The airport appeals board may waive the fee upon a finding of financial hardship. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-805. - Procedure on appeal. 
(a)  The airport appeals board shall set a hearing date for review of the appeal within forty (40) calendar days of the receipt of notice of appeal by the airport manager. 
(b)  The airport appeals board shall take testimony from all parties to the appeal. The hearing shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The parties may, if they choose, be represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The airport appeals board shall prepare a written summary of the hearing and shall set forth the decision reached. A decision shall be rendered and sent in accordance with section 3-407 to all parties to the appeal within fifteen (15) calendar days of the hearing. The decision of the airport appeals board is final unless the council airport committee initiates review in accordance with section 3-124. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-806. - Abatement variances and time extensions. 
(a)  Any person may request a variance or time extension of a notice to abate or an assessment. Such request shall be made to the airport appeals board. 
(b)  The same time limits for filing and written requirement that appear in section 3-704 on appeals applies to this section. 
(c)  The procedure shall be the same as set forth in section 3-705. 
(d)  The airport appeals board may grant a variance only where it is determined that all of the following apply: 
(1)  Special circumstances or conditions apply to this appeal application such as hardship; 
(2)  Authorization of the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; and 
(3)  Authorization of the variance will not be materially detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood or to the public welfare in general. 
(e)  If a variance is granted by the airport appeals board, the conditions in paragraph (d) allowing the variance and the extent of the variance shall be explicitly stated. 
(f)  The airport appeals board may grant one (1) extension of the time limit set forth in section 3-803. Such extension shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. The extension period granted by the airport appeals board starts to run on the day the airport appeals board issues a decision pursuant to section 3-805(c). The airport appeals board may grant an extension only where it is shown that: 
(1)  It would create a hardship to comply with the decision within the fifteen-day period of section 3-803; and 
(2)  The moving party presents a plan that is approved by the airport appeals board, by which said party will comply with the decision within no more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-807. - Appeal from decision of airport appeals board. 
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the airport appeals board may seek review by the council airport committee in accordance with section 3-124. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Sec. 3-808. - Stay of order during appeal. 
Except for orders to vacate or violations presenting an imminent hazard, the timely filing of an appeal shall stay enforcement of a notice to abate or assessment until the appeal is finally determined by the airport appeals board. 
( Ord. No. 20-240 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-11-20)  
Secs. 3-809—3-900. - Reserved.  
Chapter 4 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention generally, Ch. 11; smoke detectors and fire alarm systems, § 11-66 et seq.; offenses generally, Ch. 21; police generally, Ch. 23; ambulances, § 27-101 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 28. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm site means a premises or location served by an alarm system. 
Alarm system means a device or system that transmits a signal intended to summon emergency services of the city. The term includes an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. Alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is used for a habitation at a permanent site; 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants within a premises; or 
(3)  An alarm installed upon a premises occupied by the city. 
Apartment means a room or suite of rooms in a multifamily dwelling or apartment complex arranged, designed or occupied as a place of residence by a single-family, individual or group of individuals. 
Apartment complex means any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three (3) or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three (3) or more families living in independent dwelling units. 
Burglar alarm notification means a notification intended to summon the police, which is initiated or triggered manually or by an alarm system designed to respond to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
Director means the chief of police or the chief of the fire department. 
Emergency medical assistance alarm notification means a notification intended to summon emergency medical assistance from the city. 
False burglar alarm notification means a burglar alarm notification to the police when the responding officer arrives at the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm notification and determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that no evidence existed which would indicate entry or attempted entry into the premises. 
False emergency medical assistance alarm notification means an emergency medical assistance alarm notification to the fire department when the responding fire department personnel find no evidence of need for emergency medical assistance. 
False fire alarm notification means a fire alarm notification to the fire department when the responding fire department personnel find no evidence of a fire having occurred or of a need for fire department services. 
False robbery alarm notification means a robbery alarm notification to police when the responding police officer finds no evidence of a robbery. 
Fire alarm notification means a notification to the fire department intended to summon firefighting forces, which is initiated or triggered manually by an alarm system designed to react to any of the visual or physical characteristics of a fire. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and has as its purpose the summoning of aid from a city department. 
Permit means a certificate, license, permit, or other form of permission that authorized a person to engage in an action. 
Robbery alarm notification is a notification intended to summon the police when a robbery occurs by means of an alarm system designed to be purposely activated by a human. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-1), 8-2-88; Ord. No. 91-167, § I, 11-5-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-2. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to violate by commission or omission any provision of this chapter that imposes upon him a duty or responsibility. 
(b)  In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this chapter to hold a corporation, partnership or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership or other association and within the scope of his employment. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-19, 3½-20), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-3. - Alarm systems in apartment complexes. 
(a)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a master alarm permit from the director if any alarm system is operated in any residential unit on the premises, whether the alarm system is furnished by the apartment complex owner as an amenity or contracted for by an individual tenant. 
(b)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall provide the director with a list of occupied residential units containing alarm systems and the name or names of persons occupying said unit on or before the fifth day of each month. 
(c)  A tenant of an apartment house shall obtain an alarm permit from the director before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's apartment. 
(d)  For purposes of assessing service fees and enforcing the provisions of this article against an individual apartment unit, the alarm permit of the tenant supersedes the master alarm permit of the apartment complex. The tenant is responsible for payment of service fees for false alarm notifications emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's apartment unit. The master alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of service fees for false alarm notifications emitted from unoccupied residential units. 
(e)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant areas and office, storage, and equipment areas. 
(Ord. No. 91-167, § III, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 4-4. - Other types of alarms. 
(a)  A person shall not install or maintain an alarm system except for the purpose of eliciting responses to burglaries, robberies, fires or requests for emergency medical assistance, unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(b)  If innovations in alarm systems or other types of alarm devices adversely affect emergency services of the city, the director may promulgate rules and regulations in order to protect the city's emergency services. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-7), 8-2-88; Ord. No. 91-167, § II, 11-5-91)  
Secs. 4-5—4-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 4-26. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated an alarm system without an alarm permit issued by the City of Denton or without having paid the annual alarm permit fee which shall be due on the anniversary date of the permit. An annual permit and an annual permit fee is required for each alarm site. The annual permit fee is established by the city council and is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-2), 8-2-88; Ord. No. 2004-214, § 1, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 4-27. - Application. 
(a)  A person shall make application for a permit for a burglar and robbery alarm at the police department. A person shall make application for a permit for fire and/or emergency medical assistance alarms at the office of the fire marshal in the fire department. 
(b)  Should an alarm system emit more than one (1) type of alarm notification, a person shall make application for all permits at the office of the fire marshal in the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-3), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-28. - Form of application. 
(a)  If the applicant for a permit required by this article is an individual, the application shall be subscribed and sworn to by such person. If the applicant is an individual and does not reside, operate any business or is not employed within the state or if the applicant is a firm or partnership and no owner or general partner resides, operates a business or is employed within the state, then the application must also be subscribed and sworn to by the individual having the authority and responsibility for the management and operation of the alarm business within the state. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be subscribed and sworn to by at least one (1) principal corporate officer. If the applicant is a corporation and none of its principal corporate officers are responsible for the management and operation of the alarm business within the state, the application shall also be subscribed and sworn to by the individual having the authority and responsibility for the management and operation of the alarm business within the state. 
(b)  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the state and place of its incorporation, the location of the applicant's principal place of business, a list of the principal corporate officers and the business address, residence address and the office or position held by each principal corporate officer. 
(c)  If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall specify the location of the applicant's principal place of business and the name, business address and residence address of each partner. 
(d)  The application shall include the following information for each individual required to subscribe and swear to it: 
(1)  The individual's full name, business address and residence address; 
(2)  The individual's residence and business telephone number; 
(3)  The individual's date and place of birth; 
(4)  The individuals responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system. 
(e)  The application shall state the address site for the location of the alarm system and whether it is a single-family residence, multifamily residence or commercial business site. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-4), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-29. - Issuance or denial. 
Upon receipt of a completed annual application form and the annual permit fee, the City of Denton shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the applicant: 
(1)  Has failed to pay a service charge fee assessed under section 4-62; 
(2)  Has had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected; 
(3)  Has made a false statement of a material matter; 
(4)  Committed any act which, if committed by a permittee, would be grounds for the revocation of a permit under section 4-32; or 
(5)  While without a permit, knowingly and willfully committed or aided and abetted in the commission of any act for which a permit is required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-5), 8-2-88; Ord. No. 2004-214, § 1, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 2007-102, § 1, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 4-30. - Transfer. 
An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. However, the individual designated to relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder shall inform the director of any change that alters information listed on the permit application, and no fee shall be assessed for such changes. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-6), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-31. - Duration. 
The duration of a permit required by this article is for one year (twelve months), or until the permit is revoked or otherwise terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-8), 8-2-88; Ord. No. 97-087, § I, 3-18-97; Ord. No. 2004-214, § 1, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 4-32. - Termination of permit. 
(a)  The director may revoke an alarm system permit or refuse to renew an alarm system permit for any violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The director may revoke a permit for failure to pay a service charge fee as required by section 4-62. 
(c)  The director may revoke a permit or refuse to renew an alarm system permit at an alarm site if an alarm system generates an excessive number of false alarm notifications in a twelve-month period; but revocation or nonrenewal may only occur in the event the permit holder has failed to pay any service charge fee as required by section 4-62. In each respective category, and excessive number shall be as follows: 
(1)  Five (5) false burglar alarms; 
(2)  Five (5) false robbery alarms; 
(3)  Five (5) false emergency medical assistance alarms; and 
(4)  Five (5) false fire alarms. 
(d)  Emergency service response shall continue to any alarm notification unless the alarm system permit is revoked as provided herein. No alarm system permit shall be terminated without providing the permit holder with thirty (30) days' written notice of revocation. 
(e)  A revocation may be withdrawn and a permit reinstated or a permit may be renewed upon a sufficient showing that the conditions which caused the action have been corrected and if the director determines that the alarm system is likely to be maintained and operated in a responsible manner and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-16), 8-2-88; Ord. No. 91-167, § V, 11-5-91) 
State Law reference— Disconnecting alarms, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4413(29bb).  
Sec. 4-33. - Unauthorized operation while permit revoked. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to operate an alarm system during a period of permit revocation or after the director refuses to renew his permit. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-17), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-34. - Appeal from denial or revocation. 
(a)  If the director refuses to issue or renew a permit required by this article or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal to the address listed on the permit. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the director. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays an action of the director in revoking a permit until the city manager makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the director is final. 
(b)  The city manager shall serve as the hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing, and the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within thirty (30) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the director, and his decision is final unless the applicant or permit holder files a written request with the city council for a hearing within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of the action of the hearing officer. A written request to the city council stays the action of the hearing officer in revoking a permit until the city council renders a final decision. 
(c)  If a request for an appeal hearing with the city council is filed within the ten-day period, the city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing before the city council. The city council shall decide the appeal on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The city council shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the hearing officer by a majority vote; failure to reach a majority decision on a motion shall leave the hearing officer's decision unchanged. The decision of the city council is final as to administrative remedies within the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-18), 8-2-88)  
Secs. 4-35—4-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 4-56. - Reporting of alarm signals. 
(a)  A holder of a permit required by this chapter shall not report alarm signals through a relaying intermediary that does not meet the requirements of this chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated by the director or is not licensed by the state board of private investigators and private security agencies. 
(b)  A permit holder shall not report alarm signals through a designated emergency 911 telephone line. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-10), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-57. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
The holder of a permit required under this chapter shall: 
(1)  Cause an adjustment to be made to the sensory mechanism of his alarm system in order to suppress false indications; 
(2)  Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system; and 
(3)  Display in a prominent exterior location an identification notice provided by the director; 
(4)  Adjust the mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than thirty (30) minutes after being activated; or 
(5)  Provide personnel, within thirty (30) minutes after being notified by the city, to reset the alarm system and provide access to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-11), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-58. - Manual reset required. 
A person in control of a local alarm or an alarm system that causes an alarm notification to be sent directly to the city shall adjust or cause the adjustment of the mechanism so that upon activation the system will transmit only one (1) alarm signal and will not transmit another alarm signal without first being manually reset. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-12), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-59. - Inspection. 
Upon reasonable notification, the police chief or fire chief may inspect an alarm site and alarm system of a permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-13), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-60. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall: 
(1)  Send notification of an alarm to the city by a human operator; 
(2)  Keep his business premises locked and secured at all times; 
(3)  Allow an inspection of his business premises by authorized representatives of the police or fire department at any reasonable time; 
(4)  Report alarms only over a special telephone number designated by the director; and 
(5)  Send alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-14), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-61. - Direct alarm reporting. 
A permit holder whose alarm system transmits automatic alarm notifications directly to the city over the normal telephone system shall: 
(1)  Transmit in the form and content specified by the director; 
(2)  Transmit over special telephone lines designed for such use; 
(3)  Design his system so that it will notify the permit holder or his designated agent identified on the permit application when an alarm is transmitted to the city; 
(4)  Furnish the director upon request with satisfactory copies of the alarm operation procedures, maintenance procedures and an up-to-date circuit diagram of the components of the alarm system; and 
(5)  Furnish the name, address and telephone number of an alarm company, licensed by the state board of private investigators and private security agencies, responsible on a twenty-four-hour, seven-day-a-week basis for correcting any malfunction that may occur. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-15), 8-2-88)  
Sec. 4-62. - Service charge for false alarms. 
(a)  The holder of a permit required under this chapter shall pay a fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary for each false burglar alarm notification emitted from an alarm site that is in excess of three (3) false burglar alarm notifications within a twelve-month period. 
(b)  The holder of a permit shall pay a fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary for each false fire alarm notification that is emitted from an alarm site that is in excess of three (3) false fire alarm notifications within a twelve-month period. 
(c)  The director shall assess separate fees, established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, against a robbery alarm permit holder for each false robbery alarm notification emitted from the alarm site. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the twelve-month period shall begin on the date the permit is issued to the permit holder and thereafter on subsequent renewal dates. If a permit is revoked under section 4-32, the twelve-month period shall begin when the revocation is withdrawn. 
(e)  The director shall assess the permit holder of an emergency medical assistance alarm a fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary for each false emergency medical assistance alarm notification emitted from the alarm site. 
(f)  A permit holder shall pay a fee assessed under this section within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice that it has been assessed. 
(g)  The permit holder will be exempt from any fee charged for a false alarm notification which is later shown by the permit holder to either have been justified or which was due to a natural or manmade catastrophe or other situation specifically exempted by the director. In addition, no fee shall be charged under this section for thirty (30) days after the date of installation of an alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 88-130, § I(3½-9), 8-2-88; Ord. No. 91-167, § IV, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 2007-102, § 2, 5-15-07)  
Chapter 5 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage consumption in parks, § 22-32. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - License required. 
(a)  The city does hereby levy an annual license fee pursuant to V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36 which shall be one-half of the state fee upon every person as permitted by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36 unless prohibited by state law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to conduct any business in the city for which a license is required by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36 and this section without obtaining such license. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3½-11, 3½-12) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36.  
Sec. 5-2. - Permit required. 
(a)  The city does hereby levy an annual permit fee pursuant to V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38 on every person doing business in the city as permitted by the state alcoholic beverage code which shall be one-half of the state fee for each permit issued for premises located in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business in the city for which a permit is required by the state alcoholic beverage code and this section without obtaining such permit. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3½-11, 3½-12) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38.  
Sec. 5-3. - Rules and regulations for sales. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital is prohibited. 
(b)  Measurement of distances: The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(Ord. No. 2014-405, § 1, 11-18-14)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 2000, repealed ch. 6, arts. I—IV, §§ 6-1—6-38, 6-51—6-60, 6-76—6-78, 6-86—6-89, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1966 Code, §§ 4-1—4-7.1, 4.8—4-19.2, 4-20—4-22.2, 4-23, 4-31—4-34, 4-41—4-53, 12-17(e), 12-31—12-33; Ord. No. 85-73, § I, adopted April 2, 1985; Ord. No. 89-115, §§ I(4-5, 4-6), II, adopted Sept. 5, 1989; Ord. No. 90-188, § II(12-36—12-40), adopted Nov. 20, 1990; Ord. No. 91-174, § II(20-81), adopted Nov. 5, 1991; Ord. No. 93-012, §§ I—III, adopted Jan. 19, 1993; Ord. No. 94-069, §§ I—III, adopted April 19, 1994; Ord. No. 94-146, §§ I—III, adopted Oct. 2, 1990; Ord. No. 96-166, § I, adopted July, 16, 1996; Ord. No. 99-216, § 1, adopted June 15, 1999; and Ord. No. 99-290, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 1999. 
Cross reference— Health and human services generally, Ch. 14; parks and recreation generally, Ch. 22; animals in parks, § 22-30. 
State Law reference— Animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the Denton Animal Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Abandon means to leave without human supervision, unattended, and without adequate provisions, for an unspecified amount of time. 
Animal means all living creatures, excluding human beings, and where applicable includes birds, fish, mammals, and reptiles. 
Animal control officer means the person employed by the city to represent and act for the city in the impoundment of animals, controlling of stray animals, enforcement of this chapter and applicable state regulations, and as otherwise authorized herein. 
Animal control center or shelter means a city-operated or designated facility for the impounding and caring of animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Animal waste means feces, urine, litter, bedding, spoiled food, or other animal matter that causes foul odors, attracts vermin or encourages their reproduction. 
At large or running at large means an animal not kept within an enclosure or fenced area or restrained by a leash of sufficient strength and length to control the actions of said animal. 
Building means any structure or enclosure intended for use or occupation as a habitation or for some purpose of trade, manufacture, ornament or use. 
Cat means an animal of the feline species, both male and female. 
Circus or carnival means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
City means the City of Denton, Texas. 
Commercial kennel means any premise wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs and cats. 
Dangerous animal means a dog that makes an unprovoked attack on a person, or a domestic animal, that causes bodily injury. 
Dog means an animal of the canine species, both male and female. 
Domestic animal means all species of animals commonly and universally accepted as being domesticated. 
EAID means electronic animal identification device commonly referred to as a microchip. 
Enclosure means a fenced area or structure that physically blocks the escape of an animal contained therein. Additionally, in non-rural zoning districts, an enclosure must serve as a physical barrier to the entry of adults, children and dogs. 
Equestrian developments means residential developments which are designed to accommodate equestrian activities and which provide such facilities as community stables, riding rings, pastures, and riding trails. In addition, private stables may be located on individual residential lots. 
Estray means any stray livestock. 
Feral cat means a cat that is (1) born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat and is not socialized, (2) is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized, or (3) lives on a farm. 
Feral cat caretaker means a person other than the owner, who provides food, water or shelter to, or otherwise cares for, a feral cat. 
Feral cat colony means a group of cats that congregates, more or less, together as a unit. Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any non-feral cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of it. 
Ferret means a domesticated animal of the putorious family, both male and female. 
Fowl means any species of feathered animals which are normally suited for, or kept or used on, a farm, a ranch, or similar setting for agricultural purposes such as food or food production, animal husbandry, and production of clothing material, commerce, or other similar purpose, regardless of age, breed, or sex, unless stated herein, or determined by the animal control officer. The following and similar species shall be considered to be fowl regardless of age, breed, or sex, unless otherwise stated herein or determined by the animal control officer: chickens, ducks, game hens, geese, guineas, peafowl, pheasant, quail, swans, and turkey. 
Habitation means a structure that is adapted for the overnight accommodation of persons. 
Harbor means the act of keeping and or caring for an animal or of providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter, or care, for a period of at least three (3) days, or protection from impoundment. 
Hybrid means the offspring of two (2) animals of different species. 
Livestock means any species of animals which are normally suited for, or are kept or used on, a farm, ranch or similar setting for agricultural purposes such as animal husbandry, food or food production, production of fiber or clothing material, riding, driving, pulling, hauling, commerce, or similar purpose. For purposes of this chapter, the following or similar species of animals shall be considered to be livestock, regardless of age, breed, or sex, unless otherwise stated herein or determined by the animal control officer: bovine, equine, goats, sheep, swine. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping or having custody or control of, or who has primary responsibility for the care of, or right of property in, an animal. 
Police canine means any dog trained or being trained for law enforcement purposes, which is under the care, custody, and control of a law enforcement officer. 
Possession means actual care, custody, control or management of an animal. 
Premises means any parcel of land that is owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a person. 
Prohibited animal means any species of animals whose sale, display, or possession within the city limits is unlawful. The following or similar species of animals, including their hybrids, shall be considered prohibited: 
(1)  Class Reptilia. Family Helodermatidea (the venomous lizards); family Viperidae (rattlesnakes, pit vipers and true vipers); family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras and mambas); family Colubridae—Dispholidus typuss (boomsland), Cyclagras gigas (water cobra) and Bioga dendrophila (mangrove snake) only; order Phidia (racers, boas, water snakes and pythons); order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators, caimans and gavials); 
(2)  Class Aves. Subdivision Ratitae (such as ostriches, rheas, cassowaries and emus); 
(3)  Class Mammalia. Order Chiroptera, including bats; Order Carnivora, family Felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars), except commonly accepted domesticated cats; family Canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes and jackals), except domesticated dogs; family mustelidae (such as weasels, martens, minks, badgers), except domesticated ferrets; family Procyonidae (raccoons; family Ursidae (such as bears); Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and common opossums); order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos); order Proboscidea (elephants); Order Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas); Order Rodentia (such as porcupines); and Order Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison and camels). 
Prohibited animal does not mean a psittacine bird, canary, finch, hamster, guinea pig, rat, mouse, gerbil, or reptile families Leptotyphlopidae and Colubridae. 
Protective custody impound means the impoundment of an animal as the result of a fire, medical emergency, hospitalization, custody arrest, or other natural or manmade situation that leaves the owner, harborer or person otherwise in possession of animal incapable of maintaining control of, or caring for, the animal. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, sidewalks, highways, alleyways, parks and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
Quarantine means the strict isolation of a biting animal or animal suspected of being rabid in a closed cage or pen in a manner that prevents physical contact between the animal and all other animals and humans. 
Sterilization means the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of an animal to render it unable to reproduce. 
Stray animal means any animal for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer, which is found to be at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
Strict isolation means to confine an animal in a closed cage or pen in a manner which prevents physical contact with other animals or people for a period of time specified by the animal control officer. 
Tethered means an animal attached to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device commonly used for the size and type of animal involved. An animal is not considered tethered when the animal is attached to a stationary object, as long as the owner or custodian is physically within reach of the animal. Any tethering device used to tether an animal must be at least ten (10) feet in length. 
Vaccinated means an animal properly injected by a licensed veterinarian with a rabies vaccine licensed for use in that species of animal by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 
Vermin means flies, ticks, fleas, lice, rats, mosquitoes or other small animal or insect which may be annoying, destructive, or injurious to health. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2003-309, § 2, 9-16-03; Ord. No. 2006-330, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2008-059, § 1, 3-4-08; Ord. No. 2016-217 , § 1, 8-2-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-3. - Exemption of city officials from liability. 
All of the regulations provided in this chapter and the functions and duties of all officers, agents, servants or employees of the city in the enforcement of this chapter are declared to be governmental and for the benefit, health and welfare of the general public. Any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for the city in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable by the performance of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties.  
Sec. 6-4. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city authorizes animal control officers to enforce the provisions of this article and to act as the local health authority and animal control authority in enforcing the provisions of applicable sections of the V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code. 
(b)  The authority of an animal control officer includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  The authority to issue citations and swear out summonses for any violation of this article and any other power or duty stated within the terms of this article; 
(2)  The humane destruction of an animal which is diseased or has been seriously injured to the degree that destruction is the most humane course of action or when an animal poses an imminent danger to a person or property; 
(3)  The impoundment of an animal under provisions of this article or when the animal is diseased and endangers the health of a person or another animal; and 
(4)  The pursuit of animals running at large onto private property, excluding entrance into a habitation without the effective consent of the owner, while enforcing the provisions of this article and to enter onto private property and commercial animal establishments to enforce regulations covered in this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and knowingly interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of his or her duties. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer of the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, upon being issued a citation, to give an animal control officer a false name or a false address. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, altar, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or other equipment that is placed on any property by an animal control officer for the purpose of exercising the authority, or performing any duty, prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-5. - Animal control center or shelter. 
The city council shall select and establish facilities in the city for impoundment, adoption, maintenance and humane destruction of stray, at large, diseased, and dangerous animals. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-6. - Animal shelter advisory committee—Creation. 
(a)  There is hereby established and created the animal shelter advisory committee to be composed of seven (7) members who shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  One (1) licensed veterinarian who has a principal place of business or a residence in the City of Denton; 
(2)  One (1) city official; 
(3)  One (1) person who is employed by the City of Denton Animal Shelter; 
(4)  One (1) representative of an animal welfare organization; and 
(5)  Three (3) people who are not involved by occupation or membership in any of the above categories. 
(b)  Each member shall serve a term of office of two (2) years from the date of his or her appointment, and terms shall be staggered. The veterinarian and City of Denton Animal Shelter employee appointed to the animal shelter advisory committee are not required to be qualified voters in the City of Denton, Texas. This section shall supersede section 2-61 as it relates to the appointment of the licensed veterinarian and the City of Denton Animal Shelter employee and their qualification to vote in the City of Denton. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2006-330, § 2, 12-12-06) 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 14.16. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, §2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 6-7. - Same—Purpose; meetings. 
(a)  It shall be the purpose of the animal shelter advisory committee to assist the city in complying with the requirements of the animal shelter act, V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 823.005, and to make recommendations to the city council regarding methods and procedures necessary to ensure compliance with the Act. 
(b)  The committee shall meet at least three (3) times per year. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-8. - Restraining animals and tethering animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer, or person in possession of any animal to permit the animal to run at large in the city or to trespass upon the premises of any other person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer, or person in possession of any animal to leave the animal unattended in a public place regardless of whether or not it is restrained by a leash. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer, or person in possession of any animal to leave the animal restrained by a leash and unattended in any manner that allows the animal to enter the private property of another without the effective consent of the owner. 
(d)  Subsections (a) through (c) do not apply to police canines. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to restrain a dog by a fixed point chain or tether unless the chain or tether is at least ten (10) feet long, has swivels at each end, and is attached to a pulley or trolley mounted cable that is mounted no more than seven (7) feet above ground level. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to restrain a dog with a chain or tether something is missing shall attach the chain or tether to a properly fitted collar or harness worn by the dog. A person may not wrap a chain or tether around a dog's neck. A person may not restrain a dog with a chain or tether that weighs more than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of the dog's body weight. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to restrain a dog in a manner that does not allow the dog to have access to necessary shelter and water. A chain or tether used to restrain a dog must, by design and placement, be unlikely to become entangled. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2006-330, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 6-9. - Animal nuisances. 
It shall be considered a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Harbor, keep, or control any animal on their premises which by barking, howling, or crowing creates noise to the degree that the noise interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property by its occupants. 
(2)  Keep any animal in such a manner as to endanger the public health in the following ways: 
a.  By the accumulation of organic animal wastes which cause foul and offensive odors; 
b.  By being a hazard to any other animal or human being; or 
c.  By keeping animal pens, stables or enclosures in an unsanitary condition. 
(3)  Keep bees in such a manner as to deny the reasonable use of adjacent property or endanger personal health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00) 
Cross reference— Noise generally, § 20-1.  
Sec. 6-10. - Defecation of dogs on public and private property. 
(a)  An owner, harborer, or other person in possession of a dog commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the dog to defecate in the city on private or public property and fails to remove and dispose of any excreta the dog deposits. 
(b)  An owner, harborer, or other person in possession of a dog commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Knowingly permits the dog to enter or be present on private property located in a public place; and 
(2)  Fails to have in his possession materials or implements that, either alone or in combination with each other, can be used to immediately and in a sanitary and lawful manner both remove and dispose of any excreta the dog may deposit on the property. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) or (b) that: 
(1)  The property was owned, leased, or controlled by the owner, harborer, or person in possession of the dog; 
(2)  The dog was specially trained to assist a person with a disability and was in the possession of that disabled person at the time it defecated or was otherwise present on the property; 
(3)  The owner or person in control of the property had given prior consent for the dog to defecate on the property; or 
(4)  The dog is a police canine being used in official law enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-11. - Confinement of stray animals by individual. 
If a stray animal is found upon the premises of another or running at large, the occupant of the premises, or person discovering the animal running at large, may confine the animal only for so long as reasonably necessary to notify the animal control center and have the animal impounded, or deliver said animal to the animal control center. In attempting to confine the animal, the occupant shall not use any force that is intended or known by the occupant to cause or in the manner of its use or intended use is capable of causing death or injury to the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-12. - Animal care generally. 
Animals shall be cared for, treated and transported in a humane manner and not in violation of V.T.C.A. Penal Code § 42.11, V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Tit. 10, or any other provision of law, including federal, state and local laws, ordinances and rules. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly abandon any animal within the corporate limits of the city. Any person violating this section shall bear the full costs and expenses incurred by the city in the care of the abandoned animal and the person shall reimburse the city all costs as determined by the animal control officer. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly confine or allow to be confined any animal in a motor vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such periods of time as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water or any other circumstances which might cause suffering, disability or death. An animal control officer who reasonably believes that an animal is in a motor vehicle or trailer under such circumstances is authorized to enter the vehicle to remove the animal and transport the animal to the animal control center. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal which is inflicted with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is in a painfully crippled or diseased condition, that to keep said animal alive would be considered inhumane. All such animals shall be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian or turned over to the animal control center to be humanely destroyed. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly color, dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of any chicken, duckling, other fowl, rabbit or aquatic turtle or to possess for the purpose of sale, exchange or gift any of the above-mentioned animals which have been so colored. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, offer for sale, exchange or give away any chicken, duckling or other fowl, rabbit or aquatic turtle younger than eight (8) weeks of age as a toy, premium, novelty or pet unless the manner or method of display is first approved by the animal control officer. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to produce or participate in the production of a circus, carnival, or other performing animal exhibition in which an animal is induced or encouraged to perform through the use of a chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual device in a manner which causes or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to raise or kill a cat, dog, ferret, or rabbit for the skin or fur. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to mutilate any live animal. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed veterinarian to dock the tail or crop the ears of any animal. 
(10)  A person commits an offense if he: 
a.  Beats, cruelly treats, torments, mentally abuses, overloads, overworks, or otherwise abuses an animal; 
b.  Causes, instigates, or permits any dog fight, cock fight, bull fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans; 
c.  Fails to provide an animal in his possession with adequate wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from inclement weather and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; 
d.  While transporting an animal in a vehicle, fails to restrain the animal in a manner that prevents the animal from leaving the vehicle or being accidentally thrown from the vehicle; or 
e.  Treats an animal in an inhumane or cruel manner as defined by V.T.C.A. Penal Code § 42.09 or V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 821. 
(11)  It is an exception to the application of this section if, at the time of the conduct charged, the actor: 
a.  Was a licensed veterinarian engaged in the legitimate practice of veterinary medicine; or 
b.  Was engaged in bona fide experimentation for scientific research. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-13. - Vaccination of cats, dogs, and ferrets. 
(a)  Every owner of a dog, cat, or ferret, four months of age or older, shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies, with an antirabies vaccine approved by the Texas Board of Health. Only a licensed veterinarian shall administer the vaccine, whether the vaccine is of the modified live virus or the inactivated type. 
(b)  Upon vaccination, the administering veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the cat, dog or ferret as evidence thereof, a certificate of vaccination and a tag that contains a serial number to correspond with the vaccination certificate number, the issuing clinic's name and phone number. The owner shall place the rabies tag on the animals collar or harness while the animal is outside the owners residence. 
(c)  All such cats, dogs, or ferrets shall be revaccinated at intervals approved and accepted by the veterinarian community. The owner shall provide sufficient proof to the Animal Services Unit of the City of Denton of valid rabies vaccination in compliance with all state laws. Any person establishing residence within the City of Denton shall comply with this section within ten (10) days of establishing such residency. 
(d)  If an unvaccinated cat, dog, or ferret inflicts a bite, scratch, or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits, a rabies vaccine shall not be administered to the cat, dog, or ferret until the conclusion of a ten (10) day quarantine period, beginning with the date of the bite, scratch, or attack. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly possess a dog, cat, or ferret that has not been vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by this section. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly use a certificate of vaccination or tag of any dog, cat, or ferret other than the one for which it was issued. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a person to alter or obliterate any information contained in a certificate of vaccination or on a vaccination tag. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog, cat, or ferret to fail or refuse to present a valid vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian to an animal control officer, upon request, that such animal is currently vaccinated against rabies as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2006-330, § 4, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 6-14. - Registration of cats, dogs, and ferrets required. 
(a)  Every owner of a cat, dog, or ferret, which is four (4) or more months of age and is kept in the city, shall register the animal with the animal control center. 
(b)  In order to register a cat, dog, or ferret, the owner, or his designee, shall: 
(1)  Provide a current rabies vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian that contains identifying information regarding the animal including, but not limited to, breed, sex, and sterilization information; 
(2)  Present a valid picture identification card issued to him by a state; and 
(3)  Pay a registration fee as established by the city council and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  Upon registration, the animal control center shall execute and furnish to the owner of the cat, dog or ferret as evidence thereof, a certificate of registration and a tag that contains a serial number to correspond with the registration certificate number. The owner shall place the registration tag on the animal's collar or harness while the animal is outside the owner's residence. If the tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall obtain a duplicate upon payment of a fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly possess a dog, cat, or ferret that has not been registered as prescribed by this section. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly use a certificate of registration or tag of any dog, cat, or ferret other than the one for which it was issued. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a person to alter or obliterate any information contained in a certificate of registration or on a registration tag. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a person who owns or harbors a dog, cat, or ferret to fail or refuse to present proof to an animal control officer, upon request, that such animal is currently registered as required by this section 
(h)  The animal control center shall waive the prescribed registration fees for owners under the following conditions: 
(1)  The registration of an animal trained to assist the hearing impaired, visually impaired, or physically impaired; 
(2)  The registration of a dog employed as a police canine by a law enforcement agency; 
(3)  The registration of a spayed or neutered animal by a resident sixty-five (65) years of age or older; or 
(4)  The registration of a spayed or neutered animal which has had a microchip implanted. 
The eligibility for a waiver of the registration fee does not relieve the owner of his responsibility to register a dog, cat, or ferret as prescribed by this section. 
(i)  For purposes of this section, "temporarily" means a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Non-residents of the city who stay within the city limits temporarily; or 
(2)  Residents who may harbor an animal temporarily. 
(Ord. No. 2006-330, § 5, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 6-15. - Impounding of cats, dogs, and ferrets. 
(a)  An animal control officer is authorized to impound any animal which is running at large within the city or for which impoundment is otherwise authorized by this article or state law. Where an animal is running at large in a public place, the impounding officer may enter upon the public place for the purpose of impoundment or issuance of a citation or both, unless the officer has notice that entry is forbidden. In no case, however, shall an animal control officer enter a habitation on private property without the effective consent of the owner, or the order of a magistrate, or as otherwise allowed by state law. 
(b)  Any impounded animal which has been seriously injured or is seriously ill may be euthanized immediately to prevent suffering, or given to a non-profit humane organization for the purpose of veterinary medical care, as determined by the animal control officer. The animal shelter shall not be responsible for providing veterinary care for any sick or injured animal. 
(c)  Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious meals may be immediately euthanized to prevent suffering or given to an individual or to a non-profit humane organization for the purpose of caring for said animal. 
(d)  The owner of any animal impounded under the terms of this article shall have the right to redeem same, unless otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(e)  Animals impounded in accordance with this section shall be held at the animal control center for a minimum of ninety-six (96) hours. If the owner does not redeem the animal before the holding period expires, the animal shall become the property of the animal control center and the animal control center shall dispose of the animal through adoption, transfer to an animal rights organization, or euthanasia. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00) 
State Law reference— Restraint and impoundment of dogs and cats, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-6a, § 3.08)  
Sec. 6-16. - Protective custody impounds. 
(a)  If an animal is impounded as the result of a fire, medical emergency, hospitalization, custody arrest, or other natural or manmade situation that leaves the owner, harborer or person otherwise in possession of the animal temporarily incapable of maintaining control of, or caring for, the animal, an animal control officer may impound the animal and house it at the animal control center. 
(b)  The owner, harborer or the person that was in possession of the animal will be notified of the location of the animal, the conditions under which the animal may be released, and that the animal will be held for a period of ninety-six (96) hours. If the owner, or his designee, has not claimed the animal within ninety-six (96) hours, the animal becomes the property of the city to be disposed of by the animal control center through adoption, transfer to an animal rights organization, or euthanasia. 
(c)  Owners, or their designees, shall fulfill all the requirements for redemption as prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2006-330, § 6, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 6-17. - Requirements to redeem a dog, cat, or ferret. 
(a)  To redeem a dog, cat, or ferret impounded under the provisions of this article, the owner, or his designee, shall: 
(1)  Provide a current rabies vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian that contains identifying information regarding the animal including, but not limited to, breed, sex, and sterilization information; 
(2)  Present a valid picture identification card issued to him by a state; 
(3)  Pay impound and holding fees as established by the city council and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary; and 
(4)  If not the owner, present sufficient authorization to take possession of the animal. 
(b)  If the owner, or his designee, cannot, or refuses to, provide proof that the animal is currently vaccinated against rabies, the owner, or his designee, shall pay a licensed veterinarian for the administration of the rabies vaccination and present a receipt of payment issued by the veterinary clinic prior to the release of the animal. The animal shall be vaccinated within seven (7) days following the release of the animal. 
(c)  If an animal is not registered as required by this article at the time of redemption, the owner, or his designee, shall register the animal prior to the release of the animal. If the animal is not currently vaccinated as required by this article, the owner shall present a pre-paid receipt from a licensed veterinarian for the vaccination and pay the registration fee prior to the release of the animal. The registration certificate and tag will be issued upon presentation of the required rabies vaccination certificate. 
(d)  An owner, or his designee, who redeems an animal, six (6) months of age or older, for a second or subsequent impound shall provide proof that the animal has been spayed or neutered prior to the release of the animal. If the owner cannot provide proof that the animal is spayed or neutered, the owner shall pay a veterinary clinic for the cost of spaying or neutering the animal and present a receipt of payment to the animal control center prior to release of the animal. The animal shall be spayed or neutered within fourteen (14) days after the release of the animal. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a person redeeming an animal under this section to: 
(1)  Fail to provide proof of rabies vaccination within ten (10) days of the release of the animal; or 
(2)  Fail to provide proof that the animal was spayed or neutered within fourteen (14) days of the release of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2006-330, § 7, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 6-18. - Adoption of dogs, cats, and ferrets. 
(a)  The animal control center is authorized to offer for adoption any impounded animal not redeemed by its owner within ninety-six (96) hours or any animal released by its owner for adoption, except where otherwise specified. 
(b)  Animal services officers shall be the sole judge as to whether or not an animal is suitable to offer for adoption. A decision to offer a particular animal for adoption shall not constitute a warranty, expressed or implied, of the health, temperament, or age of the animal. 
(c)  In order to adopt a dog or cat, a person shall: 
(1)  Complete the necessary adoption paperwork and pay an adoption fee as established by the city council and kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(2)  If required by this article, pay a registration fee as established by the city council and kept on file with the city secretary. 
(d)  In order to adopt a ferret, a person shall: 
(1)  Complete the necessary adoption paperwork; 
(2)  Pay a veterinary clinic for the administration of vaccinations against rabies and other communicable diseases common to the animal species and present a receipt of payment from the veterinary clinic; 
(3)  If required by this article, pay a registration fee as established by the city council and kept on file with the city secretary; and 
(4)  Subsequently provide certification from the veterinary clinic that the animal was vaccinated as prescribed within seven (7) days of the animals release from the animal shelter. 
(e)  A person who adopts an animal from the animal control center, that is determined by the city's contracted veterinary provider to be either of insufficient age or medical condition to receive vaccinations or be spayed or neutered as prescribed by law, shall follow the instructions provided by the contracted veterinary provider and ensure that the adopted animal is subsequently vaccinated and spayed or neutered by the contracted veterinary provider when it is medically capable. 
(f)  If a person fails to meet the requirements of this section, the animal center is authorized to impound the animal. It shall be unlawful for any person, who is in violation of this section, to fail or refuse to surrender an animal adopted from the animal control center. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2005-342, § 1, 11-15-05)  
Sec. 6-19. - Transfer of animals to other releasing agencies. 
The custody of cats, dogs, and ferrets eligible to be placed for adoption under this article may be transferred without fee to animal shelters or humane organizations so that these organizations may act as releasing agencies and place the animals for adoption pursuant to V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 828. Before any animals will be transferred to other releasing agencies, these agencies must meet any administrative requirements established by the animal control center. All responsibilities required of releasing agencies under [V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code,] Ch. 828 for adoption, immunization and sterilization of impounded animals shall be solely the responsibility of the animal shelters or humane organizations and the city shall retain none of these responsibilities upon transfer. The transfer of the animals eligible for adoption to alternate releasing agencies shall be made without any fee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-20. - Injuring, capturing or killing animals or birds. 
(a)  Except as may be otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to intentionally or knowingly interfere with, injure, capture or kill any animal within any public park, driveway, street or other public property of the city except by permission of the city council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally kill, injure or administer poison to any bird whatsoever within the city limits without the permission of the city council. 
(c)  This section does not apply to harmful rodents, reptiles or insects. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-21. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, put or leave a dead animal upon a public place, street, alley, right-of-way or public way or in any solid waste container or upon the property of another person without the other persons consent. 
(b)  All veterinarians and residents shall be charged a fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary for each trip by city employees to pick up one (1) or more dead animals. 
(c)  All veterinarians and residents bringing dead animals to the city's animal control facility shall be assessed and pay a disposal fee per animal, as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave an animal carcass at the city's animal control center, except at times when such center is open to the public and a city employee is available to receive such carcass. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-22. - Euthanasia and cremation of animals. 
(a)  An owner or resident may bring an animal or animals to the animal control center for euthanasia and shall be assessed and pay for each animal the fee established by city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  An owner or resident may bring an animal or animals to be cremated at the city's animal control center and shall be assessed and pay for each animal the fee established by city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-23. - Reporting animal bites, scratches, or suspected rabies. 
(a)  It is the duty of any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to a human to provide a detailed report of the incident to the animal control center as soon as possible, but not later than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the incident. 
(b)  It is the duty of any person having knowledge of a domestic animal that is bitten or scratched by an animal known to have rabies, or suspected of having rabies, to provide a detailed report of the incident to the animal control center as soon as possible, but not later than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the incident. 
(c)  Every veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a cat, dog, ferret, or other domestic animal shall immediately report such fact to the animal control center, stating precisely where such animal may be found. 
(d)  Every veterinarian having an animal quarantined as the result of an incident involving a bite or a scratch shall submit a written report to the animal control center describing the condition of the animal on the initial day of observation, the fifth day, and the tenth day of observation. 
(e)  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies or suspected of having been rabid shall be surrendered to the animal control center for diagnostic purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-24. - Rabies quarantine, confinement and disposition. 
(a)  An animal control officer shall have the authority to order the quarantining of any animal responsible for a bite or scratch to a human or another domestic animal or any animal suspected of having, or having been exposed to, any zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to the human population or other animals. 
(b)  When an animal is diagnosed with rabies, is under suspicion of having rabies, or has bitten or scratched a human, the owner must immediately place the animal in quarantine at the animal control center or at a licensed veterinary clinic within the incorporated limits of the city for a period of not less than ten (10) days from the time of the bite or scratch. If the owner fails or refuses to surrender the animal for quarantine, an animal control officer may obtain a warrant from a magistrate to seize and impound the animal for a period of time as provided in this section. 
(c)  The owner of a dog, cat or ferret subject to quarantine under this section may request permission for home quarantine. The animal control center may allow a home quarantine provided that: 
(1)  The owner can provide valid proof that the animal subject to quarantine is currently vaccinated against rabies; 
(2)  The victim of the bite or scratch is the owner or a member of the immediate family of the owner; 
(3)  The animal subject to the quarantine was not at-large at the time of the bite or scratch; 
(4)  The animal subject to the quarantine has no prior bites or scratches on file with the animal control center; 
(5)  The owner demonstrates sufficient accommodations to isolate the animal subject to quarantine from humans and other animals in the residence; 
(6)  The owner can provide sufficient assurance that the animal will remain inside an enclosed structure for the duration of the quarantine period and may be allowed outside only when restrained on a leash by the owner or other capable adult in the household only for so long as reasonable for the animal to urinate and defecate; 
(7)  The owner agrees not to remove the animal subject to quarantine from the incorporated limits of the city during the prescribed quarantine period; and 
(8)  The animal control officer physically inspects the premises prior to allowing the home quarantine to insure that these conditions can be met and the owner agrees to periodic inspections of the animal subject to quarantine including, but not limited to, the initial day of quarantine, the fifth day and the tenth day of quarantine. 
(d)  The violation of the conditions of home quarantine by any person shall be just cause for seizure and impoundment of the quarantined animal by an animal control officer. If the owner refuses to allow the impoundment of the quarantined animal for the purpose of quarantine, an animal control officer may obtain a warrant from a magistrate to seize and impound the animal for a period of time as prescribed by this section or state law. 
(e)  The owner of an animal that is bitten by or exposed to an animal known to have rabies or suspected of having rabies shall immediately confine the animal and notify the animal control center. The animal control center shall: 
(1)  If the animal is currently vaccinated, order the owner to obtain immediate revaccination and confine the animal for observation for a period of not less than forty-five (45) days; or 
(2)  If the animal is not currently vaccinated, order the owner to confine the animal for a period of not less than ninety (90) days; and 
(3)  Perform an immediate inspection of the animal and the premises with subsequent inspections periodically during the confinement period. 
(f)  Any person having possession of or responsibility for any quarantined animal shall immediately notify the animal control center if such animal escapes or becomes or appears to become sick or dies. In case of death of the animal under quarantine, the person shall immediately surrender the carcass to the animal control center for diagnostic purposes. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any cat, dog, or ferret, which has been quarantined, without the prior approval of the animal control center. 
(h)  The owner of an animal quarantined in accordance with this section or state law shall bear the full cost of the quarantine. If the animal is quarantined at the animal control center, the owner shall pay fees as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(i)  If, upon the expiration of the quarantine period, no animal control officer or veterinarian has observed signs of rabies, a release from quarantine shall be issued to the owner. If the animal does not have current rabies vaccination, the animal shall be vaccinated prior to its release to the owner. 
(j)  If the animal is impounded at the animal control center for quarantine, the owner may redeem the animal in accordance with the provisions of this article. If the owner fails to redeem the animal on or before the third day following release from quarantine, the animal shall become the property of the city and the animal control center is authorized to dispose of the animal through adoption, transfer to an animal rights organization or euthanasia. 
(k)  Unauthorized or prohibited animals that bite or scratch a human or another animal or are suspected of having rabies shall be humanely destroyed and submitted for diagnostic testing. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-25. - Pigeons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns a pigeon to intentionally allow the pigeon to stray in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly be in possession of more than twenty-five (25) pigeons on any premises within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep the enclosure in which such pigeons are confined in such a manner so as to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity or to breed or attract vermin, or to allow such pigeons to cause considerable noise to the annoyance and discomfort of surrounding neighbors so that the reasonable use and enjoyment of their property is disturbed or, in any manner, to endanger the public health or safety or otherwise create a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-26. - Keeping of fowl. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any chicken to maintain more than eight (8) hens on any single parcel of property in a residential neighborhood. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any chicken within the corporate limits of the city in any pen, shed, coop, enclosed structure, or fenced yard, if any part of such enclosure, structure, or yard is within fifty (50) feet of any residence, business or commercial establishment or office, school, hospital or nursing home. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a rooster within the corporate limits of the city in any pen, shed, coop, enclosed structure, or fenced yard, if any part of such enclosure, structure, or yard is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residence, business or commercial establishment or office, school, hospital or nursing home. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any chicken that is not maintained within an enclosed structure or fenced yard that prevents the animal from straying off of the owner's property. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any chicken within the corporate limits of the city unless the person possess a current and valid permit from the city. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any fowl (other than chickens) within the corporate limits of the city in any pen, shed, coop, enclosed structure, or fenced yard, if any part of such enclosure, structure, or yard is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residence, business or commercial establishment or office, school, hospital or nursing home. This section shall not apply to pet birds kept within residential or commercial structures, nor shall it apply to birdhouses for the keeping of migrating or wild birds. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any fowl to maintain yards, pens, sheds, coops, or other enclosures in which such fowl are confined in such a manner as to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity, or to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes or other noxious insects or rodents, or in any manner to endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or to create a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2012-257, § 1, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 6-27. - Livestock; sanitary conditions and registration requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any livestock within the corporate limits of the city if the person does not have a parcel of land at least one acre in size. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor more than two (2) head of livestock within the corporate limits of the city if the person has a parcel of land less than three (3) acres in size. 
(c)  For every parcel of land greater than three (3) acres, a person may have one additional head of livestock for every acre over three (3) acres. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements in subsections (a) through (c), it shall be unlawful for any person to feed or keep any species of swine in any lot, pen, building, stable, or other enclosure in the city, any part of which lot, pen, building, stable or other enclosure is nearer than one thousand (1,000) feet to any building. If a person is in compliance with this subsection, future changes to adjacent property owned by another will be a defense to prosecution under this ordinance. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any livestock within the corporate limits of the city, where there is less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet for each head of cattle or horse and three thousand (3,000) square feet for all other types of livestock. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any livestock to maintain yards, pens, stables, sheds, or other enclosures in which such animals are confined in such a manner as to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity, or to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes or other noxious insects or rodents, or in any manner to endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or to create a public nuisance. 
(g)  Manure and droppings shall be removed from pens, stables, yards, coops and other enclosures weekly and handled or disposed of in such a manner as to keep the premises free of any nuisance. 
(h)  Mound storage of droppings of manure between such removals shall be permitted, only under such conditions as to protect against the breeding of flies, rodents, and to prevent the migration of fly larvae (maggots) into the surrounding soil. 
(i)  The feeding of vegetables, meat scraps or garbage to livestock shall be done only in impervious containers or on an impervious platform. 
(j)  Watering troughs or tanks shall be provided, which shall be equipped with adequate facilities for draining the overflow so as to prevent the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects. 
(k)  No putrescible material shall be allowed to accumulate on the premises; and all such material used to feed, which is unconsumed, shall be removed and disposed of by burial or other sanitary means. 
(l)  Registration requirements. Persons maintaining livestock within the city limits shall annually register with the City of Denton Animal Services Department. The registration shall include a designation by the owner of the use of the property for livestock, proof of the acreage of the parcel of land, the distance requirements for swine if applicable, and the number and type of livestock kept on the parcel. There shall be no fee for this registration. It shall be unlawful for a person to add additional heads of livestock without amending the registration within thirty (30) days of acquiring the additional livestock. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2003-309, § 3, 9-16-03; Ord. No. 2005-291, § 1, 9-20-05) 
Cross reference— Solid waste generally, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 6-28. - Livestock riding or driving. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow livestock to be driven or ridden upon any public property; provided however, horses may be ridden on the unimproved or unpaved portion of the right-of-way and the chief of police, or his designee, may authorize horses and other livestock to be ridden or driven on the right-of-way under the authority of a parade. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow livestock to be driven or ridden on any private property, except on the property of the owner of the livestock or by permission of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-29. - Wild animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any wild animal within the city, except at commercial animal establishments dealing in the sale or handling of such animals and having proper zoning for such commercial establishments and having proper facilities for the restraint and care of such animals. 
(b)  The animal control officer may establish conditions under which it would be permissible to keep or harbor wild animals at locations other than those listed in this section for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-30. - Prohibited animal permit and impoundment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to harbor, own or exhibit a prohibited animal within the city. If a person is found in possession of a prohibited animal and the person does not have a valid permit for possession of the prohibited animal issued by the Animal Services Unit of the City of Denton, the animal may be immediately impounded by an animal services officer or by a City of Denton Police Officer. Section 6-16(b) regarding release or disposition of the animal shall apply to prohibited animals. However, the prohibited animal shall only be released to the owner if the owner has found a place where the animal may be legally kept. 
(b)  It is an exception to the application of subsection (a) of this section if the owner, harborer, or exhibitor holds a prohibited animal permit or is a governmental entity. 
(c)  A permit for the possession of a prohibited animal may be issued only to a zoo, research institution, individual researcher, public or private primary or secondary school, performing animal exhibition, rodeo or circus, or carnival of which the animal is an integral part, if the animal is restrained from inflicting injury upon persons, property or other animals and adequate provision is made for the care and protection of the animal. A permit may be issued to an individual researcher only upon the recommendation of a medical institution or the director of a research institution. 
(d)  The fee for such permit shall be established by the city council and is on file in the office of the city secretary. The permit shall be issued for one (1) or more animals of an owner or exhibitor at a single location. The permit is valid for a designated period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months and may be renewed for the same fee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2006-330, § 8, 12-12-06) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 6-31. - Revocation of prohibited animal permit. 
The animal control officer shall revoke a permit to harbor, own or exhibit a prohibited animal within the city if: 
(1)  The permit holder fails to properly restrain the animal; or 
(2)  The permit holder fails to generally care for or protect the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-32. - Prohibited animal permit appeal from denial or revocation. 
(a)  If the animal control center refuses to issue or renew a prohibited animal permit or revokes a permit, he or she shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to appeal. 
(b)  The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the animal control officer to the chief of police by filing with the chief of police a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the animal control center. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the chief of police stays any action by the animal control center to revoke a permit until a final decision is rendered. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the prescribed period, the action of the animal control center is final. 
(c)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing and shall consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. The hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within thirty (30) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the animal control officer and his decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 6-33. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the city by providing for the disposition of animals determined to be dangerous. 
(b)  The administrative procedures of this article shall apply to any animal required to be restrained in accordance with this article which, while running at large or while restrained in a public place, has bitten or attacked a person or, while running at large, has bitten or attacked another animal and for which a complaint has been filed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-34. - Filing the complaint. 
(a)  To invoke the provisions of this article, a written complaint shall be filed with the animal control center within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the person or animal was attacked or bitten, on a form provided by the city which shall give notice of the penalty for the filing or signing of a false complaint as provided in this article. 
(b)  The complaint shall be signed by the victim of the bite or attack, or the owner of the animal attacked or bitten, as applicable. If the person required to sign the complaint is a minor or is incapacitated, the complaint shall be signed by the persons parent, guardian or legal representative. 
(c)  The complaint shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person attacked or bitten or the owner of the animal attacked or bitten; 
(2)  The facts and circumstances of the incident, including the date, time and location; a description of the animal complained of; and if known, the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the animal complained of, and of any witness; and 
(3)  A statement that the animal complained of, while running at large or while restrained in a public place, made an unprovoked attack on a person or animal in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2016-217 , §§ 2, 3, 8-2-16)  
Sec. 6-35. - Making a false complaint. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to file or sign the written complaint required by this ordinance when the person knows that the complaint contains false information. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-36. - Investigation; determination of probable cause; order of impoundment. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a dangerous animal complaint, the animal control center shall immediately initiate an investigation to determine if there is probable cause to believe that the animal which is the subject of the complaint is dangerous. 
(b)  If the investigating animal control officer determines that there exists probable cause to believe the animal is dangerous, the animal control officer shall request an order of impoundment be issued by the chief of police or his designee. 
(c)  The order of impoundment shall include the facts set forth in the complaint, the duty of the owner to immediately impound the animal, and notification of the subsequent dangerous animal hearing. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an order of impoundment, the owner of the subject animal shall immediately impound the animal at the animal control center or a licensed veterinary clinic or approved animal kennel within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(e)  If the owner of an animal subject to impoundment refuses or fails to immediately impound the animal as required, an animal control officer may obtain a warrant from a magistrate, seize the animal, and transport it to the animal control center. 
(f)  The owner or harborer will bear any and all costs for the impoundment required by this section. 
(g)  Any owner, harborer, or other person having possession of or responsibility for any animal which is subject to an investigation under this article shall immediately notify the animal control center if such animal escapes or becomes or appears to become sick or dies. In case of death of the animal under investigation, the person shall immediately surrender the carcass to the animal control center for diagnostic purposes. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to impound an animal subject to this article, or harbor, hide or secret an animal subject to this article, for the purpose of preventing its impoundment. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, or secure the transport, of an animal subject to this article to any location outside the incorporated limits of the city if the person has knowledge that the animal is the subject of an investigation under this article. 
(j)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an animal control officer from immediately impounding an animal that poses an immediate threat to the health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-37. - Determination hearing. 
(a)  The jurisdiction for a dangerous animal determination hearing under this article shall be assigned to the municipal court of the city. 
(b)  The owner of an animal subject to a dangerous animal determination hearing under this article shall be notified, in writing, of the date, time and location of the hearing within five (5) days after the impoundment of the animal. 
(c)  The determination hearing shall be held within ten (10) days after impoundment of the animal. 
(d)  The hearing shall be held before a magistrate of the municipal court of the city. The magistrate shall consider evidence provided by any interested party in making his determination. 
(e)  If the magistrate determines that the animal which is the subject of the hearing is a danger to the community, the magistrate will issue an order as to the disposition of the animal and any conditions that may be placed upon the owner for the continued possession of the animal. 
(f)  Nothing in this section precludes the owner of an animal which is the subject of the hearing from waiving his right to a determination hearing. If a person waives the right to a hearing, the animal will be assumed to be dangerous and the owner shall immediately authorize the destruction of the animal. If the animal is impounded at the animal control center, the owner shall release the animal to the center for destruction. If the animal is impounded at a veterinary clinic or an animal kennel, the owner shall have the animal destroyed by a licensed veterinarian immediately and provide documentation of the destruction to the animal control center. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-38. - Disposition of a dangerous animal. 
(a)  If, in accordance with this article, a magistrate determines that an animal is dangerous, the magistrate shall issue an order of disposition for the animal. The magistrate may order the destruction of the animal or place special conditions on the owner for the continued maintenance of the animal. 
(b)  If an order of disposition contains special conditions, such conditions shall include, but not be limited to, a requirement that the owner: 
(1)  Register the animal as a dangerous animal with the animal control authority for the area in which the animal is kept; 
(2)  Restrain the animal at all times in a secure enclosure when the owner or harborer is not present; 
(3)  Display signs of a permanent nature at the property lines located on the front and rear of the property and on the secure enclosure of the animal; and 
(4)  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal causing bodily injury to a person. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "secure enclosure" means a locked structure capable of preventing the entry of any part of the body of a human, including children, and capable of preventing the escape, release, or protrusion of any part of the body of the animal. The enclosure shall have secure sides and a floor either attached to the sides or with the sides embedded no less than twelve inches in a concrete border surrounding the base of the enclosure. The concrete border shall be no less than four inches wide and no closer than six feet to any property line. An enclosure shall be adequately lighted and ventilated and must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, "on a leash" means secured on the owner's property by a leash no longer than four feet in length, held by a person of sufficient strength to restrain the animal, and muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the animal from biting any person or any other animal. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, "register" means to: 
(1)  Provide the animal control center with the name, address and telephone number of the person owning or harboring a dangerous animal; 
(2)  Provide the animal control center with the name, general description and two color photographs, one depicting a frontal view and one depicting a side view, of the dangerous animal; 
(3)  Provide the animal control center with a valid rabies vaccination certificate issued for the dangerous animal by a licensed veterinarian; 
(4)  Provide a copy of a current liability insurance policy as prescribed by subsection (b)(3) of this section; 
(5)  Agree to inspections by animal control officers of the dangerous animal and the premises on which the dangerous animal is kept at any reasonable times to insure compliance with the provisions of this article; and 
(6)  Pay a dangerous animal permit fee as authorized by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(f)  For the purpose of this section, "signs" shall mean a sign, at least eight inches by twelve inches, of a permanent nature stating "BEWARE OF DANGEROUS ANIMAL" in red lettering on a white background. The lettering shall be no less than two inches in height and made of a reflective material that is visible in low-light situations or at night. The owner of a dangerous animal shall renew the registration at least annually and submit payment of fees as authorized by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(g)  The owner shall immediately notify the animal control center of any change in status of a dangerous animal, including relocation, transfer of ownership, escape, or death. In the event that the dangerous animal is moved to another location within the city, the animal control center shall inspect the new location to insure compliance with this section. If ownership of the dangerous animal is transferred to another person, that person shall be subject to all requirements of this section. If the dangerous animal is moved to a location outside the incorporated limits of the city, the owner shall inform the animal control center of the new location of the animal. The animal control center shall forward a copy of the magistrate's order of disposition to the local animal control authority of the jurisdiction into which the animal is being moved. 
(h)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly, intentionally, or negligently fails to perform any act required by this section. Each day in which a person is in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense under this section. An offense under this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars. 
(i)  Upon notification that a violation of this section has occurred, an animal control officer shall immediately impound the animal and the disposition of the animal shall be determined by a magistrate of the municipal court of the city. 
(j)  If an owner of an animal deemed to be dangerous is unable to comply with the conditions set forth in this section, the owner shall have the animal humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian or by releasing the animal to the animal control center. If the animal is destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the owner shall provide certification from the veterinarian that such destruction was performed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
Sec. 6-39. - Impoundment; redemption. 
(a)  The owner of an animal impounded at the animal control center under the provisions of this article and subsequently determined not to be a dangerous animal under the provisions of this article may redeem the animal by complying with the provisions of section 6-17, of this article, including the payment of fees authorized by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  The owner of an animal impounded under the provisions of this article and subsequently determined to be a dangerous animal shall, prior to the release of the animal from any facility, provide proof to the animal control center that he has complied with all conditions contained in the order of determination and pay all fees as authorized by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  If an animal impounded under this article is determined not to be dangerous, the owner shall be notified that the animal is eligible for redemption and the terms of redemption. The owner shall redeem the animal within ninety-six (96) hours after receiving such notice. If the owner fails to redeem the animal within the required period, the animal shall become the property of the city and shall be euthanized by the animal control center. 
(d)  The owner of an animal that is determined to be dangerous under the provisions of this article shall notify the animal control center within ninety-six (96) hours of their intent to redeem the animal. The owner shall redeem the animal within thirty (30) days after notice that the animal is eligible for redemption. If the owner fails to redeem the animal within the required period, the animal shall become the property of the city and shall be euthanized by the animal control center. The owner shall pay the city impound and holding fees as authorized by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2000-460, § 1, 12-19-00)  
ARTICLE III. - FERAL CATS 
 
Sec. 6-40. - Feral cat colonies. 
Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and feral cat colony caretakers shall be entitled to maintain and care for feral cats by providing food, water, shelter and other forms of sustenance, provided that the feral cat colonies are registered with the animal services department. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 6-41. - Registration of feral cat colonies. 
Each feral cat colony within the city limits must be registered annually with the animal services department. This registration shall include: 
(1)  The name and contact information for the primary colony caretaker. 
(2)  The location of the feral cat colony. 
(3)  The number of cats in the colony. 
(4)  Documentation showing the number of cats that have been micro chipped, spayed or neutered, and vaccinated in the colony in the past year. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 6-42. - Oversight committee. 
The animal services supervisor shall appoint a committee of three (3) individuals to assist with the management of feral cat colonies within the city limits. Two (2) committee members shall have prior experience in managing and/or educating the public about feral cat colonies. The third member of the committee shall be a licensed veterinarian. This committee will assist the animal services supervisor with: 
(1)  Ensuring that the registered caretakers are operating within the requirements of this article, 
(2)  Resolving conflicts or complaints over the conduct of a feral cat colony caretaker or of any cats within a colony. 
(3)  Determining the disposition of an abandoned feral cat colony. 
(4)  Establishing and reviewing written minimum educational standards for all registered colony caretakers. 
(5)  Establishing and reviewing the procedures for feral cat colony maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 6-43. - Feral cat colony caretaker responsibilities. 
All registered feral cat colony caretakers are responsible for the following: 
(1)  Registering the colony with the animal services department. 
(2)  Successfully completing the annual department-approved educational course for feral cat colony caretakers. 
(3)  Taking all appropriate and reasonable steps to have the colony population vaccinated for rabies in accordance with 6-13 of this Code. 
(4)  Taking all appropriate steps to have the colony population spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian. 
(5)  Having an EAID inserted into each colony cat by a veterinarian in accordance with professional medical standards. The caretaker shall be the named contact for the EAID. 
(6)  Maintaining appropriate documentation on each colony cat showing records for spay or neuter, vaccination, and EAID. 
(7)  Providing food, water and, if feasible, shelter for colony cats. 
(8)  Obtaining proper medical attention for any colony cat that appears to require it. 
(9)  Obtaining written authorization from the appropriate property owner to enter on to private property to provide colony care. 
(10)  Notifying the department within seven (7) days of any change in address or contact information for the caretaker. 
(11)  Following the written procedures for colony maintenance as established under this article by the oversight committee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 6-44. - Withdrawal of feral cat colony caretaker. 
In the event a registered caretaker is unable or unwilling to continue their duties with a colony, the caretaker must notify the animal services department in writing. If no replacement caretaker is readily available, the animal services supervisor will meet with the oversight committee to determine the disposition of the abandoned feral cat colony. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 6-45. - Disposition of feral cat colony cats. 
Any cat that is trapped within the city limits will be scanned for an EAID. If a trapped cat shows to be registered to a feral cat colony, the animal services department will notify the registered caretaker. The caretaker must: 
(1)  Retrieve the colony cat from the shelter within three (3) days, or 
(2)  Inform the animal services department that they do not intend to reclaim the cat. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 6-46. - Enforcement. 
(1)  The establishment of feral cat colonies does not diminish the right for individual private property owners to trap and remove stray animals from their property in accordance with established procedures of the animal services department. 
(2)  Feral cat colony cats that are repeatedly trapped on private property or otherwise cause a continued nuisance will be reported to the registered caretaker. The caretaker will be provided thirty (30) days to resolve the issue. In the event the caretaker is unable to resolve the problem, the animal services supervisor will discuss the disposition of the cat with the oversight committee. 
(3)  Feral cat colony cats that are trapped on private property do not constitute a violation of section 6-8 regarding unrestrained animals and the registered caretaker is not subject to the implementation of a fine under that provision. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 6-47. - Non-compliant colony caretaker. 
A feral cat colony caretaker that repeatedly fails to manage a colony or otherwise continues to act in a manner that is not in compliance with this article may be prohibited from serving as a feral cat colony caretaker. Such decision will be at the discretion of the animal services supervisor with the advice of the oversight committee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 6-48. - Existing feral cat colonies. 
Feral cats who were spayed or neutered and vaccinated for rabies prior to the date on which this article became effective, but did not have an EAID inserted, shall be deemed to be in compliance with this article provided that the colony caretaker provides the animal services department with a description of the individual cat. Feral cat colony caretakers shall take all appropriate steps to bring these cats into compliance with this article within three (3) years, or upon revaccination of the cats for rabies, whichever comes first. 
(Ord. No. 2008-059, § 2, 3-4-08)  
ARTICLE IV. - BEES 
 
Sec. 6-49. - Keeping of bees. 
(a)  Honeybees may be kept if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All hives shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any inhabited dwelling other than that of the person keeping such bees; 
(2)  There is an adequate source of water within twenty (20) feet of all hives; 
(3)  Any hive contaminated with or known to have Africanized honeybees (killer bees) shall be destroyed by a qualified beekeeper at the owner's expense; 
(4)  Adjacent neighbors must be notified that bees will be kept on your property; and 
(5)  A honeybee registration form must be completed and submitted to the City of Denton. Any violation for failing to complete a honeybee registration form shall be dismissed without any fine or costs assessed upon the submission of a honeybee registration form within thirty (30) days of the violation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any hive to maintain more than the prescribed number of hives on the chart below on any single parcel of property in a residential neighborhood. 
.25 Acre 	.3 Acre 	.5 Acre 	1 Acre 
2 hives 	3 hives 	4 hives 	5 hives 
2 nucs 	3 nucs 	4 nucs 	5 nucs 
 
The total number of hives allowed are staggered according to the size of the parcel. An equal number of hives and nucs (nucleus colonies, or small honeybee colonies created from larger colonies) are allowed on the property with restriction. Nucs are allowed to be on the property for ninety (90) days before they must be removed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or allow to be kept, bees in such a manner as to deny the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property or endanger the personal health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hive within the corporate limits of the city unless the person has submitted a current and valid registration with the City of Denton. 
( Ord. No. 2016-217 , § 4, 8-2-16)  
Chapter 8 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, art. XIII. 
Cross reference— Housing generally, Ch. 15; licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 25; utilities generally, Ch. 26; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicles, Ch. 32. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Denton Cable Television Ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-10; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access channel means a channel dedicated in whole or in part for local programming which is not originated by a grantee. 
Cablecasting, origination and access means programming exclusive of broadcast signals carried on a cable television system: 
(1)  Origination cablecasting means programming, exclusive of broadcast signals, carried on a cable television system over one (1) or more channels and subject to the exclusive control of the cable operator. 
(2)  Access cablecasting means services provided by a cable television system on its public, education, local government or leased channels and defined as follows: 
a.  Public access channel means a specially designated noncommercial public access channel available on a first-come nondiscriminatory basis for which the system shall maintain and have available for public use at least the minimal equipment and facilities necessary for the production of programming for such a channel. 
b.  Education access channel means a specially designated channel for use by local educational authorities. 
c.  Local government access channel means a specially designated channel for local government uses. 
d.  Leased access channel means portions of the system's nonbroadcast bandwidth, including unused portions of the specially designated channels for leased access services. 
Cable services means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming and other programming services together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such programming and programming services that the cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally. Examples of cable services include: video programming, pay-per-view, voter preference polls in the context of a video program, teletexts, one-way transmission of any computer software and one-way videotex services such as news services, stock market information, etc. Noncable services include: shop-at-home, bank-at-home services, electronic mail, one-way and two-way transmission of nonvideo data and information not offered to all subscribers, data processing, video conferencing and voice communication. 
Cable system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. Such term does not include the following: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless such facility uses any public right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber and, by an appropriate channel selector, also permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations. 
District means the area within which the cable operator will provide service. 
Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 refers to 47 U.S.C. 521 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, and may hereafter be called the cable act. 
Franchise means the right granted through a contractual agreement between the city and called a person, partnership or corporation by which the city authorizes such person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and maintain a cable system in the city. 
Grantee means a party, its lawful successors and assigns to which a franchise under the authority of this chapter is granted by the council. 
Gross revenues means all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature or other consideration derived directly or indirectly by the grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents and any other person or entity in which the grantee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the grantee arising from or attributable to operation of the cable system, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Revenue from all charges for services provided to subscribers of entertainment and nonentertainment services, including leased access fees; 
(2)  Revenue from all charges for the insertion of commercial advertisements upon the cable system; 
(3)  Revenue from all charges for the leased use of studios; 
(4)  Revenue from all charges for the installation, connection and reinstatement of equipment necessary for the utilization of the cable system and the provision of subscriber and other services; and 
(5)  The sale of cablecasting or any programming developed for community use or institutional users. 
Gross revenues shall include value at retail price levels, the value of any goods, services or other remuneration in nonmonetary form, received by the grantee or others described above in consideration for performance by the grantee or others described above of any advertising or other service in connection with the cable system. Gross revenues shall not include converter deposits, refunds to subscribers by the grantee, subscriber accounts which are in arrears and are deemed uncollectible by generally accepted accounting practices or items excluded by the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
Programmer means any person who produces or otherwise provides program material for transmission by video, audio, digital or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes, to subscribers by means of the cable communications system. 
School means any institution of the Denton Independent School District, any nonprofit day care center and any other nonprofit educational institution. 
Service, basic and additional shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Basic service means any service which includes the transmission of local television broadcast signals, and public, educational and governmental access channels. 
(2)  Additional services means any of the following: Such video services as the transmission of all leased access channel signals not included in basic subscriber service, as well as the transmission of cablecast video advertising messages and pay television signals. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel, park, alley, sidewalk, easement, all other public rights-of-way and public grounds, now or hereafter existing within the city. 
Subscriber means any person who legally receives one (1) or more of the services of a grantee. 
Two-way communications means the transmission of telecommunication signals from subscriber locations or other points throughout the system back to the system's control center as well as transmission of signals from the control center to subscriber locations. 
User denotes a person or organization utilizing a system channel for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof, in a subscriber capacity. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-10; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-3. - Scope of franchise. 
A franchise to be granted by the city pursuant to this chapter shall grant to the grantee the right, privilege and franchise to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all such extensions thereto and additions thereto in the city and poles, wires, cables underground, conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a cable system for the interception, sale, transmission and distribution of television programs and other audio-visual electrical signals and the right to transmit the same to the inhabitants of the city on the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter. The city expressly reserves the right to grant a similar use of streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this franchise. It is further the intention of this chapter to limit the activity of a grantee solely to the operation of cable television systems within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-1; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-4. - Duration of franchise grant. 
The term of any franchise granted by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be for a period of fifteen (15) years from and after the grant and acceptance date of the franchise to be awarded, subject to conditions and restrictions as provided in this chapter, and provided that the mayor and city council shall have the right to review such franchise periodically at such times as the mayor and city council may from time to time elect to do and as provided in this chapter. An interim grant of authority to operate a cable system may be granted for a period of less than 15 years. Extensions, renewals, or transfers of a cable franchise agreement may be for a period of less than 15 years. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-2; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 2003-321, § 1, 10-7-03) 
State Law reference— Unauthorized use of cable, etc., V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 31.12, 31.13.  
Sec. 8-5. - Franchise rights subject to police powers. 
In accepting a franchise pursuant to this chapter, the grantee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the police power of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public, and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power, provided that such additional ordinances shall not substantially or materially conflict with or alter in any manner the rights granted in a franchise and shall not conflict with the laws of the state, the United States or the rules of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-3; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-6. - Rights reserved to city. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire the property of a grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself, or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city's right of eminent domain. 
(b)  There is hereby reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be reserved by the provisions of this chapter or by local, state or federal law, and a grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(c)  Neither the granting of any franchise under the provisions of this chapter nor any provision of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city. 
(d)  The city council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under the provisions of this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted under the provisions of this chapter. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under the provisions of this chapter, either on behalf of the city, the grantee or any subscriber, in the best interests of the public. 
(e)  Insofar as it is not inconsistent with or otherwise preempted by federal or state regulations, the city council retains all authority to regulate noncable communications to the extent necessary to ensure the delivery of proposed noncable services, if any, and that they are in compliance with all regulatory provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-101), 11-1-88)  
Secs. 8-7—8-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - APPLICANT SELECTION PROCESS 
 
Sec. 8-31. - Written application required. 
No license, franchise, extension, transfer or renewal thereof for cable television shall be issued except upon written application to the city council on an application form prescribed by the city council. Such form shall contain such information as the city council may prescribe as to the citizenship and character of the applicant the financial, technical, legal and other qualifications of the applicant to operate the system; complete information as to its principals and ultimate beneficial owners, including in the case of corporations, all stockholders, both nominal and beneficial, owning one (1) percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock and, in the case of incorporated associations all members and ultimate beneficial owners, however designated; complete information on the extent and the quality of the service, number of channels, hour of operation, variety of programs, local coverage, safety measures, installation and subscription fees, and such other information as the city council may deem appropriate or necessary. Such application shall be signed by the applicant or by a duly authorized representative, evidence of whose authority shall be submitted with the application. Each applicant shall make full disclosure of the true owner of the applicant and of the equipment to be employed and rendering service and of the source of funds for the purchase, lease, rental and installation of such equipment. Each applicant shall set forth as completely as possible the equipment to be employed, the routes of the wires and cables, the areas to be served, the approximate starting and completion dates of construction of the system and the dates service will actually be available to the areas named. Each applicant shall submit a nonrefundable application fee as may be established by the city council to cover the costs of review, issuance and enforcement of franchises issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-80; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 2003-321, § 1, 10-7-03)  
Sec. 8-32. - Award procedure. 
(a)  Not later than ninety (90) days after the final date for filing applications, one (1) or more public hearings shall be held on the applications for a cable television franchise. At the time set for the hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the city council shall proceed to hear all comments. Not later than ninety (90) days after such public hearing, the city council shall make a determination based upon an evaluation of the applications, the hearings, and other information that the grantor may deem relevant. 
(b)  No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed so as to require the granting of a franchise when, in the opinion of the city council, it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one (1) or more. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-82; Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-81), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-33. - Additional information. 
The city council may at any time demand and applicants shall provide such supplementary, additional or other information as the city council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested cable television franchise should be granted. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-82), 11-1-88)  
Secs. 8-34—8-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LENGTH, RENEWAL AND TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 8-56. - Franchise required; duration; exclusivity. 
(a)  The city may grant a cable television franchise for the use of the streets within the city for the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system. No system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the city or be allowed to operate without a franchise. Any franchise awarded by an agreement in accordance with this chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise. 
(b)  The franchise may be granted for a term not to exceed fifteen (15) years; thereafter, after full public hearings and according to the franchise renewal procedure in section 8-57, the franchise may be renewed for periods of reasonable duration, not to exceed fifteen (15) years, as in the opinion of the city council will serve the public interest. 
(c)  The franchise may be extended or transferred in accordance with federal or state law, not to exceed fifteen (15) years, as in the opinion of the city council will serve the public interest. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-20(1), (2); Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-20), 11-1-88; Ord. No. 2003-321, § 1, 10-7-03)  
Sec. 8-57. - Procedure to consider franchise renewal. 
(a)  A cable television franchise may be renewed by the city upon application of the grantee pursuant to the procedure established in this section and in accordance with the then applicable law. During the six-month period which begins with the thirty-sixth month before the expiration of the franchise agreement, the city may, on its own initiative, and shall, at the request of the grantee, commence proceedings which afford the public appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of: 
(1)  Identifying the future cable-related community needs and interests; and 
(2)  Reviewing the performance of the grantee under the franchise during the then current franchise term. 
(b)  Upon completion of a proceeding under subsection (a) of this section, the grantee seeking renewal of a franchise may, on its own initiative or at the request of the city, submit a proposal for renewal. Any such proposal shall contain such material as the city may require, including proposals for an upgrade of the cable system. The city may establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted. 
(c)  Administrative proceedings; hearings. 
(1)  Upon submittal by the grantee of a proposal to the city for the renewal of the franchise, the city shall provide public notice of such proposal and, during the four-month period which begins on the completion of any proceedings under subsection (a) of this section, renew the franchise or issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed and, at the request of the grantee or on its own initiative, the city manager shall select a hearing officer who shall commence an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt public notice of such proceeding, in accordance with subsection (c)(2) of this section, to consider whether: 
a.  The grantee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law; 
b.  The quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, quality or level of cable services or other services provided over the system, has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
c.  The grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the grantee's proposal; and 
d.  The grantee's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. 
(2)  In any such proceeding, the grantee shall be afforded notice, and the grantee and the city shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence, including evidence related to issues raised in the proceeding under subsection (c)(1) of this section to require the production of evidence, and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding. 
(3)  The administrative hearing officer will make the findings of fact required by subsection (c)(1) of this section within sixty (60) days of the proceeding and promptly submit these findings to the city secretary. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the findings of fact, the city council shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the findings of fact and transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons thereof. 
(d)  Any denial of a proposal for renewal shall be based on one (1) or more adverse findings made with request to the factors described in subsections (c)(1)a. through (c)(1)d. of this section, pursuant to the record of the proceeding. The grounds of denial shall not constitute a violation of the provisions of 47 U.S.C. 546, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  If the grantee's proposal for renewal has been denied by a final decision of the city made pursuant to this section or has been adversely affected by a failure of the city to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section, the grantee may appeal such final decision or failure pursuant to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. 546(e) and 47 U.S.C. 555. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (e) of this section, the grantee may submit a proposal for the renewal of the franchise pursuant to this subsection at any time, and the city may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time, including after proceedings pursuant to this section have commenced. The provisions of subsections (a) through (e) of this section shall not apply to a decision to grant or deny a proposal under this subsection. The denial of a renewal pursuant to this subsection shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is submitted in accordance with subsections (a) through (e) of this section. 
(g)  The grantee shall pay all costs incurred by the city considering and processing a proposal for renewal as described in subsections (a), (c)(1), (c)(3) and (f) of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-20(2)(a); Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-21), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-58. - Reevaluation. 
The city and the grantee may hold scheduled reevaluation sessions commencing in the seventh year subsequent to the grantee's acceptance of a cable television franchise agreement in accordance with the terms of any franchise agreement. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-21; Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-22), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-59. - Forfeiture and termination. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to forfeit and terminate a cable television franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee for a material breach of its terms and conditions. In interpreting this chapter, material provisions shall include all labeled as such and all others which, under all the facts and circumstances indicated, are a significant provision of the franchise agreement. A material breach by the grantee shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Violation of any material provision of the franchise or any material rule, order, regulation or determination of the city made pursuant to the franchise; 
(2)  An attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or the grantee practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or its subscribers or customers; 
(3)  Failure to begin or complete system construction, reconstruction or system extension as provided by the franchise; 
(4)  Failure to provide the types of services promised, subject to the recourse that is available under 47 U.S.C. 545; 
(5)  Failure to restore service after ninety-six (96) consecutive hours of interrupted service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from the city; or 
(6)  Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of the franchise. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not constitute a material breach if the violation occurs but is without fault of the grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its reasonable control. The grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance of its shareholders, directors, officers or employees. 
(c)  If the city determines that the grantee has violated any provisions of the franchise, the city manager may make a written demand that the grantee comply with any such provision and remedy such violation. If the violation by the grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued to the satisfaction of the city, the city manager may place the issue of termination of a franchise before the city council in a hearing. The city manager shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of such hearing, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  At such hearing, the city council shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any person interested therein and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any violation by the grantee has occurred. 
(e)  If the city council shall determine the violation by the grantee was the fault of the grantee and within its reasonable control, the council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be forfeited and terminated unless there is compliance within such reasonable period as the city council may establish. 
(f)  The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed upon the agenda for the next regular council meeting at the expiration of the time set by the council for compliance. The city council then may terminate a franchise forthwith upon finding that the grantee has failed to achieve compliance or, in its discretion, may further extend the period allowed to achieve compliance. 
(g)  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall adopt a decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver of or limitation on any right of the grantee to seek relief in federal or state court. In the event of any determination by the city to revoke or terminate a franchise, to impose a forfeiture of a bond, letter of credit or other security fund or to impose a substantial financial penalty which would have a material adverse effect upon the grantee, such a determination shall be stayed during the pendency of any judicial review thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-22; Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-23), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-60. - Continuity of service. 
(a)  It shall be the right of all cable television subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew a franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. If the grantee is changed or if a new operator acquires the system, the grantee shall cooperate with the city, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system. 
(b)  If the grantee fails to operate the system for ninety-six (96) consecutive hours without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the city that are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-23(1); Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-24), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-61. - Acquisition by city. 
(a)  If a renewal of a cable television franchise held by the grantee is denied and the city acquires ownership of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of the system to another person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. 
(b)  If a franchise held by the grantee is revoked for cause and the city acquires ownership of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of the system to another person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at an equitable price. In the determination of an equitable price, such matters as the harm to the community resulting from the grantee's breach of the franchise may be considered. 
(c)  The value of a cable system, fair market value or equitable price, shall be determined by an appraisal committee consisting of three (3) persons to be appointed by a judge of a court of record of the city. The grantee or its successors or assigns and the city shall each recommend one (1) appointee to the court, however, the court shall not be bound by such recommendations. No payment shall be made by the city to the grantee by reason of the value of the franchise itself. 
(d)  It shall be understood that a condition of each contract entered into by the grantee with reference to operations under a franchise shall be that each contract shall be subject to the exercise of this authority by the city and that the city may be substituted for the grantee as a party to any such contract and may succeed, at its direction, to all the privileges and the obligations thereof at its option. 
(e)  Upon the termination of a franchise and the rights granted thereunder, whether by expiration or forfeiture, the city council may direct and require the grantee, as provided in section 8-143, to remove its wires, cables, fixtures and accessories and appurtenances from the streets. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-23(2); Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-25), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-62. - Transfers and assignments. 
(a)  A cable television franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the city. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. No such consent shall be required for a transfer of the franchise or the system in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole or in part to secure an indebtedness. 
(b)  The proposed assignee must show technical ability, financial capability, legal qualifications and general character qualifications as determined by the city and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise and such conditions as may be prescribed by the city council and expressed by resolution. The city shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer or assignment in the event its refusal to consent is not communicated in writing to the grantee within one hundred twenty (120) days following receipt of written notice of the proposed transfer or assignment. 
(c)  The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in or transfer of or acquisition by any other party of control of the grantee. The word "control" as used in this subsection is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party and the grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. 
(d)  A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of ten (10) percent of the voting interest of the grantee. 
(e)  The consent or approval of the city council to any transfer of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of any applicable franchise. 
(f)  In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city shall not approve any transfer or assignment of a franchise prior to substantial completion of construction of the proposed system or completion of a commitment to reconstruct, rebuild or upgrade an existing system. 
(g)  The city council reserves the right of first refusal to purchase a cable system at or above a bona fide offering price being made by a third party when the system is placed on the market for sale. The city shall exercise such right within ninety (90) days of notification by the grantee of pending sale, or such right shall be forfeited. 
(h)  In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without any successor in interest accepting in writing the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement as amended. 
(i)  The council reserves the right to review the purchase price of any transfer or assignment of the system and any potential assignee to this franchise expressly agrees and understands that any negotiated sale value which the council determines will cause a significant effect on subscriber rates in order to finance the purchase may result in a denial of transfer. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-23(3); Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-26), 11-1-88)  
Secs. 8-63—8-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-81. - Construction, installation and maintenance of system. 
Methods of construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall comply with the most recent edition of the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code adopted in chapter 28, article III, of this Code as the same may be amended from time to time, and all applicable laws and regulations to the extent that such codes are consistent with local law affecting the construction, installation and maintenance of electric supply and communications lines. To the extent that such code is inconsistent with other provisions of this franchise or with local law, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-50; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-82. - System tower. 
(a)  Any tower constructed for use in the cable system shall comply with the standards contained in Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures, EIA Standards RS-222-A as published by the Engineering Department of the Electronic Industries Association, 2001 I Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 20006. 
(b)  Installation and physical dimensions of any such tower shall comply with any appropriate Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
(c)  Any antenna structure used in the cable system shall comply with Construction Marking, and Lighting of Antenna Structure, 47 C.F.R. 17.1 et seq., and all applicable laws and regulations. 
(Code 1966, §§ 5½-51—5½-53; Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-51), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-83. - Safety. 
All working facilities and conditions used during construction, installation and maintenance of the city's cable television system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-54; Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-52), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-84. - Service standards. 
(a)  A cable television franchise grantee shall put, keep and maintain all parts of the system in good condition throughout the entire franchise period. 
(b)  Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon the subscriber's request. 
(c)  The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum system use. 
(d)  The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by the grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the city. 
(e)  A grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to maintain the technical, operational and maintenance standards and quality of service set forth in this chapter and franchise agreement. Should the city find, by resolution, that a grantee has failed to maintain these standards and quality of service and should the city, by resolution specifically enumerate corrections to be made to come into compliance, a grantee shall make such corrections. Failure to make such corrections within three (3) months of such resolution will constitute a breach of condition for which the remedy set forth in section 8-128 is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-53), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-85. - Technical standards. 
The cable television franchise grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances and construction standards of the city, the Federal Communications Commission, the NCTA Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems, published by the National Cable Television Association, and detailed standards submitted by the grantee as part of its application, which standards are to be incorporated by reference in the franchise agreement. In addition, each grantee shall provide the city with a written report of the results of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to Federal Communication Commission standards and requirements. The grantee shall pay the costs incurred by the city for any technical assistance deemed necessary by the city for obtaining independent verification of technical compliance with all standards. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-54), 11-1-88)  
Secs. 8-86—8-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-101. - Access programming facilities. 
The cable television franchise grantee must provide reasonable equipment to be used by access cablecasters with the aid of a technical and production staff to be provided by the operator. Equipment that can store programs for later showing shall be provided. In addition, the grantee shall make available a centrally located studio to all access users on a first come, first served basis. Any applicant to operate the system will be expected to demonstrate in its application how it plans to make available the equipment, the studio and production and technical staff. Applicants will be given preference in the selection process for plans that will most adequately meet these requirements. A full schedule of rates for use of equipment, studio and technical and production staff must be submitted to and agreed to by the city. If separate rates are planned for mobile facilities, these must be also included. Rate preference may be given to noncommercial users. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-40; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-102. - Hub system. 
(a)  The cable system design shall incorporate the use of a hub system with sufficient hubs to ensure the quality of reception required by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(b)  The grantee shall be required to maintain the capability for nonvoice return communications. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-41; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-103. - Emergency override. 
The cable system shall include an "emergency alert" capability which will permit the mayor to override, by remote control, the audio and/or video of all channels involved in retransmission of television broadcast programming. The cable operator shall designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-42; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-104. - Standby power. 
The cable system operator shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby powering for headend transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of two (2) hours. The equipment shall be constructed so as to automatically notify the cable office when it is in operation and to automatically revert to the standby mode when the AC power returns. All utility safety regulations must be followed to prevent injury to linemen resulting from a standby generator powering the dead utility line. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-43; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-105. - Privacy. 
Use of data obtained from cable television subscribers shall be authorized only in accordance with the provisions of 47 U.S.C. 551, as amended. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-44; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-106. - Antenna switch. 
The cable television franchise grantee shall install an RF switch for alternative use of off-air antennas upon request by a subscriber. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-45; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Secs. 8-107—8-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LOCAL REGULATORY FRAMEWORK AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-126. - Remedies to subscribers. 
(a)  If cable television service to any subscriber is interrupted for twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, except for acts of God and except in circumstances for which the prior approval of the interruption is obtained from the city council, the grantee shall provide a ten-percent rebate of the monthly fees to the affected subscriber. 
(b)  If its service to any subscriber is interrupted for forty-eight (48) consecutive hours, except for acts of God and except in circumstances for which the prior approval of the interruption is obtained from the city council, the grantee shall provide a twenty-percent rebate of the monthly fees to affected subscribers. 
(c)  If its service to any subscriber is interrupted for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours, except for acts of God and except in circumstances for which the prior approval of the interruption is obtained from the city council, the grantee shall provide a one-hundred-percent rebate of the monthly fees to the affected subscribers. 
(d)  The time limits prescribed in subsections (a), (b) and (c) shall be measured from the time that the subscriber notifies the grantee. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-60; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-127. - Security fund. 
(a)  Within twenty (20) days after the effective date of a cable television franchise agreement, the grantee shall deposit with the city's executive director of finance and maintain on deposit through the term of any franchise the sum of sixty-five thousand dollars ($65,000.00) in monies, as security for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this franchise agreement and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this contract and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, reconstruction, operation or maintenance of the system and the payment by the grantee of any penalties or liquidated damages due the city pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement. The city may accept a letter of credit or security bond in an amount determined by the city council for smaller cable systems. 
(b)  The city manager may draw upon the security fund for any of the occurrences set forth in this section and in section 8-128. Within ten (10) days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund deposited pursuant to subsection (a) of this section in accordance with section 8-128, the grantee shall pay to or deposit with the executive director of finance a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount of sixty-five thousand dollars ($65,000.00). Failure to restore the security fund to the original amount shall constitute a material breach. 
(c)  Examples of a basis for drawing upon the security fund include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Failure of the grantee to pay to the city any taxes after ten (10) days' written notice of delinquency; 
(2)  Failure of the grantee to pay to the city, after ten (10) days' written notice, any amounts due and owing the city by reason of the indemnity provision of section 8-144; 
(3)  Failure by the grantee to pay to the city any liquidated damages due and owing to the city pursuant to section 8-128; 
(4)  Failure by the grantee to pay to the city any amounts due pursuant to section 8-57(g); 
(5)  Failure by the grantee to pay, upon ten (10) days' written notice, any amounts owing as franchise fees pursuant to section 8-135. 
(d)  The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the property of the city if this contract is cancelled because of the default of the grantee. The grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security fund or portion thereof as remains on deposit with the executive director of finance at the expiration of the term of the franchise agreement, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee. 
(e)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this contract or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-61; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 2003-321, § 1, 10-7-03)  
Sec. 8-128. - Liquidated damages. 
(a)  By acceptance of the cable television franchise granted by the city, the grantee understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and performance requirements as stipulated in this chapter and the franchise agreement will result in damage to the city, and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage for delay or nonperformance; therefore, the franchise agreement shall include provisions for liquidated damages to be paid by the grantee, in amounts set forth in the franchise agreement and chargeable to the security fund for the following concerns: 
(1)  For failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in accordance with use of streets, erection of poles, undergrounding relocation, sections 8-181 and 8-143, unless the city council specifically approves the delay, by motion or resolution, due to the occurrence of conditions beyond the grantee's control, the grantee shall pay five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day or part thereof the deficiency continues. 
(2)  For failure to provide, upon written request by the city, data, documents, reports or other information, the grantee shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) per day or part thereof that each violation occurs or continues. 
(3)  For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system following a written request by the city pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall pay to the city one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues. 
(4)  For failure to provide in a continuing manner the types of services proposed in the accepted application, unless the council specifically approves the grantee a delay or change or the grantee has obtained modification of its obligation under section 625 of the Cable Act, the grantee shall pay to the city five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day or part thereof that each noncompliance continues. 
(5)  Upon determining that there has been a failure to make improvements in accordance with section 8-84, the grantee shall pay to the city two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues. 
(6)  Any other action or nonaction by the grantee shall be as agreed upon between the city and the grantee and set forth in the franchise agreement. Nothing in this section shall preclude further liquidated damages as agreed upon by the parties in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  If the city manager concludes that the grantee is liable for liquidated damages pursuant to this section, he shall issue to the grantee by certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The notice shall set forth the basis for the assessment and shall inform the grantee that liquidated damages will be assessed from the date of the notice unless the assessment notice is appealed for hearing before the city council and the city council rules (i) that the violation has been corrected, or (ii) that an extension of time or other relief should be granted. The grantee desiring a hearing before the city council shall send a written notice of appeal by certified mail to the city manager within ten (10) days of the date on which the city sent the notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The hearing on the grantee's appeal shall be within thirty (30) days of the date on which the city sent the notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. After the hearing, if the city council sustains in whole or in part the city manager's assessment of liquidated damages, the city manager may at any time thereafter draw upon the letter of credit required by section 8-127. Unless the city council indicates to the contrary, the liquidated damages shall be assessed beginning with the date on which the city sent the notice of the intention to assess liquidated damages and shall continue thereafter until such time as the violation ceases, as determined by the city manager. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver of or limitation on any right of the grantee to seek relief in federal or state court. In any determination by the city to revoke or terminate a franchise, to impose a forfeiture of a bond, letter of credit or other security fund or to impose a substantial financial penalty which would have a material adverse effect upon the grantee, such a determination shall be stayed during the pendency of any judicial review thereof. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-62), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-129. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Not less than thirty (30) days before the construction start date set forth in any cable television franchise agreement, the grantee shall obtain and maintain at its cost and expense and file with the city secretary a corporate surety bond in a company authorized to do business in the state and found acceptable by the city's risk manager, in an amount established in the franchise agreement to guarantee the timely construction and/or reconstruction and full activation of the cable system and the safeguarding of damage to private property and restoration of damages incurred with utilities. The bond shall provide but not be limited to the following condition: There shall be recoverable by the city, jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the city resulting from the failure of the grantee to satisfactorily complete and fully activate the cable system throughout the franchise area pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Any extension to the prescribed construction or reconstruction time limit must be authorized by the city council. Such extension shall be authorized only when the city council finds that such extension is necessary and appropriate due to causes beyond the control of the grantee. 
(c)  The construction bond shall be terminated only after the council finds that the grantee has satisfactorily completed initial construction and activation or reconstruction of the cable system pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(d)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the construction bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such construction bond shall affect any other rights the city may have. 
(e)  The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement: 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be cancelled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-63), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-130. - Authority; cable TV advisory board. 
(a)  The city shall exercise continuing regulatory authority under the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. This authority shall be vested in the city council and administered through the city manager. This authority includes the adoption of reasonable rules and regulations necessary to enable the city to perform administration and enforcement activities. 
(b)  A cable TV advisory board consisting of seven (7) members who shall serve for two-year terms, which terms shall be staggered, is hereby established. Each board member shall be appointed and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The board shall advise the city council on its regulatory jurisdiction and shall have the following responsibilities and duties at the direction of the city council: 
(1)  Resolving disputes or disagreements between subscribers and the grantee after an investigation, should the subscriber and the grantee not first be able to resolve their dispute or disagreement. The decision or findings may be appealed to the city council; 
(2)  Reviewing and auditing all reports and filings submitted to the city as required in this chapter and such other correspondence as may be submitted to the city concerning the operation of the cable television network, and reviewing the rules and regulations set by the grantee; and 
(3)  Assuring that all tariffs, rates, and rules pertinent to the operation of the cable system in the city are made available for inspection by the public at reasonable hours and upon reasonable requests. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-64; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 96-168, § I, 7-16-96) 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 14.16. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 8-131. - Procedure for formal action. 
(a)  Any formal inquiry, proceeding, investigation or other formal action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the city council in regard to the operation of a grantee's cable television system, including action if permitted by federal and state law in regard to an increase in subscription rates, shall be taken only after thirty (30) days' public notice of such action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the city, a copy of such action or proposed action is served directly on the grantee and the grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or a hearing as may be specified by the city council and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the person and authority to whom such responses should be addressed and such other procedures as may be specified by the cable TV advisory board. If a hearing is to be held, public participation will be allowed. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to this operation. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-65; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-132. - Functions to be regulated. 
(a)  Each cable television franchise grantee shall maintain an office in the city, which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed telephone and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received on a twenty-four-hour basis. Smaller cable systems may be served by an office within 20 miles of the city. 
(b)  Each grantee shall maintain a repair and troubleshooting force capable of responding to subscriber complaints or request for service within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint or request. No direct charge shall be made to the subscriber for this service. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-66; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 2003-321, § 1, 10-7-03)  
Sec. 8-133. - Subscriber complaint procedure. 
(a)  Subscriber notice of complaint procedures. Each cable television franchise grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints to the satisfaction of the city manager. The grantee shall furnish a notice of such procedures to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the system and at least once a year thereafter. 
(b)  Complaint records. The grantee shall maintain a written record or log listing dates and times of customer complaints, identifying the subscriber and describing the nature of the complaints and when and what action was taken by the grantee in response thereto. Such record shall be kept at the grantee's local office, reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least three (3) years, and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours without further notice or demand by the city manager. 
(c)  Repetition of similar complaints. When there have been similar complaints made or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the council, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, the council shall have the right and authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system. Such test shall be made, and the reports of such test shall be delivered to the city no later than fourteen (14) days after the city formally notifies the grantee. Such report shall include the following information: 
(1)  The nature of the complaint which precipitated the special tests; 
(2)  What system component was tested; 
(3)  The equipment used and procedures employed in testing; 
(4)  The method in which such complaints were recorded; and 
(5)  Any other information pertinent to the special test. 
The tests and analyses shall be supervised by a professional engineer, not on the permanent staff of the grantee. The engineer should sign all records of special tests and forward to the city such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken by the city. The city's right under this provision shall be limited to requiring tests, analyses and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on the complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the city has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable service. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-67; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-134. - Equal opportunity policy. 
(a)  A cable television franchise grantee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. 
(b)  A grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the Federal Communication Commission, as expressed in sections 76.13(h) and 76.311 of chapter 1 of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and section 634 of the Cable Act. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state, city and county laws and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination. The grantee shall make a positive effort to hire racial minorities, women and other protected groups as subcontractors if available and qualified. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-68; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-135. - Payment of franchise fee. 
(a)  For the reason that the streets to be used by the cable television franchise grantee in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the city are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers and that the grant to the grantee to the use of such streets is a valuable property right without which a grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions and because the city will incur costs in regulating and administering the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the city, for the first ten (10) years from the date of acceptance from a franchise, an amount equal to five (5) percent of the grantee's gross annual revenue from all sources attributable to the operations of the grantee within the confines of the city. Should a franchise agreement exceed ten (10) years in length, the grantee shall pay a franchise fee equal in amount to the maximum permitted by law, provided that such amount shall not exceed seven (7) percent. 
(b)  The franchise fee shall be payable quarterly to the city. The grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement of all collected gross revenue including itemization for each type of revenue received within the city during the period for which the quarterly payment is made, and the payment shall be made to the city not later than forty-five (45) days after the expiration of the date for which payment is due. 
(c)  The executive director of finance of the city may, from time to time during the term of a franchise, prescribe standards governing the nature, extent and type of accounting system and accounting procedures utilized by the grantee and require changes in accounting standards or procedures utilized by the grantee for the purpose of promoting the efficient administration of the franchise fee requirements of this chapter. Any such standards shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be mailed to the grantee to whom directed. The grantee shall promptly comply with all such standards. 
(d)  During the term of each franchise, the city may, not more frequently than once a year, conduct an audit of the books, records and accounts of the grantee for the purpose of determining whether the grantee has paid franchise fees in the amounts prescribed by subsection (a) of this section. The audit may be conducted by the city staff or by an independent certified accounting firm retained by the city and shall be conducted at the sole expense of the city. The party conducting the audit shall prepare a written report containing its findings, and the report shall be filed with the city and mailed to the city and grantee. Any additional amount due the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee from the city. 
(e)  If any franchise payment or recomputed amount, cost or penalty is not made on or before the applicable dates specified in this section, interest shall be charged from such date, compounded daily, at the annual rate equivalent to the then existing prime rate, as established by NCNB Texas National Bank, Dallas, plus two (2) percent. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-69; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-136. - Rates. 
(a)  To the extent permitted by federal and state law, the city may regulate the following rates, fees and charges for cable television service: 
(1)  Rates for the provision of basic cable service to subscribers, whether residential or commercial, including multiple tiers of basic cable service; 
(2)  Rates for the initial installation or the rental of one (1) set of the minimum equipment which is necessary for the subscribers' receipt of basic cable service; 
(3)  Any other rates for any type of services delivered by the grantee that may become subject to local regulation. 
(b)  The grantee may petition the council for a change in rates subject to regulation by filing a proposed rate schedule with the city secretary. The following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The grantee may petition the council for a change in rates by filing a revised rate schedule including the justification for the proposed new schedule. 
(2)  Within ten (10) days of notification by the council of the place and time established for a hearing on the petition, the company shall notify its subscribers of the same day by announcement on at least two (2) channels of its system, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for five (5) consecutive days. Following all proper notice, but in no event later than ninety (90) days from the date of the petition, the council shall hold an appropriate public hearing to consider the proposed new rates, at which hearing all parties desiring to be heard, including the company, shall be heard on any matters relating to the performance of this franchise, the company's services and the proposed new rates. 
(3)  Within ninety (90) days after the hearing, the council shall render a written decision on the company's petition, either accepting, rejecting or modifying the petition and reciting the basis of its decision. 
(4)  The criteria for the council's decision in such matters shall be the establishment of rates which are fair and reasonable to both the company and its subscribers and shall be generally defined as the minimum rates necessary to meet all applicable costs of service, including fair return on all invested capital, all assuming efficient and economical management. 
(5)  In order for the council to determine whether proposed rate changes comport with the criteria established in subsection (b)(4) of this section, the company's petition for a rate increase shall include the following financial reports, which shall reflect the operations of the city system only: 
a.  Balance sheet; 
b.  Income statement; 
c.  Cash flow statement; 
d.  Statement of sources and applications of funds; 
e.  Detailed supporting schedules of expenses, income, assets and other items as may be required; 
f.  Statement of current and projected subscribers and penetration. 
(c)  The grantee's accounting records applicable to the system shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable times. The city shall have access to records of financial transactions for the purpose of verifying burden rates or other indirect costs prorated to the city operation. The documents listed in subsection (b)(5) of this section shall include sufficient details and/or footnotes as may be necessary to provide the city with the information needed to make accurate determinations as to the financial condition of the system. All financial statements shall be certified as accurate by an officer of the grantee. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-70; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-137. - User classes and divisions. 
Subscribers of cable television services may be divided into commercial and residential classes. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers. Rates for commercial and noncommercial users of access channels may be established separately. Nothing in this section shall prohibit preferential rates for noncommercial users if approved by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-71; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-138. - Advance charges and deposits. 
A cable television franchise grantee may require subscribers to pay for each month of basic service in advance at the beginning of each month. No other advance payment or deposit of any kind shall be required by a grantee for basic subscriber service. No deposit or advance payment of any kind shall be charged for the provision of any converter without prior approval of the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit charges or the waiver of charges for initial installation or reconnection. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-72; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-139. - Installation and reconnection. 
Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter, a cable television franchise grantee may make a charge to subscribers for the installation of service outlets and for the reconnection of service outlets. The rates for such connection or reconnection shall be authorized by the city as provided in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-73; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-140. - Disconnection. 
There shall be no charge for disconnection of any cable television installation or outlet. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee or any other properly due fee or charge, the grantee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet; provided, however, that such disconnection shall not be effected until thirty (30) days after the due date of the delinquent fee or charge and shall include ten (10) days' written notice of the intent to disconnect delivered to the subscriber in question. If a subscriber pays thirty (30) days after payment is due and after notice of disconnection has been given, a grantee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent fee or charge and the payment of reconnection charge, a grantee shall promptly reinstate a subscriber's cable service. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-74; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-141. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Annual reports. No later than March 31 of each year, each cable television franchise grantee shall submit a written report to the city, in a form directed by the city council, which shall include the following: 
(1)  A summary of the previous year's activities and development of this system, including but not limited to services begun or dropped, subscriber gain or loss; 
(2)  Copies of the financial statements audited by a certified public accounting firm acceptable and approved by the city, including the grantee's balance sheet, income statement and working papers relating to subscriber accounts; 
(3)  A current statement of costs of construction by component categories; 
(4)  A summary of complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition; 
(5)  A list of officers and members of the board of the franchisee and the parent corporation, if any; 
(6)  A list of all stockholders holding three (3) percent or more of the voting stock of a grantee and the parent corporation, if any. 
(b)  Filings with Federal Communication Commission. Copies of all petitions, filings, reports and correspondence filed with the Federal Communication Commission will be filed concurrently with the city. 
(c)  Monthly reports required. The following monthly reports shall be required from the grantee: 
(1)  During construction, upgrading or rebuilding of a system, a monthly progress report shall be filed by the grantee with the city describing projected construction activity for the project, work accomplished for the particular month and for the total project to date; 
(2)  Summary of telephone call activity as to total calls received, answered, abandoned or delayed, with the average delay quantified; 
(3)  Summary of service calls showing number resolved within twenty-four (24) hours and number of calls unresolved within the twenty-four-hour period. This summary shall be in a format that can describe the general nature of calls received as to the type of service, problem or grievance; 
(4)  Summary of system outages for the month, including all outages affecting two (2) or more subscribers. This report shall show the number of outages, number of subscribers affected, the number of hours in which the system was down and the cause for the outages, i.e., power failure, storm, system malfunction, etc.; 
(5)  Summary of subscriber statistics for the month, showing by category of service provided (i.e. basic service, each pay TV option, etc.), the number of subscribers at beginning of month, plus connects, less disconnects, equaling the ending number of subscribers for the month. Changes in the number of homes passed by the cable system shall be shown in a similar manner. 
(d)  Other records. The city may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-75; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-142. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  A grantee seeking to operate under the authority of this chapter shall, prior to the granting of a franchise for cable television operation by the city, submit to approval by the city's risk manager satisfactory evidence in the form of certificates of insurance or their equivalent, including but not limited to the following coverage and risk areas: 
(1)  Worker's compensation and employee's liability coverage on all employees of the franchise as required by statute; 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability coverage including a blanket contractual liability provision and a broad form damage endorsement covering but not limited to explosion, collapse or other underground activity; 
(3)  Comprehensive automobile liability coverage. 
(b)  The minimum limits of coverage on each of the above-described coverages, except subsection (a)(1) of this section shall in no event be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(c)  All insurance policies required by this section shall be so endorsed as to make the city a named insured under such policy. Further, each policy shall be so endorsed as to require the carrier to give not less than sixty (60) days' notice of cancellation or nonrenewal to the city. Such policies shall further carry an endorsement providing a waiver of any rights of subrogation in the favor of and to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-76(1)—(4); Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-143. - Use of public property and conditions for use. 
(a)  A cable television franchise grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway or public place for any purpose without first having obtained a permit to do so in accordance with applicable city ordinances, including but not limited to chapter 25 of this Code, provided that a grantee shall not be required to post a bond prior to commencing such disturbance of such public place. 
(b)  A grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place or remove from the street or other public place any property of the grantee when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction, change of establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, city-owned power or signal lights and tracks or any other type of structure or improvement by a public agency. 
(c)  The grantee's use of existing poles or conduits belonging to the city or the erection or construction of new poles or conduits shall be governed by a separate pole use agreement. 
(d)  All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of the grantee shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic and travel upon the streets or public places of the city. The grantee shall keep accurate maps and records as requested by the city. A grantee shall not place poles or other equipment where they will interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of adjoining property owners or with any gas, electric or telephone fixtures or with any water hydrants or mains. All poles or other fixtures placed in a street shall be placed in the right-of-way between the roadway and the property, as specified by the city. 
(e)  All wires, cables, amplifiers and other property shall be constructed and installed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires shall be installed parallel with existing telephone and electric wires whenever possible. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled, with due respect for engineering and safety consideration. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing either telephone or electric service are underground. In areas where both telephone and electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, the grantee may install its service above ground with the understanding that at such time as those facilities are required to be placed underground by the city, the grantee shall likewise place its service underground without additional cost to the residents of the city other than as may be granted under the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  The city shall give the grantee reasonable notice of plans for street improvement where paving or resurfacing of a permanent nature is involved. The notice shall give the grantee sufficient time to make any additions, alterations or repairs to its facilities as it deems necessary in advance of the actual commencement of the work, so as to permit the grantee to maintain continuity of service. 
(g)  The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of the building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. 
(h)  The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging upon streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company. All trimming is to be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of the grantee. The grantee shall make every effort to preserve the aesthetic beauty and viability of any trees trimmed. The grantee may contract for such services. However, any firm or individual so retained shall receive city approval prior to commencing such activity. 
(i)  Public buildings shall be connected to the cable system at no charge. Such requests for service may be initiated by authorized local government officials. For planning purposes, one (1) service drop per facility should be anticipated at the civic center, municipal building, service center, the county courthouse, police and fire facilities, public library and all public and parochial schools. If more than one (1) drop is required per facility, the charge should be based on the grantee's costs of time and materials. No monthly charges should be made for providing basic subscriber services at these public buildings. Failure of the grantee to complete connection of basic service drop within one hundred twenty (120) days of receipt of written request shall constitute a material breach. 
(j)  Upon the request of an authorized university official, academic buildings and residence halls at the University of North Texas and Texas Woman's University should be connected to the cable system at no charge. If more than one (1) service drop is required per building, the charge should be based on the company's cost of time and materials. No monthly charges should be made for providing basic cable subscriber services at the academic buildings. 
(k)  The grantee may be required to interconnect its system with all other broadband communications facilities. Such interconnection shall be made within the time limit established by the city. The interconnection shall, at the city's discretion, be accomplished according to the method and technical standards determined by the city, in a manner consistent with applicable Federal Communication System standards. 
(l)  At the expiration of the franchise term or upon its termination as provided for in this chapter, the city shall have the right to require the grantee to remove at its own expense all portions of the cable system from all streets within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-77; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-144. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Each cable television franchise grantee shall, at its sole expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and, in their capacity as such, the officers, agents and employees of the city from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages or otherwise as follows: 
(1)  For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss of use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through the acts or omissions of the grantee or its officers, agents, employees or contractors or to which the grantee's or its officers, agents, employees or contractors acts or omissions in any way contribute; 
(2)  Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation; and 
(3)  Arising out of or alleged to arise out of the grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of the United States, state or any local agency applicable to the grantee in its business. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the parties indemnified and held harmless herein from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel at the grantee's sole expense. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the grantee from its duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against such party. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-76(5); Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-78), 11-1-88)  
Secs. 8-145—8-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SERVICE FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 8-161. - Required services and facilities. 
(a)  A cable television franchise application or proposal for renewal shall include a description of the grantee's system design and a description of programming and services being offered, including optional premium services, a description of facilities being proposed for local origination programming and facilities being offered to various community institutions. The offer of programming and services contained within a grantee's application shall be deemed a binding offer of such grantee for and to the benefit of the city and the subscribers of the grantee. If a program originator ceases to provide a service or if the grantee determines that other programming or cable services may be of greater benefit to subscribers, the grantee may, subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, substitute services. 
(b)  The system, after the incorporation of such substitute services, shall satisfy the warranty made by the grantee to subscribers and potential subscribers in its application for a franchise. The city council, on behalf of system subscribers, shall have the right to review any substitution of service that the grantee has made and may order a change therein if it determines, after due hearing on notice, that the warranty has been violated and that certain broad categories of video or other information programs that were committed by the grantee in its proposal are not being delivered. Any such order shall be issued only after a public hearing has been scheduled and held, and written notice of such hearing shall have been provided to the grantee and to the public at least fourteen (14) days prior to such hearing. Any such order may be enforced by a court of competent jurisdiction. A grantee shall not, in relation to this section, be deemed to have waived any right accorded to a franchised cable television operator arising under the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a grantee may, in accordance with the Cable Act of 1984, upon thirty (30) days' advance notice to the city, rearrange, replace or remove a particular cable service required by the franchise if: 
(1)  Such service is no longer available to the grantee; or 
(2)  Such service is available to the grantee only upon the payment of a royalty required under section 801(b)(2) of title 17, United States Code, which the grantee can document: 
a.  Is substantially in excess of the amount of such payment required on the date of the grantee's offer to provide such service; and 
b.  Has not been specifically compensated for through a rate increase or other adjustment. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a grantee may take such actions to rearrange a particular service from one (1) service tier to another or otherwise offer the service, if the rates for all of the service tiers involved in such actions are not subject to regulation. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-90), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-162. - Access channels. 
(a)  Each cable system franchised by the city shall provide the number of access channels agreed to in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  If any governmental or educational access channel is being utilized more than ten (10) hours per day, five (5) days a week between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. for twelve (12) consecutive weeks or if any public access channel is being used eighty (80) percent of the time between 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. for twelve (12) consecutive weeks, the grantee shall, upon receipt of written notice from the city, make new channels available for the same purposes; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall require the grantee to construct additional channel capacity to the cable system for the sole purpose of providing additional access channel capacity. Such requirement may be met by making available, on a part-time basis, one (1) or more other underutilized channels or on a full- or part-time basis one (1) or more other unused access channels until such time as such underutilized or unused channels are needed for the uses to which they have been dedicated. 
(c)  Whenever any access channel, other than the basic access channels, required in a franchise agreement for governmental, educational and public access, is utilized less than four (4) hours per day for five (5) days per week for a continuous period of not less than twelve (12) consecutive weeks, the city may permit different or additional interim uses for the channel. The grantee may be permitted to utilize unused access channel capacity under rules and procedures established by the city, however, no access capacity shall be utilized by the grantee until all other channel capacity on the cable system has been programmed. 
(d)  Access channels permitted by the city for interim use by a cable operator are to be restored to governmental, educational or public access use whenever the criteria in subsection (b) of this section are exceeded for any one (1) of the existing access channel uses or whenever the demand for use as demonstrated by records of each access channel indicate that an excessive number of people or programs are being turned away by lack of channel capacity available. 
(e)  The city council, in cooperation with the cable operator or grantee, shall develop public access channel rules for the use of the public access channel. The city council may, by resolution, delegate to the cable operator the administration and oversight of the operation of the cable TV public access channel, and delegate to the cable operator the authority to develop administrative and other procedures for the operation of the public access channel under such conditions as the city council may establish in that resolution. The city council shall have the right by resolution to repeal or limit the power of the cable operator to administer and oversee the operation of the public access channel or to repeal or revise any administrative or other procedures the cable operator establishes. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-91), 11-1-88; Ord. No. 97-297, § I, 10-7-97)  
Sec. 8-163. - New developments. 
(a)  Subsequent to each reevaluation session, as set forth in section 8-58 and in any cable television franchise agreement, the city council shall have the authority to order a public hearing on the provision of additional channel capacity by the grantee or on the inclusion in the grantee's cable system of state-of-the-art technology or upgraded facilities. Notice of such hearing shall be provided to the grantee and the public not later than fourteen (14) days prior to such hearing. 
(b)  If after such hearing, the city council determines that (i) there exists a reasonable need and demand for additional channel capacity and/or state-of-the-art technology or upgraded facilities, and (ii) provision has been made or can be made for reasonable rates which will allow grantee a fair rate of return on its investment, including the investment required to provide the additional channels and/or the state-of-the-art technology or upgraded facilities, and (iii) will not result in economic waste for the grantee, the city council may order the grantee to provide a specified number of additional channels and/or specified state-of-the-art technology or upgraded facilities. In considering the economic feasibility of required system improvements, the city council may consider the extension of the term of the franchise to permit the recovery of the cost of the improvements. Any proposed extension of a franchise shall be treated procedurally in accordance with the procedure for franchise renewal. Without implying any limitations as to other provisions of this chapter, this section is deemed a material provision within the meaning of section 8-59. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-93), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-164. - Franchise required for multichannel video providers. 
All multichannel video providers shall obtain a franchise from the city prior to providing service to any resident, business, or person within the city, and shall have a franchise in full force and effect at all times while such service is being provided. 
(Ord. No. 99-121, § I, 4-6-99)  
Sec. 8-165. - Multichannel video provider defined. 
"Multichannel video provider" means a person or entity who meets one (1) or more of the following tests: 
(1)  The provider is a cable operator, as such term is defined in the Federal Cable Act, being Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following, or is otherwise required to obtain a "franchise," as such term is defined in such Act. 
(2)  The provider is an operator of an open video system, as such term is defined in Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934 and implementing regulations. 
(3)  Any person or entity who provides multichannel video service to a resident, business, or person within the city, where such service is transmitted in whole or in part via wires or lines that are in or cross any public rights-of-way or other public property of the city. The preceding sentence shall apply whether the provider owns, leases, or otherwise obtains the right to use such wires or lines, including wires or lines of a telecommunications provider used pursuant to tariff or otherwise for such purpose. 
(4)  Any person or entity who provides multichannel video service who is otherwise required to obtain a franchise or similar agreement under the City Charter or applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 99-121, § I, 4-6-99)  
Sec. 8-166. - Franchise required for construction. 
No person may construct a multichannel video system in the city without first obtaining from the city a franchise authorizing the construction of such a system. 
(Ord. No. 99-121, § I, 4-6-99)  
Sec. 8-167. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article: 
(1)  Multichannel video service means multiple channels of video programming where some or all of the video programming is generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station or by a direct to home satellite service. 
(2)  Multichannel video system includes: 
a.  A cable system, as such term is defined in Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, 
b.  An open video system, as such term is defined in Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934 and implementing regulations, and 
c.  Any other system which provides multichannel video service to a resident, business, or person within the city, where such service is transmitted in whole or in part via wires or lines that are in or cross any public rights-of-way or other public property of the city. The preceding sentence shall apply whether the provider owns, leases, or otherwise obtains the right to use such wires or lines, including wires or lines of a telecommunications provider used pursuant to tariff or otherwise for such purpose. 
(3)  Construct as used herein includes: 
a.  The installation of lines, fibers, facilities that are in or cross any of the streets, highways, or public rights-of-way or other public property within the city for use as part of a multichannel video system, or 
b.  The connection of other facilities directly or indirectly to previously existing lines, fibers, or facilities that are in or cross any of the streets, highways, public rights-of-way, or other public property of the city for use as part of a multichannel video system. 
(Ord. No. 99-121, § I, 4-6-99)  
Secs. 8-168—8-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - EXTENSION OF SERVICE 
 
Sec. 8-181. - Construction and/or reconstruction—Map and schedule. 
(a)  The grantee shall submit a construction plan or reconstruction plan which shall be incorporated by reference and made a part of the cable television franchise agreement. The plan shall include system design details, equipment, specifications and design performance criteria. The plan shall also include a map of the entire franchise area and shall clearly delineate the following: 
(1)  The areas within the franchise area where the cable system will be initially available to subscribers, including a schedule of construction for each year that construction or reconstruction is proposed; 
(2)  Areas within the franchise area where the cable system cannot reasonably be extended due to lack of present or planned development or other similar reasons, with the areas and the reasons for not serving them clearly identified on the map. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the grantee from constructing or reconstructing the system earlier than planned. However, any delay in the system construction beyond the times specified in the plan report timetable must be submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(c)  Any delay beyond the terms of construction or reconstruction timetable, unless approved by the city council, will be considered a violation of this chapter for which the provisions of either section 8-128 or 8-59 shall apply, as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-30), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-182. - Same—Extensions. 
(a)  Construction or reconstruction of a cable television system in accordance with the plan submitted by a grantee shall commence as soon after the grant and acceptance of a franchise as is reasonably possible. Failure to proceed expeditiously shall be grounds for revocation of a franchise. Failure to proceed expeditiously shall be presumed if construction or reconstruction is not commenced within eighteen (18) months of the grant and acceptance of a franchise. 
(b)  Extension of the cable system into any areas not specifically addressed in the plan shall nonetheless be required if the terms of any of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Upon request of potential subscribers, a grantee shall extend the system to any contiguous area not designated for initial service in the plan when there exists a density of thirty-five (35) homes per street mile for aerial cable or fifty (50) homes per street mile for underground cable. Extension shall be at the grantee's cost. If underground installation is required by regulation, the grantee must make installation at the grantee's expense. Where aerial extension is allowed by regulation but underground installation is requested by benefited subscribers, the cost of undergrounding that exceeds estimated aerial extension cost may be charged to such benefited subscribers. 
(2)  In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of service, a grantee shall provide, upon the request of five (5) or more potential subscribers desiring service, an estimate of the costs required to extend service to the subscribers. The grantee shall then extend service upon request of the potential subscribers according to the rate schedule. The grantee may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the grantee. The amount paid by subscribers for early extension shall be nonrefundable, and if the area subsequently reaches the density required for mandatory extension, such payments shall be treated as consideration for early extension. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a grantee from serving areas not covered under this section upon agreement with property owners. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-31), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-183. - New development undergrounding. 
(a)  In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the property owner shall give the cable television franchise grantee reasonable notice of such construction or development and of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit and/or cable. The grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. 
(b)  Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the property owner, provided that if the grantee fails to install its conduit and/or cable within five (5) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer, or then should the trenches be closed after the five-day period, the cost of new trenching shall be borne by the grantee. Except for the notice of the particular date on which trenching will be available to the grantee, any notice provided to the grantee by the city of a preliminary plat request shall satisfy the requirement of reasonable notice. The preliminary plat shall be made available to the grantee through the development review committee process. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-32), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-184. - Aerial and underground drops. 
(a)  When requests for connection requiring a cable television aerial drop line in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet are made, the grantee must extend and make available cable television service to such residents at a connection fee not to exceed the actual installation costs incurred by the grantee for the distance exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(b)  All areas required to be underground construction shall require all underground drop installations of not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet at the cost of the grantee. Connections in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be at the expense of a subscriber, such expense to equal the grantee's actual cost. 
(Ord. No. 88-182, § I(5½-33), 11-1-88)  
Sec. 8-185. - Annexation. 
Upon the annexation of any new territory by the city, the portion of the cable system that may be located or operated within such territory and the streets, alleys or public grounds thereof shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of any franchise as though it were an extension made thereunder. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-34; Ord. No. 88-182, § I, 11-1-88)  
Chapter 9 - EMERGENCY AND DISASTER PLANNING AND RESPONSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, adopted April 6, 2004, repealed ch. 9, arts. I, II, §§ 9-1—9-11, 9-36—9-42, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, ch. 9 pertained to Emergency Management and derived from Code 1966, §§ 7-1—7-11, 14-51—14-55. 
Charter reference— Recognition of mayor relating to martial law, § 2.03. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention generally, Ch. 11; police generally, Ch. 23; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Authority of cities to form a local emergency management organization, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - EMERGENCY AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Purpose and declaration of policy. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the necessary organization, powers, and authority to provide the timely and effective use of all city resources to prepare for, respond to and recover from disasters and or emergencies, natural or manmade, that are likely to affect the health, security, safety, welfare or property of the city and its residents, whether the events occur within or without the corporate limits of the city. This chapter is enacted to provide the city, its officers and employees, with the broadest power permitted by the City Code, City Charter, state and federal law to plan for and respond to disasters and or emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
When used herein the following terms shall mean: 
Civil emergency means, without limitation, any condition of unrest, riot, civil disobedience, affray, unlawful assembly, hostile, military or paramilitary action, war, terrorism or sabotage. 
Critical infrastructure means all public or private assets, systems, and functions vital to the security, governance, public health and safety, economy, or morale of the city. 
Curfew means the period during which no person other than expressly authorized officials of the city, county, state or federal government may be present in or upon public streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places or on private property without the consent of the owner or tenant thereof or at any other place where such person has no right or authority to be during such a period. 
Dangerous product means any material or product which could reasonably be expected to be used as a tool of arson or terrorism, explosive or weapon, including but not limited to: gasoline and other liquid flammable and combustible products; dynamite and other explosives; firearms and ammunition; and knives and other dangerous weapons. 
Disaster, whether natural or manmade, means, without limitation, the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from flood, fire, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, severe high or low temperatures, water contamination or pollution, land contamination or pollution, air pollution, blizzard, landslide, mudslide, hurricane, volcanic activity, building or structural collapse, high water table, pandemic disease, epidemic, riot, blight, drought, infestation, wind, storm, wave action, hazardous substance spills or releases, chemical spills or releases, petroleum spills or releases, air contamination, biological matter spills or releases, radiation releases or exposures, infestation, explosions, sabotage, mass transportation accidents or public health emergencies, computer failure or other electronic or technological failures that threaten the public health, safety and welfare, hostile military or paramilitary action or terrorist attack, or any other public calamity requiring emergency action or a utility or energy emergency. 
Emergency means the imminent threat or occurrence of a disaster, civil emergency or utility or energy emergency affecting the city and its residents and inhabitants where the mayor determines that the exercise or discharge of emergency or disaster powers is necessary to save lives, protect property, to protect the public health and safety, or to lessen or to avert the threat of a catastrophe or calamity within the city. 
Homeland security activity means any activity related to the prevention or discovery of, response to, or recovery from a terrorist attack, natural or man-made disaster, hostile military or paramilitary action, or extraordinary law enforcement emergency. 
Mayor means the mayor of the city or the mayor pro tem in his or her absence or incapacity or the next council member in succession who may be available in the absence or incapacity of the mayor pro tem. 
Public place means any public road, street, alley or other right-of-way within the city or immediately adjacent thereto, any property owned or leased by the city or under its control or any store, building or place at which people are assembled or to which people commonly resort for purposes of business, amusement or education. 
Utility emergency means, without limitation, conditions which endanger or threaten to endanger the safety, potability, availability, transmission, distribution, treatment, or storage of water, natural gas, gas fuel, electricity, communication, solid waste or sewage. 
The term "energy emergency" and other terms not specifically defined herein shall be defined in accordance with the definitions set forth in Chapter 418 "Emergency Management" or Chapter 421 "Homeland Security" of the Government Code or any successor statute. All other terms not defined herein or in Chapter 418 or 421 shall be construed in their common and usual meaning unless the contrary is clearly indicated and in accordance with section 1-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 9-3. - Director; coordinator; program manager. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of emergency and disaster management headed by the director of emergency and disaster services of the city which position shall be held by the mayor. An emergency management coordinator shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director, in conjunction with the county and other governmental entities. The emergency management coordinator shall appoint an emergency management program manager who shall be authorized to execute and perform all duties of the coordinator, as enumerated in this article. Such appointment shall be approved by the director of emergency and disaster services hereinafter sometimes referred to as director. 
(b)  The emergency manager coordinator shall be responsible for all actions taken with respect to requests for revenue, grants, or other funding for homeland security or emergency management activities or initiatives or any other duties delegated to the coordinator by the director. The coordinator shall inform the office of the governor about any such actions relating to homeland security. In the event the city receives a grant or other funding related to homeland security as a result of these activities, the coordinator shall provide the office of the governor with an annual report detailing the city's compliance with homeland security strategy. The coordinator shall also be responsible for securing and maintaining the confidentiality of all information relating to critical infrastructure or any other categories of information made confidential by V.T.C.A., Government Code Chapters 418 and 552 or any other applicable provisions of the law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-4. - Operational organization. 
The operational disaster and emergency services organization of the city shall consist of the municipal officers and employees set forth in this chapter and who may be designated by the mayor and city manager and volunteer workers. Plans of organization shall substantially conform to recommendations of the federal government and the state emergency management division or the state office of disaster or emergency services or any successor agencies. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed to the officers and employees of the city in accordance with the terms of the emergency management program or plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-5. - Powers and duties of the director. 
The duties and responsibilities of the director of emergency and disaster services shall include, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur; 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management program or plan for the city and recommend for adoption of the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan; 
(3)  Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency and disaster management organization, as well as the training of emergency management personnel; 
(4)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city; 
(5)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations; 
(6)  Marshalling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management plan; 
(7)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements in cooperation with the representatives of the state and other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(8)  Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions that may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; 
(9)  Authorizing agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes; 
(10)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for this article; 
(11)  Assisting the city manager, the mayor pro tem or the mayor's designee in the exercise of emergency powers under section 9-22. The director of emergency and disaster services shall consult with the city attorney in the planning and exercise of emergency measures; 
(12)  Coordinate with the state and federal government, the department of homeland security and any successor agency and other governmental agencies as may be necessary to plan and implement a joint jurisdiction emergency planning and disaster services plan and mutual aid arrangements; 
(13)  Request the mayor when appropriate to declare a state of disaster or emergency as provided in section 9-21; 
(14)  Control and direct emergency training activities; 
(15)  Maintain a liaison with other municipal, state, regional and federal disaster and emergency services agencies; 
(16)  Marshal and direct, after the declaration of a state of disaster or emergency, the operational disaster and emergency services organization of the city, including all necessary personnel equipment and supplies from any department of the city to aid in carrying out the emergency operations program or plan; 
(17)  Prepare under the direction of the mayor and in consultation with the city attorney, all necessary emergency proclamations, rules, and orders pursuant to sections 9-21 and 9-22, and implement the emergency operations plan or program; 
(18)  Serve as an operations officer for any joint or mutual emergency operations administration; 
(19)  Exercise any other process or duties as may be assigned by the mayor or city council and as may be specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Chapter 418 or the Homeland Security Act of 2003, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Chapter 421, or any successor statute and any other applicable local, state or federal laws; 
(20)  Consult with the city attorney as necessary in the planning and exercise of emergency powers. 
The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management and for carrying out the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He or she may delegate authority for the execution of these duties to the coordinator and the program manager, but will be responsible for the execution of these duties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04) 
State Law reference— Declaration of local disaster, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.108.  
Sec. 9-6. - Emergency management plan. 
The director of emergency and disaster services shall develop and maintain and recommend for adoption by the city council a comprehensive emergency management plan in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency or disaster management or any successor agency. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster or emergency. The director shall make continuing studies of the emergency management plan or program. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-7. - Mutual aid agreements. 
(a)  The director may, on behalf of the city, enter into reciprocal aid, mutual aid, joint powers agreements, intergovernmental assistance agreements, or other compacts, plans, or agreements with other governmental entities for the protection of life and property. Such agreements may include the furnishing or exchange of supplies, equipment, facilities, personnel, and/or services and authorize employment by the county and other cities and governmental entities within the county with the director as area coordinator for mutual aid. 
(b)  The city council or any of its committees, boards, commissions, or authorities may exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of the emergency or disaster and may waive compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law. 
(c)  The director shall recommend for adoption by the city council mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the emergency management plan or program. 
(d)  The director is authorized to join with other city, county, state and federal officials to form joint emergency management plans and programs and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator and to participate in county-wide, regional and state-wide programs of emergency and disaster management and to present any such plans or programs for the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Secs. 9-8—9-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS DURING TIMES OF DISASTER OR EMERGENCY 
 
Sec. 9-21. - Authority to declare state of disaster. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to declare by proclamation a state of disaster and to take any action deemed necessary to provide adequate control over persons and conditions during such periods of impending or actual public emergency or disaster, and it is the intent of the city council to provide the means whereby the mayor may take steps to protect lives and property and maintain the operation of the government, until the city council or the governor of the state shall further act. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-22. - Mayor's powers during disaster or emergency. 
The mayor is authorized, if the mayor finds that the city or any part thereof is suffering or is in imminent danger of suffering a disaster, emergency, civil emergency, or utility emergency, to declare a local disaster and issue orders exercising all emergency powers including without limitation, all of the following: 
(1)  Temporarily suspend, limit, cancel, convene, reschedule, postpone, continue, or relocate all meetings of the city council, and any city committee, commission, board, authority, or other city body as deemed appropriate by the mayor. 
(2)  Suspend or limit the sale, distribution, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives, and other combustible products and require the closing of those businesses or parts of businesses insofar as the sale, distribution, dispensing, or transportation of these items are concerned. 
(3)  Establish a curfew during such hours of the days or nights and affecting such categories of persons as may be designated. 
(4)  Require closing of business establishments. 
(5)  Prohibit the sale or distribution within the city of any products which could be employed in a manner which would constitute a danger to public safety. 
(6)  Temporarily close any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, public parks or public ways. 
(7)  Temporarily suspend or modify, for not more than seven (7) days, any regulation or ordinance of the city, including but not limited to, those regarding health, safety, and zoning. This period may be extended upon approval of the city council. 
(8)  Suspend or limit the use of the city's water resources or other infrastructure. 
(9)  Control, restrict, allocate, or regulate the use, sale, production, or distribution of food, water, fuel, clothing, and/or other commodities, materials, goods, services, and resources including the establishment of wage, rent, and price controls and other economic stabilization methods necessary to preserve economic stability. 
(10)  Suspend or limit burning of any items or property within the city limits and up to five (5) miles outside the corporate limits. 
(11)  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee. If regular city forces are determined to be inadequate, then to acquire the services of such other personnel as the mayor can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law to other registered and identified disaster emergency workers. 
(12)  Utilize all available resources of the city as reasonably necessary to manage the disaster or emergency. 
(13)  Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened areas within the city if the mayor deems this action is necessary for the preservation of life, property, or other disaster or emergency mitigation, response or recovery and to prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destination in connection with an evacuation. 
(14)  Purchase or lease materials, supplies, or equipment during the local disaster or emergency, and to authorize any or all agencies or city officials to directly purchase or lease those materials, supplies, or equipment essential to continue the work of the city involved without the advertisement of bids. Purchases or leases exceeding the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall require prior approval by the director of finance and municipal services shall follow the emergency procurement procedures set forth in section 9-23. 
(15)  Hire and contract for construction, engineering, architectural, building, electrical, plumbing, and repair of public improvements and/or other professional or construction services essential to continue to work of the city without the advertisement of bids when the delay of advertising and public bidding might cause serious injury or loss. Such contracts shall not exceed twenty-five ($25,000.00) without prior approval having been given by the director of finance and administrative services and following the emergency procurement procedures set forth in section 9-23. 
(16)  Make application for local, state, or federal assistance. 
(17)  Establish and control routes of transportation, ingress or egress. 
(18)  Control ingress and egress from any designated disaster or emergency area or home, building or structures located therein. 
(19)  Utilize private property as necessary to cope with emergency or disaster conditions, subject to any requirements established by law for compensation and in accordance with section 9-31. 
(20)  Appropriate and expend funds, exclude contracts, authorize the obtaining and acquisition of property, equipment, services, supplies, and materials without strict compliance with procurement regulations or procedures. 
(21)  Transfer the direction, personnel, or functions of city departments and agencies for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency or disaster services. 
(22)  Accept services, gifts, grants, loans, equipment, supplies, and/or materials whether from private, nonprofit, or governmental sources. 
(23)  Terminate or suspend any process, operation, machine, device, or event that is or may negatively impact the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property within the city. 
(24)  Delegate authority to such city officials as the mayor determines reasonably necessary, convenient, or expedient. 
(25)  Require the continuation, termination, disconnection, or suspension of natural gas, electrical power, water, sewer, communication or other public utilities or infrastructure. 
(26)  Close or cancel the use of any municipally owned or operated building or other public facility. 
(27)  Disinfect, abate, demolish, remove or clean up any building, structure, site, wreckage, or debris. 
(28)  Declare, issue, enforce, modify and terminate orders for quarantine and isolation of persons or animals posing a threat to public health. 
(29)  Exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of emergency or disaster including the waiving of compliance with any time consuming procedures and formalities, including notices, as may be prescribed by law. 
(30)  Issue any and all such other orders or undertake such other functions and activities as the mayor reasonably believes is required to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property within the city or otherwise preserve the public peace or abate, clean up, or mitigate the effects of any emergency or disaster. 
(31)  Exercise the full power and authority to provide by proclamation all regulations reasonably necessary to protect the health, security, welfare, safety, peace, life and property of the city and the inhabitants during the time of such crisis. 
(32)  Delegate, to the extent allowed by law, any or all of these powers and duties to the emergency management coordinator. 
(33)  Petition the governor to apply to the federal government for financial assistance and for aid to local families and individuals adversely affected by the disaster or emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-23. - Emergency procurements. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the mayor, upon declaration of a state of emergency by proclamation as provided in section 9-21, may authorize the city manager or the city manager's designees to procure by purchase or lease, such goods and services as are deemed necessary for the city's emergency response effort. This emergency procurement of goods or services may be made in the open market without filing a requisition or estimate and without advertisement for immediate delivery or furnishing. A full written account of all emergency procurements made during this emergency, together with a requisition for the required materials, supplies, equipment, or services, shall be submitted to or provided by the city manager within thirty (30) days after their procurement, and shall be open to public inspection for a period of at least one year subsequent to the date of the emergency purchases. The city manager shall, within three months of the conclusion of the emergency, formally communicate these emergency expenditures in a full written account to the city council. 
(b)  All payments or compensation for personal services must be approved by city council unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-24. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith but only to the extent of any such conflict or inconsistency. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-25. - Filing and notice of declaration and regulation. 
Any proclamation or declaration of disaster or emergency and emergency regulations issued by the mayor shall be promptly filed with the city secretary and the public shall be promptly notified through general publicity of said declaration in the official newspaper of the city or by local radio or television or by posting said declaration and regulations on the city's web site or by circulating notice or by posting signs at conspicuous places within the affected area or by any combination of such methods or as otherwise may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-26. - Prohibited conduct during disaster or emergency. 
During the period an actual or impending local disaster or emergency has been declared, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Enter or remain upon the premises of any establishment not open for business to the public, unless such person is the owner or agent of the establishment. 
(2)  Violate any of the orders or regulations duly issued by the mayor or authorized personnel. 
(3)  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any duly authorized peace officer or any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, or any order or regulation issued under authority provided for in this chapter or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(4)  To wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(5)  To operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-27. - Effective term of declaration. 
The declaration of a local disaster or emergency shall be in effect immediately upon issuance and shall remain in effect for a period of up to seven (7) days or the maximum period allowed by law. This period may be extended by the mayor only upon approval of the city council or by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-28. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council except in accordance with the approved city and/or county budgets or as authorized by this chapter and other applicable law. No person shall have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council, unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, safety, welfare, life or property in accordance with sections 9-22 and 9-23 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04) 
Cross reference— Purchasing generally, § 10-26 et seq.  
Sec. 9-29. - Location of city council meetings and departments. 
(a)  Whenever an emergency or disaster makes it imprudent or impossible to conduct the affairs of the city at its regular locations, the city council may meet at any place, inside or outside the city limits. Any temporary disaster meeting location for the city council shall continue until a new location is established or until the emergency or disaster is terminated and the city council is able to return to its normal location. 
(b)  Whenever an emergency or disaster makes it imprudent or impossible to conduct the affairs of any department of the city at its regular location, such department may conduct its business at any place, inside or outside the city limits, and may remain at the temporary location until the emergency or disaster is declared ended or until the department is able to return to its normal location. 
(c)  Any official act or meeting required to be performed at any regular location of the city council or of its departments shall be valid when performed at any temporary location established under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-30. - Authority to enter property. 
During the period of a declared emergency or disaster, a city officer or employee or authorized agent may enter onto or upon private property if the officer, employee or authorized agent has reasonable grounds to believe that there is a true emergency or disaster and an immediate need for assistance for the protection of life or property, and that entering onto the private land will allow the employee or authorized agent to take such steps to alleviate or minimize the emergency or disaster or to prevent or minimize risk or danger to lives or property from the declared emergency or disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-31. - Property taken or commandeered. 
Any person making a claim for property taken, used or commandeered during the emergency or disaster shall follow the procedure set forth and be compensated in accordance with the requirements and restrictions of V.T.C.A., Government Code Chapter 418 or any successor statute. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Secs. 9-32—9-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT, IMMUNITY, AND GENERAL APPLICATION 
 
Sec. 9-51. - Scope and application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all executive, legislative, and judicial branches, powers, and functions conferred upon the city and its officers, employees, and authorized agents.  
Sec. 9-52. - Immunity. 
(a)  This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, safety, and welfare and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damages sustained to persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
(b)  Any officer, employee, or volunteer of the city performing a homeland security activity or other emergency activity under this chapter shall also be entitled to the protection of the limitations on liability contained in V.T.C.A., Chapters 418 and 421 or any successor statute or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-53. - Authority for enforcement. 
The members of the police force of this city and other law enforcement agencies have jurisdiction or as otherwise authorized by the mayor, the public health department, the fire department, or such other persons as authorized by the mayor, are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the orders, rules, and regulations made or issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 9-54. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the chapter shall, upon conviction of any provision that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and upon conviction of a violation of any other provision of this chapter, be fined a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  Any person violating a proclamation of emergency or disaster, a subsequent proclamation exercising emergency or disaster powers, a rule, regulation or order, which rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter, or who violates any order or directive of emergency services personnel pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction of any proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and upon conviction of a violation of any other proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive issued under this chapter, be fined a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  Each and every day that the provisions of or any proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive issued under this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04) 
State Law reference— Similar penalty, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.173.  
Sec. 9-55. - Civil penalty. 
Any owner or owner's representative with control over the premises violating any provision of or any proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive issued under this chapter upon proof that (1) the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this chapter or of any proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive issued under this chapter; and (2) after the defendant received notice of the chapter, proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive, the person committed acts in violation of same or failed to take action necessary for compliance may be assessed a civil penalty not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day for violation or a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) a day for violations relating to point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a non-point source, into a sewer system, including a sanitary or storm water sewer system, owned or controlled by the city or assessed a civil penalty as may otherwise be authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04) 
State Law reference— Similar penalty, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.173.  
Sec. 9-56. - Penalties cumulative. 
All penalties in this chapter are in addition to and cumulative of any other remedies that may be available at law and in equity, including, without limitation, injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04) 
State Law reference— Similar penalty, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.173.  
Sec. 9-57. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of this chapter to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and/or phases of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-101, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Chapter 10 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of the council, § 2.08; independent annual audit, § 2.13; preparation, submission and administration of annual budget by city manager, § 5.03(b); annual financial report to the council by city manager, § 5.03(c); revenue and taxation, § 7.01 et seq.; budget, § 8.01 et seq.; borrowing for public improvements, § 9.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Sale of property, § 2-106 et seq.; licenses, permits and business regulation generally, Ch. 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definition of tax assessor and collector. 
As used in this chapter and wherever it may appear in this Code, the term "tax assessor and collector," "tax assessor-collector," "tax assessor" or "tax collector" shall mean the executive director of finance or his designee.  
Sec. 10-2. - Payment of taxes, penalty and interest. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, taxes are due on receipt of the tax bill and are delinquent if not paid before February 1 of the year following the year in which they are imposed. 
(b)  If one-half of the principal amount of all taxes due on all property, real and personal, by any person for the current year is paid before December 1 of the year for which such taxes are due, the balance may be paid at any time before July 1 of the following year without penalty or interest. 
(c)  Delinquent taxes shall incur penalty and interest in the amounts provided for in the V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.01. 
(d)  On any taxes upon property, both real and personal, that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year they become delinquent, there is hereby imposed an additional penalty of twenty (20) percent on the amount of such delinquent taxes, penalty, and interest due. 
(e)  The collector of such delinquent taxes shall deliver a notice of delinquency and of the additional penalty to be imposed to the property owner at least thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days before July 1 of the year such taxes become delinquent. 
(Code 1966, §§ 22-2, 22-5; Ord. No. 89-116, §§ I, IV, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2004-119, § 1, 4-20-04) 
State Law reference— Additional penalty for collection costs authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07.  
Sec. 10-3. - Taxation of telecommunication services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunication services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communications originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. The tax shall not serve to offset any franchise fees payable to the city by the terms of chapter 8 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 22-6(a), (b); Ord. No. 89-116, § V, 9-5-89)  
Secs. 10-4—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PURCHASING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-376, § 2, repealed art. II, §§ 10-26—10-37, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, §§ 10-26—10-37, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1966, §§ 2-31—2-36, 2-38; Ord. No. 85-189, § I, adopted Sept. 17, 1985; Ord. No. 88-129, § I(2-39, 2-40), adopted Aug. 2, 1988; Ord. No. 90-165, § I, Oct. 16, 1990; Ord. No. 99-021, § I, adopted Jan. 21, 1992; and Ord. No. 93-182, §§ I—VIII, adopted Oct. 5, 1993. 
Cross reference— Commitment of funds during emergency management activities, § 9-9. 
State Law reference— Purchase and contract procedure, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 252.001 et seq., 271.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Purchasing and procurement methods and procedures.. 
(a)  The purchasing agent of the City of Denton (the "purchasing agent') shall make all purchases and sales for the city in accordance with the provisions of state law, the Charter and in accordance with this article. The city may utilize any purchasing or procurement method or procedure authorized by law to purchase or contract for goods, services or public works. The purchasing agent is authorized to determine which method of procurement provides the best value to the city under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, §§ 271.113, 271.114, and 252.022(d), as amended. As authorized by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 252.022(c) the purchasing agent is hereby authorized to use any procurement procedure or method for the construction or installation of any public work for Denton Municipal Electric that is authorized by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Ch. 271(H), as amended, even if the public work is for the construction of a public work defined in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 252.043(d). This ordinance shall constitute a resolution for purposes of V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 252.022(c). 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have full authority to purchase or provide for the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for the use of all departments, utilities, commissions and boards comprising the city government. 
(Ord. No. 2001-376, § 1, 10-2-01)  
Sec. 10-27. - Requisitions for supplies. 
The purchasing agent shall not furnish any supplies to any department unless there is to the credit of such department an available appropriation balance in excess of all unpaid obligations sufficient to pay such supplies. 
(Ord. No. 2001-376, § 1, 10-2-01)  
Sec. 10-28. - Procedures for purchases based on certain values. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee, is authorized to make purchases of budgeted items of $100,000.00 or less without city council approval. 
(b)  That to the extent any expenditure is subject to specific competitive bidding or other procurement requirements under state law, including Chapters 252 and 271 of the Local Government Code the city manager is hereby delegated the authority to exercise on behalf of the city any and all rights or duties of the city under such laws. 
(Ord. No. 2001-376, § 1, 10-2-01; Ord. No. 2006-237, §§ 1, 2, 9-12-06)  
Sec. 10-29. - Contracts with former city council members. 
The city shall not, within one hundred eighty (180) days after a council member leaves office, enter into a contract with any business entity as defined by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Ch. 171, in which the former council member has a substantial interest as defined by Ch. 171. This prohibition does not apply to: 
(1)  A contract required to be awarded to the lowest responsible through competitive sealed bids; 
(2)  A contract to purchase items that are available from only one source as specified in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Ch. 252; 
(3)  A contract required to receive a city service or participate in a city program which is available to the general public; 
(4)  A contract that is necessary to preserve or protect the public health or safety of the citizens or because of a public calamity that requires the immediate appropriation of money to relieve the necessity of the city's residents or to preserve the property of the city; and 
(5)  The purchase of real estate or an interest in real estate. 
(Ord. No. 2001-376, § 1, 10-2-01)  
Secs. 10-30—10-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAXES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-46. - Levy; payment. 
(a)  An annual occupation tax is hereby levied and shall be collected from every person pursuing any occupation taxed or which may hereafter be taxed by the general laws of the state, and such annual occupation tax shall be equal in each instance to one-half of the amount levied by the state for such occupations, except as provided in division 2 of this article. However, the levy of occupation taxes in this section shall not apply unless permission for such levy is specifically granted to cities by the legislature of the state. 
(b)  All occupation taxes shall be paid annually, in advance, except where otherwise provided by state law, in which event the method of payment provided by state law shall govern. 
(Code 1966, § 22-15)  
Secs. 10-47—10-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to levy occupation tax, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8814. 
 
Sec. 10-61. - Levy; exemptions. 
(a)  Every owner who exhibits, displays or permits to be displayed a coin-operated machine, as defined by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8801, shall pay and there is hereby levied on each coin-operated machine an annual occupation tax in an amount not to exceed one-fourth of the amount levied by the state for such machines. 
(b)  Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, merchandise vending machines, beverage vending machines, confection vending machines, cigarette vending machines and service coin-operated machines are expressly exempt from the tax levied in this division. 
(Code 1966, § 22-26) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8803.  
Sec. 10-62. - Time for payment of tax. 
The taxes levied and provided for in this division shall be paid to the city tax assessor and collector on or before January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1966, § 22-27)  
Sec. 10-63. - License card; sealing machines to prevent operation. 
(a)  The city tax assessor and collector shall, upon the payment of the occupation tax provided in this division, issue a license card for each coin-operated machine for which the tax is paid, which card shall show the number of the occupation tax receipt and the classification of such coin-operated machine. 
(b)  If any person shall fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax due on any coin-operated machine or shall fail or refuse to have the license card for such coin-operated machine attached thereto where it can be easily seen, the city assessor and collector shall have the right to place a seal on such coin-operated machine in order to prevent the use thereof until the occupation tax has been paid or until the license card therefor has been properly attached to the coin-operated machine. 
(Code 1966, § 22-28) 
State Law reference— Sealing machines, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8815.  
Sec. 10-64. - Fee for removal of seal; penalty for breaking. 
(a)  After a coin-operated machine has been sealed by the city tax assessor and collector as provided in section 10-63, it shall be the duty of the owner, licensee or person in charge of the premises in or on which such machine is located to see that the seal is not broken or removed and that the machine is not removed from the premises. Proof that such seal was tampered with, removed or destroyed or that any machine so sealed was removed from the premises on which it was located at the time of sealing shall be prima facie evidence that such acts were done by such owner, licensee or person in charge of such premises. 
(b)  Any seal, as provided in this division, shall only be removed by the city tax assessor and collector after a fee allowed by state law has been paid to cover the expense of sealing and the removal of the seal. 
(Code 1966, § 22-29) 
State Law reference— Fee authorized, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8815.  
Sec. 10-65. - Transfer of occupation tax receipt. 
(a)  If the owner or operator of any coin-operated machine upon which an occupation tax is levied desires to transfer the occupation tax receipt on a given coin-operated machine to another machine replacing the machine originally taxed, such owner or operator shall apply to the city tax assessor and collector for a new license card which may be issued upon the payment of a fee as determined by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  If the owner or operator of any coin-operated machine in the city upon which an occupation tax is levied shall fail to properly transfer such receipt, as set out in subsection (a) of this section, the coin-operated machine upon which the transfer was improperly made shall be considered to be a coin-operated machine upon which no occupation tax has been paid. 
(Code 1966, § 22-30)  
Secs. 10-66—10-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BINGO GROSS RECEIPTS TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— By referendum on January 15, 1983, the electorate approved Ordinance No. 83-05 authorizing bingo in the city. 
State Law reference— Bingo enabling act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d. 
 
Sec. 10-81. - Levied. 
An annual gross receipts tax of two (2) percent on the gross receipts on the conducting of bingo games within the city is hereby levied and shall be collected from every person conducting bingo games in the city in accordance with the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d. 
(Code 1966, § 22-41)  
Sec. 10-82. - Local share of bingo prize fee. 
There shall be collected for the city its local share of the bingo prize fee or bingo prize money on all bingo games conducted within the corporate limits of the city as authorized by V.T.C.A. Occupations Code Ch. 2001. All such fees shall be collected, subject to the penalty provided by V.T.C.A. Occupations Code Ch. 2001, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2243 , § 3, 10-8-19)  
Secs. 10-83—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Hotel occupancy tax authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping and does not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
Hotel means any building in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations, including a hotel; motel; tourist home, house or court; lodginghouse; inn; roominghouse; or bed and breakfast. The term does not include: 1) a hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; or 2) a dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room in a hotel if the room is one which is ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant is other than a permanent resident. 
Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident. 
Permanent resident is a person who has the right to use or possess a room in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period. A person is a permanent resident if he enters occupancy under a lease, the duration of which is at least thirty (30) consecutive days, or if he has previously occupied the room or space for thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of October, November and December; the second quarter being the months of January, February and March; the third quarter being the months of April, May and June; and the fourth quarter being the months of July, August and September. 
Reporting and payment period means a calendar month unless the hotel owes less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a calendar month or one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a calendar quarter. If the preceding is true, the hotel qualifies to report and pay based on a quarterly period. 
Tax assessor-collector means the tax assessor and collector of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 23-1; Ord. No. 96-136, § I, 6-18-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-102. - Levied; amount; exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, there is hereby levied a tax of seven (7) percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs two dollars ($2.00) or more each day and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession. The tax shall also be levied on banquet halls or meeting rooms that are located within the same building in which the public could obtain sleeping accommodations. However, the tax is not imposed on a room that is owned by a hotel that is physically separated and specifically not used for sleeping accommodations. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed under subsection (a) of this section upon the following persons: 
(1)  A permanent resident; 
(2)  An officer, employee, agency, institution (other than an institution of higher education), board, or commission of this state, for whom a special provision or exception to the general rate of reimbursement under the General Appropriations Act applies and who is provided with photo identification verifying the identity and exempt status of the person, is not required to pay the tax. 
(Code 1966, § 23-2; Ord. No. 96-136, § II, 6-18-96)  
Sec. 10-103. - Collection. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by this article for the city. 
[(b)  Reserved.] 
(Code 1966, § 23-3 Ord. No. 96-136, § III, 6-18-96)  
Sec. 10-104. - Reporting and payment period. 
(a)  A person required to collect the tax imposed by this section shall pay the tax assessor-collector the tax collected during the preceding reporting period and at the same time shall file with the tax assessor-collector a report stating: 
(1)  The total amount of the payments made for rooms at the person's hotel during the preceding reporting period; 
(2)  The amount of the tax collected by the person during the preceding reporting period; 
(3)  The amount of exemptions and types according to section 10-102; and 
(4)  Other information that the tax assessor-collector requires to be in the report. 
(b)  Except as provided by subsection (c), each calendar month is a reporting period and the taxes imposed by and collected under this section are due and payable to tax assessor-collector on or before the 20th day of the month following the end of each calendar month. 
(c)  If a taxpayer owes less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a calendar month or one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a calendar quarter, the taxpayer qualifies as a quarterly filer having a reporting period of a calendar quarter and the taxes are due and payable on the 20th day after the end of the calendar quarter. 
(Code 1966, § 23-4; Ord. No. 96-136, § IV, 6-18-96)  
Sec. 10-105. - Access to books and records. 
The tax assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied by this article. He shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due hereunder, including documentation of information contained in the report to the city by the hotel. 
(Code 1966, § 23-5)  
Sec. 10-106. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall fail to file a report as required in this article or shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed in this article when the report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five (5) percent of the amount due as penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days he shall forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax. However, such penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the due date. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including a hotel operator who fails to collect the tax, fails to file a return, files a false return or who is delinquent in the tax payment, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 23-6)  
Sec. 10-107. - Additional penalties. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to take all or any of the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed by this article and pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report or filed a false report or failed to pay the tax when due: 
(1)  Require the forfeiture of any revenue the city allowed the hotel operator to retain for its cost of collecting the tax; 
(2)  File legal proceedings against the hotel for noncompliance; and 
(3)  File legal proceedings against the hotel seeking any other remedies provided under state law.  
Sec. 10-108. - Authorization to bring suit. 
The city attorney is hereby authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax imposed by this article and required to pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report or filed a false report or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in the injunction.  
Sec. 10-109. - Use of revenue derived from tax. 
The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this article may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of convention center facilities as such are defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001; 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the municipality or its vicinity; 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  Which are at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities; or 
b.  Which are located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists, convention delegates or other visitors to the municipality. 
The revenue derived from this tax shall be allocated and expended in compliance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351, § 351.103. 
(Ord. No. 96-136, § V, 6-18-96)  
Sec. 10-110. - Conflict of laws. 
In case of conflict between V.T.C.A., Tax Code chs. 156 and 351 and this article, the terms and provisions of V.T.C.A., Tax Code chs. 156 and 351, shall prevail over this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-136, § VI, 6-18-96)  
Secs. 10-111—10-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TAX EXEMPTION FOR DESIGNATED HISTORIC SITES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Historic land preservation and historic districts, § 35-211 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-126. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted for the purpose of encouraging the preservation of individually designated historic sites by providing for a reduction of the city's property tax to qualifying properties. 
(Ord. No. 87-189, § I(22-50), 10-20-87)  
Sec. 10-127. - Definition. 
As used in this article, "designated historic site" means any structure or archeological site and the land necessary for access to and use of the structure or archeological site, if the structure or archeological site is designated as a historically or archeologically significant site in need of tax relief to encourage its preservation pursuant to an ordinance or other law adopted by the governing body of the unit. 
(Ord. No. 87-189, § I(22-51), 10-20-87; Ord. No. 2009-290, § 1, 11-17-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-128. - Partial tax exemption of designated historic sites. 
(a)  Any property which was a designated historic site on the first day of January for any year beginning with 1989 and extending to and including 2008, shall be exempt from real property ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Denton to the extent of fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the designated historic site. The exemption provided for herein shall apply for a maximum of fifteen (15) successive years, beginning with the first year the property is entitled to the exemption during the specified years and continuing and including each and every year of the fourteen (14) successive years thereafter during which the property is a designated historic site on the first day of January of those fourteen (14) years. 
(b)  Any property which was a designated historic site on the first day of January 2009 shall be exempt from real property ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Denton for tax year 2009 to the extent of fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the designated historic site. 
(c)  Any property which is designated a historic site after the first day of January 2009 may be exempt from real property ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Denton to the extent of fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the designated historic site if the property owner demonstrates to city qualifying expenses of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more for permanent improvements and/or for restoration of said property. The qualifying expenses are limited to two (2) years prior to designation as a historic site. The historical landmark commission must determine whether the qualifying expenses result in a permanent improvement and/or restoration of said property as a condition of receiving the exemption. The exemption provided for herein shall apply for a maximum of ten (10) successive years, beginning with the first year the property is entitled to the exemption during the specified years and continuing and including each and every year of the nine (9) successive years thereafter during which the property is a designated historic site on the first day of January of those nine (9) successive years. 
(d)  Additional ten (10) year exemptions thereafter will require the property owner to demonstrate to city qualifying expenses of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more, beyond those demonstrated for the initial or subsequent exemption, for permanent improvements and/or for restoration of said property. The historical landmark commission must determine whether the qualifying expenses result in a permanent improvement and/or restoration of said property as a condition of receiving the exemption. 
(e)  Upon designation as a historic site eligible for a tax exemption or reauthorization of a tax exemption, the director of planning and development shall provide the property owner a certified ordinance or other document that authorizes the tax exemption. To receive the exemption provided herein, a person claiming the exemption must apply for the exemption with the chief appraiser of the Denton Central Appraisal District as provided by state law. Immediately after issuance of a certificate of demolition or removal, the director of planning and development shall notify the chief appraiser of the Denton Central Appraisal District. 
(Ord. No. 87-189, § I(22-52), 10-20-87; Ord. No. 98-110, § I, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 2009-290, § 1, 11-17-09)  
Sec. 10-129. - Recapture of taxes. 
(a)  If any designated historic site is, within twenty-five (25) years from any year in which the property received a tax exemption under this article: 
(1)  Removed as a designated historic site by ordinance, upon the request of the owner; or 
(2)  Removed as a designated historic site by ordinance after it has been determined to have been totally or partially destroyed or altered by the willful or negligent act of the owner or the owner's agent, in violation of article V of chapter 35 of this Code; 
an additional tax is imposed, on the effective date of the ordinance providing for its removal as a designated historic site, equal to the difference between the city taxes imposed for each year an exemption was made under this article, and the taxes that would have been imposed had the exemption not been made, plus interest on the additional amount at an annual rate of seven (7) percent, calculated from the dates on which the additional taxes would have become due if not exempted. 
(b)  If, in providing for the removal of a property as a designated historic site because of its being partially or totally destroyed or altered, as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city council, after receiving the determination of the historic landmark commission and planning and zoning commission, determines, after public hearing for which the owner shall be given notice, that the property was totally or partially destroyed or altered by the willful or negligent act of the owner or his representative, in violation of article V of chapter 35, the additional tax provided for in this section shall be imposed. 
(c)  A tax lien attaches to the property on the date it is removed as a designated historic site to secure payment of the additional tax and interest imposed by this section. The lien exists in favor of the city for which the additional tax is imposed. 
(d)  The city tax assessor and collector shall notify the chief appraiser of the additional tax imposed and shall prepare and deliver a statement to the owner for the additional taxes plus interest as soon as practicable after removal of the property as a designated historic site. The taxes and interest are due and become delinquent and incur penalties and interest as provided by law for ad valorem taxes imposed by the city if not paid before February 1 of the year following the year in which the additional tax is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 87-189, § I(22-53), 10-20-87)  
ARTICLE VII. - TAX EXEMPTION FOR HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITES 
 
Sec. 10-130. - Granting of partial exemption. 
Any property which is designated as a "historically significant site" pursuant to the terms of this article and which is substantially rehabilitated as provided herein shall have abated any increase in the assessed value for ad valorem tax purposes in excess of the assessed value of the property for the tax year immediately prior to the renovation, for a period of ten (10) years following the completion of the renovation. Only the historic structure and the land reasonably necessary for access to, and use of, the structure shall be subject to the tax abatement. The abatement period shall begin on the first day of the tax year following completion of the rehabilitation project. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-131. - Designation of historically significant sites. 
For the purpose of this article, all structures, residential and commercial, fifty (50) years old or older which are within the boundaries of the downtown commercial district as indicated on attachment "A," which is attached hereto [in Ord. No. 98-116] and made a part hereof for all purposes, are designated as historically significant sites in need of tax relief to encourage their preservation. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-132. - Eligibility. 
To be eligible for a property tax abatement, a property must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The property must meet the requirements for designation as a historically significant site in need of tax relief as defined in section 10-131 of this article. 
(2)  The property must meet all requirements for application, certification and verification as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-133. - Application process. 
Applications for a historically significant site tax exemption pursuant to this article are to be filed with the preservation officer (or such other city official designated by the city manager) of the City of Denton, who shall be the agent for the City of Denton for the purposes of administering this article. Each application must be signed by the owner of the property, be acknowledged before a notary public and shall: 
(1)  State the legal description of the property proposed for certification; 
(2)  Include an affidavit by the owner stating the structure is fifty (50) years old or older and is located within the Downtown Commercial District of the City of Denton, commercial buildings within historic districts, historic conservation districts or any commercial building that the city council deems historic or in need of preservation; 
(3)  Include detailed plans and/or descriptions of the proposed work demonstrating rehabilitation is in accordance with the current property appearance guidelines adopted by ordinance of the city council; 
(4)  Include cost estimates indicating the repair or rehabilitation of the exterior of the building will equal or exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the most recent assessed ad valorem tax valuation of the structure or twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), whichever is less. Roof repair or replacement may comprise no more than fifty (50) percent of the minimum threshold amount necessary to qualify for tax abatement; 
(5)  Include a projection of the estimated construction time and predicted completion date of the historic repair or rehabilitation; 
(6)  Authorize the members of the historic landmark commission, the city manager or designee, and elected officials to visit and inspect the property proposed for certification to verify that it is in need of substantial repair or rehabilitation and to verify repair or rehabilitation; 
(7)  Sign an agreement to submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness to determine compliance with property appearance guidelines for any exterior modifications to the property for the duration of the period during which the tax abatement is in effect; 
(8)  Include a tax certificate showing all taxes due upon the property have been paid; and 
(9)  Provide any additional information to the historic landmark commission which the owner or committee deems relevant or useful, such as the history of the structure, access to the structure by the public, or any proposed changes in use of the structure. 
Each application shall contain sufficient documentation confirming or supporting the information submitted therein. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2014-125, § 1, 5-6-14)  
Sec. 10-134. - Certification process. 
Upon receipt of the sworn application, the preservation officer shall forward the application to the historic landmark commission for review. The historic landmark commission shall review the proposed rehabilitation for conformance with the current version of the property appearance guidelines. The historic landmark commission shall recommend to the city council whether the structure shall be eligible for the tax exemption. The commission may recommend approval of the application as submitted, approval with conditions, or denial. The historic landmark commission shall review the application within forty-five (45) days of its submittal to the preservation officer. The written recommendation of the historic landmark commission shall be delivered to the city manager no more than ten (10) days after the commission's decision is rendered. If the decision of the commission is for approval with conditions, and the applicant concurs with such conditions, the above ten (10) days for delivery will not commence until the application is amended to comply with the conditions approved by the commission. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the historic landmark commission, the city manager shall, within a reasonable time, place the matter upon the city council agenda for determination of eligibility. In determining eligibility, the city council shall first determine that all the requirements of this article have been met and that only the historic structure and the land reasonably necessary for access to, and use thereof, is to be provided favorable tax relief as provided in section 10-130 of this article. If eligibility is determined, the council shall authorize the city manager to execute a tax exemption certificate upon verification of completion of repairs or renovation. If required by the Denton County Appraisal District, the city manager or designee shall provide annually a list of structures eligible for tax exemption under this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-135. - Verification process. 
Upon completion of the repair or rehabilitation, the certified applicant shall submit to the preservation officer a sworn statement of completion acknowledging that the structure has been substantially repaired or rehabilitated in accordance with the plan approved by the city council. Applicant must also present documentation verifying that the cost of repair or rehabilitation meets or exceeds the amounts established in section 10-133 of this article. The preservation officer or designee, upon receipt of the sworn statement of completion, but no later than thirty (30) days thereafter, shall make an investigation of the property and shall approve or disapprove the fact that the property has been completed as required for certification. If the repair or renovation deviates in any way from the construction plan approved by council, the historic landmark commission shall determine whether or not the modifications are in accordance with the property appearance guidelines. If verification of completion shall be deemed unfavorable, the certified applicant shall be required to complete or correct the repair or rehabilitation in order to obtain the tax exemption provided by this article or appeal the commission's decision to the city council. When the verification of completion receives a favorable review by the preservation officer, or the commission or the council, whichever is applicable, the preservation officer shall notify the city manager in writing of compliance. Thereafter, the city manager shall execute a tax exemption certificate and forward same to the Denton County Appraisal District. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-136. - Property appearance guidelines. 
The property appearance guidelines on file in the office of the preservation officer, the planning department and such other office as the city manager may designate, are hereby approved and incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes. The property appearance guidelines shall be periodically reviewed by the historical landmark commission and desired changes by the commission to such guidelines shall be recommended to the city council. Any changes to the property appearance guidelines shall not be effective until such changes are approved by the city council. The city council may direct the city manager or the preservation officer to propose certain changes to the property appearance guidelines but such changes shall not be adopted by city council without a recommendation from the historic landmark commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2014-125, § 2, 5-6-14)  
Sec. 10-137. - Alteration or destruction. 
(a)  During the exemption period, if the preservation officer or a member of the historic landmark commission has reason to believe that an exempted structure has been altered or totally or partially destroyed by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his representative, the preservation officer shall immediately cause the matter to be scheduled for the earliest possible consideration by the city council. If, after giving notice and hearing to the owner, the city council determines that the exempted structure has been totally or partially destroyed or altered by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his representative, the owner shall immediately repay to the city all of the tax revenues that were not paid because of the exemption plus interest calculated at an annual rate of seven (7) percent. 
(b)  Where an exempted structure is totally or partially destroyed or altered by other than the willful act or negligence of the owner or his representative, the owner shall, whenever feasible, request a building permit to reconstruct the historically significant site in accordance with plans and specifications (plans) that comply with the property appearance guidelines and building and development codes of the city. The cost of renovation is hereby deemed feasible when destruction or alteration is fifty (50) percent or less of the assessed ad valorem tax value of the building without deduction for the abatement hereunder. The plans for the structure must be approved by the preservation officer or designee. If there is any question that the plans do not comply with the property appearance guidelines the historic landmark commission shall determine if such plans are in compliance with such guidelines, A decision by the commission, denying the issuance of the building permit for failure of the plans to comply with the property appearance guidelines, may be appealed by the owner to the city council. If rebuilding activities are not completed within one (1) year of the damage to the structure, the repayment of the tax revenues not paid because of the exemption shall be required as set forth in subsection (a) above, unless city council grants an extension for such permits. 
(c)  If the owner of a damaged historic structure exempted under this article applies for a demolition permit, the building official shall follow the regulations contained in section 35-220 (Demolition or removal of historic landmarks) of the zoning chapter, as amended, in processing such permit. In cases where a demolition permit is issued by the city because renovation is not feasible, repayment of tax revenue is not required. 
(d)  If the owner of a historic structure which is damaged by a willful or negligent act of the owner or his representative has such structure demolished or such structure is not repaired within one (1) year of the damage, such owner will not be eligible for future abatement unless a revised application for such structure is approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-138. - Transferability to future owner(s). 
If the tax exemption certificate executed by the city manager per section 10-135 is timely recorded by the owner of the structure in the deed records of Denton County with the approved application, the tax exemption authorized above shall constitute a covenant running with the land for the ten-year period provided in this article. Should the owner of the structure ever cease to comply with the terms of the application and of this article during such ten-year period, this abatement may be revoked for the years remaining within such ten-year period, upon the finding of such incompliance by the city council, after giving notice and hearing to the owner. The city manager or his designee shall advise the chief appraiser of the Denton County Appraisal District of the revocation of the abatement and shall file an appropriate document in the deed records of Denton County revoking the tax exemption. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-139. - Authority of chief appraiser. 
The chief appraiser for the county appraisal district shall determine that portion of land which is reasonably necessary for access to and use of historic structures for which applications for exemptions are granted and shall assess for taxation all such excess land in the same equal and uniform manner as all other taxable properties in the city. It shall be in the discretion of the chief appraiser as to whether or not owners of historically significant structures under this article must file an application with such appraiser's office annually to obtain the exemption granted above or if one (1) application can be executed by the owner of the historically significant structure to obtain the ten-year historic exemption. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-140. - Use in conjunction with other tax incentives. 
At the discretion of city council, the tax abatement provided in this article may be used in conjunction with tax abatements for historic landmark zoning as provided in article VI chapter 10 of the Denton City Code. The applicant must meet all requirements for each tax abatement separately in order to be considered for both abatements. 
This tax abatement may be used in conjunction with other types of abatements that may be developed in the future, unless otherwise prohibited by statute or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 10-141. - Definitions. 
Should the exact meaning of terms contained in this article be in dispute, the meaning of such terms as utilized in the interpretation or definition of such terms in article V "Historic Landmark Preservation and Historic Districts" of chapter 35 (zoning) of the City Code, as amended, or in this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 98-116, § I, 4-28-98)  
Chapter 11 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Airports generally, Ch. 3; fire regulations at municipal airports, § 3-10; alarm systems generally, Ch. 4; emergency management generally, Ch. 9; smoking in public places, § 14-86 et seq.; housing generally, Ch. 15; drainage of flammable liquids from junked, wrecked or abandoned vehicles, § 16-129; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28; fire prevention code, Ch. 29; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicles, Ch. 32; fire safety standards in mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, § 32-93. 
State Law reference— Health and safety, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.012; fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Arson reward. 
The city will pay a reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) cash to any person furnishing and providing the city with information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for the offense of arson within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-3)  
Sec. 11-2. - Reimbursement for cleanup of hazardous materials spills. 
(a)  Any person who accidently, negligently or intentionally causes or is responsible for a spill of hazardous material affecting property within the city shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the fire department and the other departments and agencies which assist it to abate such an event. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "hazardous materials" means any substances or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief, pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment and shall include but not be limited to such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, costs incurred by the fire department or other departments of the city shall include but shall not be limited to all actual out-of-pocket expenses attributable to the abatement or cleanup of any hazardous materials incident, including costs of equipment operations; costs of materials utilized; costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the full-time employment of the city; overtime costs; and any other incidental costs incurred by the city as a result of the incident. 
(d)  The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression, rescue, medical and similar services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department and other city departments and are unrelated to a particular hazardous material incident. 
(Ord. No. 89-169, § I(10-5), 11-21-89)  
Sec. 11-3. - Recovering cost for fire protection and emergency services. 
(a)  Collection of fees: 
(1)  The chief of the city fire department, or his designee, shall collect all fees and costs for fire prevention services and for other public safety and emergency services rendered by the department when providing these services for motor vehicle accidents. Such fees include but are not limited to the use of equipment, materials, maintenance and overhead expenses and costs of whatever nature which constitute full reimbursement to the Denton Fire Department for services actually rendered and as hereinafter authorized. 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days of the date of providing fire prevention and protection services or other public safety and emergency services for motor vehicle accidents, the chief of the city fire department, or his designee, shall submit an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to providing such services, to include but not limited to all actual expenses including costs of equipment operations; cost of materials utilized; costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the full time employment of the city; overtime costs; and other incidental costs incurred by the city as a result of the incident, to the customer, client, owner, designated agent, representative and/or insurance company who received, covered and/or otherwise benefitted from these services. The provisions of this section shall apply only to those persons who were not residing within the city at the time of the incident which led to the benefits of services. 
(3)  Any bills, fines or penalties, including but not limited to clean up costs, fees or expenses that are imposed upon the City of Denton or the Denton Fire Department by any local, state or federal agency, related to the rendering of fire protection or prevention services or of other public safety and emergency services involving motor vehicle accidents, may be included in the billing or billed separately within thirty (30) days of receipt. 
(4)  Any fees or expenses billed by the chief, or his designee, shall be payable in full within sixty (60) days of the date of the invoice. Failure to timely make payment may result in the accumulation of interest on any unpaid balances at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum for any unpaid balances. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
The city may enforce the provisions of this section by any action allowed by law for the collection of any amounts due hereunder, including reasonable and necessary attorneys fees, costs, and expenses, in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-278, § 2, 9-5-00)  
Secs. 11-4—11-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative departments, § 2-27; authority of fire department officers to direct traffic, § 18-5; emergency ambulance service provided by fire department, § 27-102. 
 
Sec. 11-26. - Organized and conducted in accordance with state law. 
The fire department shall be organized and conducted in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of the Firefighter's and Police Officer's Civil Service Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq. 
(Code 1966, § 10-20)  
Sec. 11-27. - Office of chief—Created; appointment. 
The office of chief of the fire department is hereby created and established. The chief shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 10-18)  
Sec. 11-28. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The chief of the fire department shall be responsible for the general conduct of the fire department and shall have the authority and duty to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 10-19)  
Secs. 11-29—11-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 11-46. - Office created. 
The office of city fire marshal is hereby created. 
(Code 1966, § 10-31)  
Sec. 11-47. - Appointment and qualifications. 
The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office. 
(Code 1966, § 10-32)  
Sec. 11-48. - Duties. 
The fire marshal shall have the primary duty of administering and enforcing the fire code adopted in chapter 29 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 10-33)  
Secs. 11-49—11-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE DETECTORS AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Smoke detection and alarm devices, V.A.T.S., Insurance Code art. 5.43-2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 11-66—11-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SMOKE DETECTORS IN DWELLING UNITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Housing generally, Ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 11-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bedroom means any room which is designed with the intent that it be used for sleeping purposes. 
Corridor means a passage which connects parts of the dwelling unit. 
Dwelling unit means a home, mobile home, duplex unit, apartment unit, condominium unit or any dwelling unit in a multiunit residential structure. It also means one (1) or more rooms which are subject to a single rental agreement and which are rented to a tenant for use by persons as a permanent residence. 
Landlord means the owner, lessor or sublessor of a dwelling unit. A managing agent or leasing agent, whether residing or officing on-site or off-site, shall be considered the agent of the landlord for purposes of notice and other communications required or allowed under this division. Otherwise, a manager or agent of the landlord shall be considered a landlord under this division only if the manager or agent purports to be the owner, lessor or sublessor in the rental agreement. 
Smoke detector means a device which is: 
(1)  Designed to detect visible or invisible products of combustion; 
(2)  Designed with an alarm audible to the bedrooms it services; 
(3)  Powered by either battery, alternating current or other power source; 
(4)  Tested and listed for use as a smoke detector by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., Factory Mutual Research Corporation or United States Testing Company, Inc.; and 
(5)  In good working order. 
Tenant means any person who is entitled to occupy a dwelling unit to the exclusion of others and who is obligated to pay rent for the dwelling unit under a written or oral rental agreement. 
Test of smoke detector means the performance of the act or acts which the manufacturer of a smoke detector recommends for that particular model of smoke detector as a simple test of whether or not the smoke detector is in good working order. 
Units constructed after September 1, 1981, means any unit for which a building permit was issued after September 1, 1981 or, if no building permit is issued, any unit which is occupied as a residence for the first time after September 1, 1981. 
Units constructed on or before September 1, 1981, means any unit for which a building permit was issued on or before September 1, 1981, or which was occupied as a residence for the first time on or before that date. 
(Code 1966, § 10-54) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 11-82. - Installation in certain dwelling units. 
(a)  New units. In units constructed after September 1, 1981, at least one (1) smoke detector shall be installed by the landlord outside of each separate bedroom in the immediate vicinity of the bedroom, except that: 
(1)  Where the dwelling unit is designed with the intent that a single multipurpose room be used for dining, living and sleeping purposes, the smoke detector shall be located inside the room rather than outside; 
(2)  Where the bedrooms are served by the same corridor, at least one (1) smoke detector shall be installed in the corridor in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms; and 
(3)  Where one (1) or more bedrooms are located on a level above the cooking and living area, the smoke detector for the bedrooms shall be placed at the center of the ceiling directly above the top of the stairway. 
(b)  General installation regulations. A smoke detector required by this section shall be installed prior to commencement of possession of the dwelling unit by the tenant in accordance with manufacturer's recommended procedures, subject to the following: 
(1)  A smoke detector shall be installed on a ceiling or wall; 
(2)  If installed on a ceiling, the smoke alarm shall be installed no closer than six (6) inches to a wall; 
(3)  If installed on a wall, the smoke detector shall be installed no closer than six (6) inches to the ceiling and no farther than twelve (12) inches from the ceiling; 
(4)  A smoke detector may be located elsewhere if permitted by the building code; and 
(5)  If a smoke detector is electrically operated rather than battery operated, the power system and installation procedures for the smoke detector shall comply with the building code. 
(c)  Existing units. For all dwelling units constructed on or before September 1, 1981, at least one (1) smoke detector shall be installed by the landlord in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. A smoke detector required by this subsection shall be installed in accordance with the location and installation procedure requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 10-55)  
Sec. 11-83. - Inspection and repair. 
(a)  Upon commencement of a tenant's possession of a dwelling unit containing a smoke detector, the landlord shall have a duty to test the smoke detector to verify that it is in good working order. Upon installation of a smoke detector by a landlord after commencement of the tenant's possession of a dwelling unit, the landlord shall have a duty to test the smoke detector at that time to verify that it is in good working order. 
(b)  During the term of the rental agreement or any renewal or extension thereof, the landlord shall have a duty to inspect and repair a smoke detector only if the tenant has given notice to the landlord of a malfunction or made a request to the landlord for inspection or repair. The notice to the landlord need not be in writing unless written notice is required in the written rental agreement. The landlord shall comply with the tenant's request for inspection and repair within a reasonable time, considering the availability of material, labor and utilities. 
(c)  A landlord shall not have a duty to inspect or repair a smoke detector if the damage or malfunction is caused by the tenant or the tenant's family, guests or invitees during the term of the rental agreement or any renewal or extension period of the rental agreement. However, a landlord shall have a duty to repair or replace a smoke detector covered by this section if the tenant pays in advance for the reasonable cost of the repair or replacement, including labor, materials, taxes and overhead. 
(d)  A landlord shall have satisfied his duty to inspect or repair a damaged or malfunctioning smoke detector if, after a test of the smoke detector, a test indicates that the smoke detector is in good working order. 
(Code 1966, § 10-56)  
Sec. 11-84. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful if, as landlord of a dwelling unit, a person: 
(1)  Fails to install a smoke detector in compliance with section 11-82; or 
(2)  Fails to test or repair a smoke detector in compliance with section 11-83. 
(Code 1966, § 10-57)  
Secs. 11-85—11-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE LANES; FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-057, § 3, adopted February 19, 2002, repealed Ord. No. 87-168 (Fire Lane Ordinance). This ordinance was set out as ch. 11, art. V, §§ 11-100—11-113. Certain information pertained in §§ 11-101, 11-106 and 11-107 have been preserved as these sections were amended by ordinances passed and adopted after Ord. No. 87-168. Please refer to Code Comparative Table for further explanation. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic generally, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and public places generally, Ch. 25. 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Maximum hose distance means the distance measurable with a tape or other flexible measurement device from the nearest point of a fire access roadway to any given point on the first story of an exterior wall of a building, structure, or facility. This measurement is to be taken around the external perimeters of buildings and other obstacles as necessary, rather than in a straight line. This measurement is intended to simulate the minimum length of fire hose necessary to reach all points on the exterior walls of the first story of a building, structure, or facility from a fire apparatus parked in a fire apparatus access roadway. All determinations of maximum hose distance are subject to the approval of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 95-260, § I, 12-19-95)  
Secs. 11-102—11-105. - Reserved. 
Note— Please see editor's note following article V.  
Sec. 11-106. - Specifications. 
(a)  Each fire apparatus access roadway shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The roadway shall have not less than twenty (20) feet of unobstructed width, unless otherwise approved by the fire marshal. 
(2)  Except for one and two family dwellings, the roadway shall be constructed within one hundred (100) feet of maximum hose distance from the nearest point of the fire apparatus access roadway to any given point on the exterior wall of the first story of the building, structure or facility. 
(3)  The roadway shall provide adequate turning radius and turnarounds. 
(4)  The roadway shall be capable of supporting the imposed load of a forty-thousand-pound fire apparatus with two-thirds of the weight on the rear axle. 
(5)  The roadway shall have a minimum of thirteen (13) feet, six (6) inches of vertical clearance. 
(6)  The roadway shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or other hard surface material approved by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Clearances or widths required by this section may be increased when, in the opinion of the fire marshal, minimum clearances or widths are not adequate to provide fire apparatus access. For high-piled combustible storage, see section 81.109, of the Uniform Fire Code adopted in chapter 29 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-260, § II, 12-19-95)  
Sec. 11-107. - Distance from buildings. 
(a)  The fire lane shall be extended to within one hundred (100) feet of maximum hose distance from all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of all buildings, except one and two family dwellings. For buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system throughout, the fire lane shall extend to within fifty (50) feet of the fire department hose connection. 
(b)  Where the fire lane cannot be provided to within one hundred (100) feet of maximum hose distance from all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of a building, or where the building height is thirty (30) feet or more, an approved fire protection system shall be provided as required and approved by the fire marshal, and adequate access roadways extending to within fifty (50) feet of the entire front of the building shall be provided for fire equipment access to the building as required and approved by the fire marshal. 
(c)  If a building is equipped with an automatic sprinkler, the fire lane may be extended to be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all exterior walls of the first story of a building. 
(Ord. No. 91-065, § V, 4-30-91; Ord. No. 95-260, § III, 12-19-95)  
Secs. 11-108—11-113. - Reserved. 
Note— Please see editor's note following article V.  
Chapter 13 - FOOD AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-305, § 1, adopted November 6, 2012, repealed the former Ch. 13, §§ 13-1—13-6, 13-20—13-48, 13-51—13-55, 13-61—13-63, and enacted a new Ch. 13 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 93-058, § I, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 95-182, § I, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 97-114, §§ I—IX, 4-1-97; Ord. No. 97-241, § I, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 98-267, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 2004-080, § 1, 3-23-04. 
Cross reference— Health and human services generally, Ch. 14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 13-1—13-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS RULES 
 
Sec. 13-10. - Rules on food service—Adopted; compliance procedures. 
The city adopts the amendments to Texas Board of Health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161—171 and 173—175 as amended, which establishes regulations regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction is hereby adopted as the minimum standards for food service operations within the corporate limits of the City of Denton, Texas. Wherever in these rules the words "municipality of Denton" appear, they shall be understood to refer to the City of Denton and the words "regulatory authority" shall refer to the City of Denton. The Texas Food Establishments Rules, save and except the amendments set forth below are made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. A copy of the Texas Food Establishment Rules, along with city amendments, shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary of the city being marked and designated as the Texas Food Establishment Rules, published by the Texas Board of Health Bureau of Food and Drug Safety (Retail foods division). 
Any revision, addition, or deletion to the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) by the Department of State Health Services or the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) shall be deemed to be an amendment to this article and adopted as of the time it goes into effect or is published. 
(Ord. No. 2012-305, § 1, 11-6-12; Ord. No. 2014-082, § 1, 3-18-14)  
Secs. 13-11—13-19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 13-20. - Deletions and amendments. 
Amendments to the Texas Food Establishment Rules 
Section 229.162 is amended by adding the following: 
162.1 Administrator: the Building Official, or their designated employee, of the City of Denton. 
162.2 Agricultural product: an agricultural, apicultural, horticultural, silvicultural, or viticultural, or fish or other aquatic species product, either in its natural or processed state, that has been produced, processed, or otherwise had value added for use as human food. 
162.3 Catering Establishment: shall mean a food establishment where food is completely or partially prepared for delivery at a separate location where it is meant to be served and consumed. For purposes of this definition of mobile food establishments, a food service establishment is considered to be operating mobile food units, rather than to be operating as a catering establishment; unless at each premises or property to which food is delivered, the food is provided to one person for consumption by that person or that person's guests or invitees. 
162.4 Catering operation: a food service establishment which prepares or serves food on premises in control of another. 
162.5 Certificate of Occupancy: a Certificate of occupancy is a document issued by a local government agency indicating that a building or mobile food vehicle complies with zoning and building laws. Top of Form 
162.6 Change of Ownership: a change of owner or operator of a food establishment business, and does not refer to a change of owner of the property or building in which the business is located. 
162.7 Change of Use: that which requires the owner of an establishment to submit plans before any construction is begun on a project that changes the use of the current establishment. 
162.8 Commercially Manufactured: produced or built, for commercial gain, by a person showing a high degree of skill or competence. 
162.9 Commissary: also known as a central preparation facility; base of operations; or premises from which a mobile unit operates. A commissary shall be used as a base of operations for all classes of mobile food vendors. A commissary is a site approved by the City Health Officer at which food preparation, storage and cleaning or servicing of the vehicle occurs. State law prohibits the use of a private residence as a central preparation facility or warehouse. 
1162.10 Community Market: a designated location used primarily for the distribution and sale directly to consumers of raw agricultural products grown by farmers or home-grown fruits, vegetables, produce or food products; meat and fish items, plants and flowers; arts and crafts items; and bakery goods, beverages, dairy products, delicatessen, and grocery items. 
162.11 Cooking demonstration: food that is not to be offered, sold, or otherwise distributed to the public 
162.12 Farmers Market: a designated location used primarily for the distribution and sale directly to consumers of food products by farmers or other producers of agricultural products 
162.13 Farmer's Market Food Vendor: any person(s) who operate(s), offers, or sells food typically known as "farm grown", "farm originating" or "farm obtained" from a location approved on private or public property. Foods included in "farm grown" are whole produce, plants, nuts, certain meats, honey, eggs and pasteurized dairy products. These vendors and any foodservice operations shall comply with the Texas Food Establishment Rules as set forth by the Dept. of State Health Services. 
162.14 Fixed Commercial Location: a building that can obtain a certificate of occupancy; not mobile in nature. 
162.15 Food handler card: a card issued by the City of Denton to all food establishment employees whose work brings them into contact with the handling of food, utensils, or food service equipment. These employees shall fulfill all city requirements before receiving a card. 
162.16 Grease Interceptor: a plumbing appurtenance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept oily and greasy wastes from a wastewater discharge. Such device has the ability to intercept free-floating fats and oils. 
162.17 Health Officer: the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative. 
162.18 Health or regulatory authority: the City of Denton. 
162.19 Heavy Food Preparation: shall mean any area in which foods are prepared utilizing a grill, griddle, deep-fat fryer, commercial type ovens, and/or any similar food preparation equipment; or any area subject to flooding type of wet cleaning procedures due to the cutting or processing of meat, poultry, fish or pork. Heavy food preparation includes but is not limited to: cafeterias, fast food restaurants, full service restaurants, pizza preparation, donut preparation, and meat and fish markets, etc. and may include day care centers. 
For information regarding grease interceptor sizes, refer to the International Plumbing Code as amended by the City Building Inspection Department. 
162.20 Light Food Preparation: shall mean any area in which foods are prepared exclusive of the use of fryers, grills or similar equipment. Light food preparation is usually limited to the preparation of hot dogs, sandwiches, salads or other similar foods and fountain-type cold drinks. Light food preparation includes, but is not limited to, sandwich shops, limited menu concession stands, etc. and may include day care centers. For information regarding grease interceptor sizes, refer to the International Plumbing Code as amended by the City Building Inspection Department. 
162.21 Minor: shall mean an individual under the age of 18. 
162.22 Mobile Food Establishment: a food establishment that serves, sells, or distributes any food or beverage from a mobile food preparation vehicle that is not operating at a permanent fixed location. A mobile foodservice establishment is vehicle-mounted or wheeled and capable of being readily moveable. A mobile food unit is fully self-contained. A mobile food establishment is a commercially manufactured vehicle from which food is prepared, served or provided for the public with or without charge. 
Types of mobile food establishments: The mobile food unit classifications are based upon the type of menu served. 
Class I - Limited Mobile Food Establishment: these mobile food units may provide hot and cold holding display areas from which packaged foods are displayed. Self-service by customers of unpackaged foods is not allowed. Preparation, assembly or cooking of foods is not allowed on the unit. Non-potentially hazardous beverages must be provided from covered urns or dispenser heads only. No dispensed ice is allowed. 
Class II - General Mobile Food Establishment: these mobile food units may serve a full menu as approved by the Consumer Health Division. 
Class III - General Service Pushcarts: these mobile food units shall serve only a limited menu as approved by the Consumer Health Division. 
Class IV - Limited Service Pushcarts: these mobile food units may be pushed by human power to various locations and shall serve only a limited menu of non-potentially hazardous, prepackaged food items as approved by the Consumer Health Division. 
162.23 No food preparation: any area in which foods are provided pre-wrapped, from a source approved by the Department of State Health Services with microwave oven type heating being the maximum handling involved. No food preparation is limited to prepackaged sandwiches or similar foods, candies and containerized beverages. 
162.24 Non-potentially hazardous beverage: shall mean a non-alcoholic liquid intended for consumption, whether natural or synthetic, that does not require temperature control because it is not capable of supporting the rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms or the growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulinum. The term includes: 
1)  Tea and coffee, excluding espresso, with powdered creamer or ultra-high, pasteurized half and half in individual servings; 
2)  Commercially made, high acid beverages with a pH level of 4.6 or below, such as apple juice, lemonade, limeade, and orange juice; 
3)  Fresh squeezed, high acid beverages; 
4)  Commercially filled carbonated beverages; 
5)  High acid beverages made from a commercial mix; and 
6)  Mineral water sold in open, single-service cups with ice from an approved source. 
162.25 Non-profit organization: all government entities and political subdivision and public school districts; Organizations chartered under the Texas non-profit corporation act; or Operations recognized by the IRS as a 501(c) organization or corporation. 
162.26 Perishable food: shall mean any food of a type or in a condition that may spoil. 
162.27 Remodeling, extensive: any change in the structure of a food preparation area or any change in the establishment which would increase or decrease size requirements for the food preparation or food storage areas as specified in sections 13-27(b) and (c). The term may also include any construction which requires a building permit from the Building Inspection Division of the City of Denton. 
It does not include: Expenditures for the replacement of moveable equipment; or remodeling which does not affect the construction or operation of food storage or food preparation areas or areas used to store or clean utensils and equipment used in food storage or food preparation. 
162.28 Seasonal food service establishment: any food service establishment which operates from a fixed location for a period not to exceed six (6) consecutive months provided that such operation shall occur only once during any twelve (12) consecutive month period. 
162.29 Smoker: any unit, whether mobile or fixed in nature, which uses wood or wood products to provide smoke for the purpose of slow cooking meats intended for human consumption, whether such unit is inside an enclosed building or in an outdoor area. 
162.30 Temporary Event/Community Based Event: transitory gatherings such as traveling fairs, carnivals, multicultural celebrations, special interest fundraisers, restaurant food shows, grand openings, customer appreciation days, etc. also called special events. These are single events or celebrations. 
162.31 Temporary food permit: a permit issued after fulfilling all City requirements to a food establishment selling or serving food at a temporary event. The temporary food permit is valid until the temporary event concludes or for 14 consecutive days, whichever is less. A temporary food permit is valid for only one event location at a time. 
162.32 Toilet facilities: flush toilets and sinks with hot and cold running water connected to an approved system 
162.33 Vendor/Supplier: a business establishment approved by the City Health Officer that sells or supplies food and food related products to Mobile Food Establishments. 
162.34 Warehouse: shall mean any enclosed structure, room, or building where packaged food or food products intended for off-premise consumption are stored for, sold to, or offered for sale or distribution to persons other than the ultimate consumer. 
162.35 Wholesome: in sound condition, clean, free from adulteration, and otherwise suitable for use as human food. Food which is packaged shall be deemed wholesome if it meets the foregoing requirements and it is used or sold prior to the expiration date marked on the package. 
Section 229.163(a) is amended by adding the following: 
163.1 This person (i.e., the person in charge as defined in T.F.E.R. §229.163(c)) shall have a valid Food Protection Management training certificate. Certification must be obtained by passing an examination approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services and approved by the regulatory authority. 
The following food service establishments are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
1)  Establishments selling only uncut produce or commercially packaged; hermetically sealed foods; 
2)  A food enterprise that provides only beverages or prepackaged food that is not a potentially hazardous food; 
3)  Bars and lounges that do not serve potentially hazardous foods; 
4)  A food processing plant that is inspected at least once each week by a state or federal food sanitation inspector or that only stores prepackaged food that is not potentially hazardous; 
5)  Concession stands that are run by volunteers; 
6)  A nonprofit organization that serves food only to members of the organization; 
7)  A vending machine or a mobile food establishment that offers only prepackaged food, if a certified food manager is in charge at the central preparation facility that supplies the products for the vending machine or mobile food establishment; or 
8)  A temporary event food vendor. 
Compliance may be required of establishments having one of the above exemptions if they have repeated or critical food code violations, or if determined by the health officer to be capable of causing food borne illness. 
163.2 The owner or operator of a new foodservice establishment shall provide verification to the Consumer Health Division, prior to the opening of the establishment, that the establishment meets the Certified Food Protection Manager requirement of this article. 
163.3 If a foodservice establishment cannot meet the requirements of this section because of the termination or permanent transfer of a registered food protection manager, the food establishment shall: Employ another registered food manager within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the termination or transfer of the previous manager. When an existing food service establishment has a change of ownership, the new owner or operator of the establishment shall provide verification to the Consumer Health Division within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the change of ownership that it is in compliance with the certified food protection manager requirements of this article. 
163.4 A person commits an offense if the person is the owner or operator of a food establishment and violates a provision of this section. 
163.5 A person commits an offense if the person is the food manager of a food establishment and fails to obtain a food protection manager's certificate from an accredited program accepted by the Texas Department of State Health Services within the time limits allowed in this article. 
163.6 A person holding a food protection manager's certificate shall register a copy of that certificate with the City of Denton Consumer Health Division. 
Section 229.163(c)(12) is amended by adding the following: 
163.7 Every person whose work brings them into contact with the handling of food, utensils, or food service equipment must possess a valid City of Denton food handler card. 
Every person who owns, manages, or otherwise controls any food service establishment shall not permit any person to be employed therein who does not possess a valid City of Denton food handler card within ten (10) days from the date of their employment. 
163.8 Food handler test. 
In order to receive a food handler's card, every person must achieve a score of seventy (70) or more on a the test offered by the City of Denton or pass an approved on-line course offered on the City of Denton Consumer Health webpage. After an applicant passes an online food handler course, the applicant shall bring verification to the City in order to receive a City of Denton issued Food Handler card. This requirement must be met upon expiration of a food handler's card and upon application for a new food handler's card. At the discretion of the health officer, if he or she deems it necessary, employees may be required to attend one of the classes offered by the City of Denton Consumer Health Division. 
163.9 Certificates available. 
The permit holder of the food service establishment shall make food handler cards and food manager certificates displayed where they can be easily seen by the regulatory authority. 
163.10 Duration of food handler card. 
Any food handler's card issued under the provisions of this article shall remain in full force and effect two years from the date of issuance. 
163.11 Same—Nontransferable. 
Every food handler card issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be nontransferable. 
163.12 Same—Confiscation. 
The health officer shall have the authority to confiscate a food handler's permit that has expired or is otherwise invalid. 
163.13 Personnel. 
a)  A food employee may drink from a beverage container that has a tight-fitting lid with a straw. 
b)  Employees shall wear disposable gloves when handling ready-to-eat foods, or provide documentation of training regarding correct handling of ready-to-eat foods as found in section 229.164(e)(1)(D)(i)—(iii). 
Section 229.164(a) is amended by adding the following: 
164.1 Destruction of unwholesome food authorized. 
Whenever the city health officer discovers any food or drink displayed for sale or kept for sale, which is unwholesome or unsafe for human consumption, the officer shall order the food or drink to be destroyed or removed, and the owner or the responsible person in charge shall immediately destroy or remove such unwholesome or unsafe food at his or her own expense. 
164.2 Sale or other disposition of unwholesome food prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association of persons, firm, food service establishment, temporary food service establishment or corporation to offer for sale or give away any food or drink for human consumption which has been pronounced by the city health officer to be unfit for such use. No person shall prepare potentially hazardous or TCS food for sale to the public from their own private residence. 
Section 229.164(v)(2)(C) is amended by adding the following: 
164.3 Written documentation of cool-down procedures of the food that is being donated is required. 
Section 229.165(k)(1)(C) is amended by adding the following: 
165.1 Existing equipment which was installed in a food service establishment prior to the effective date of this chapter, and which does not meet fully all of the design and fabrication requirements of this rule shall be deemed acceptable in that establishment as long as there is no change of ownership, equipment is in good repair and capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition, and the food-contact surfaces are nontoxic. Replacement equipment and new equipment acquired after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 229.166(j)(3) is amended by adding the following: 
166.1 Grease Interceptors shall be located outside the food preparation area unless otherwise approved by the regulatory authority. 
Section 229.166(l)(14)(B) is amended by adding the following: 
166.2 Garbage Containers. 
Garbage and refuse shall be kept in durable, easily cleanable, insect-proof, and rodent-proof containers that do not leak and do not absorb liquids. Containers used in food preparation and utensil-washing areas shall be kept covered except when actually in use. 
There shall be sufficient number of containers to hold all the garbage and refuse that accumulates during operation of the food establishment. The regulatory authority may require additional service, dumpsters or larger dumpsters to accommodate the garbage and refuse that accumulates. 
Suitable facilities, including hot water and detergent or steam shall be provided and used for washing garbage containers. Liquid waste from compacting or cleaning operations shall be disposed of as sewage. Power washing and contracted cleaning services shall be performed according to applicable law. 
Cardboard or other packaging materials that do not contain food residues or that are waiting regularly scheduled delivery to a recycling or disposal site may be stored outside in a covered receptacle if it is stored so that it does not create a rodent harborage problem. 
Section 229.167(b)(3) is amended by adding the following: 
167.1 Premises. 
Food Service establishments and all parts of the property used in connection with operations of the establishment shall be kept free of litter. 
Only articles necessary for the operation and maintenance of the food service establishment shall be stored on the premises. 
Section 229.167(p)(15)(B)(iii) is amended by adding the following: 
167.2 A food service establishment may permit a customer to be accompanied by a dog in an outdoor dining area if: 
a)  The food service establishment posts a sign in a conspicuous location stating that dogs are allowed in the outdoor dining area; 
b)  The customer and the dog access the outdoor dining area directly from the exterior of the food service establishment; 
c)  The dog does not enter the interior of the food service establishment; 
d)  The customer retains the dog on a leash at all times and controls the dog; 
e)  The customer does not allow the dog to be on a seat, a table, a countertop, or a similar surface; 
f)  In the outdoor dining area, the food service establishment does not 
1)  prepare food; or 
2)  permit open food, except for food that is being served to a customer; and, 
g)  Only cleaners and sanitizers that are not harmful to animals may be used on outdoor surfaces. 
Section 229.169 is amended by adding the following: 
169.1 Requirements for mobile units. 
a)  Application Process. 
1)  In order to obtain a health permit to operate a mobile food establishment within the city limits of Denton, an applicant shall submit all required applications and applicable documents with the City of Denton and pay all required fees. 
2)  The application shall include a completed itinerary. An itinerary shall be required for all mobile units that will stop and sell food in any one parcel of land for more than one hour. The itinerary of listed locations shall be approved and signed by a City Planner. The approved itinerary verifies that all sales locations stated in the submitted location itinerary are zoned for food establishments. Other documentation may be required by the health officer. 
3)  It shall be unlawful for a Mobile Food Establishment to operate unless the Consumer Health Division has been notified of the location. Notification may be done in writing or electronically according to procedures established by the Division as long as the location is part of the preapproved itinerary. The Consumer Health Division shall be given written notice at least two (2) business days before implementation of any changes to the approved, filed itinerary. 
b)  Permit Issuance. 
1)  Upon receiving a proper application for a permit, the Consumer Health Division shall make appropriate inspections of the vehicle; equipment and other reasonable inspections concerned with the mobile food establishment and shall issue a permit and sticker only if: 
a)  The inspection reveals compliance with the applicable requirements of all federal and state statutes and regulations and city ordinances governing the proposed mobile food establishment operation. 
b)  The valid sticker shall be displayed by a mobile food establishment: 
1.  The hard copy of the permit shall be posted in public view inside the vehicle; and 
2.  The sticker permit shall be posted on the back right corner on the outside of the vehicle - it will display the date of expiration of the permit and the unit ID number. 
2)  The health permit shall be valid for 12 months. Mobile food establishment permits shall not be transferable and shall be considered revoked should the food vending operation be changed from that specified in the permit. 
c)  Location of Operation. 
1)  Any location where mobile units stop and sell food in any one location for more than one hour, shall be zoned (according to the Denton Development Code) to allow food establishments. 
2)  Mobile units shall not stop and sell food in a residential District (as defined in the Denton Development Code) without written permission from the Homeowner's Association or a Neighborhood Association. Mobile units shall not stop and sell food in any residential zone that does not have an active Homeowner's or Neighborhood Association, except for those mobile food units that regularly sell food to construction workers in residential zones with active construction activity. 
d)  Operations on Public Property. 
No mobile food vehicle shall operate a business from a public park or publicly owned property or site without written permission from the City. 
e)  Signage. 
1)  Each mobile establishment must be readily identifiable by business name, printed, permanently affixed, and prominently displayed upon at least two sides of the units, in letters and numbers not less than three (3) inches in height 
2)  Each mobile food establishment shall be clearly marked with the food establishment's name or a distinctive identifying symbol. The lettering shall be at least three (3) inches in height and of a color contrasting with the background color. If a symbol is used, it shall be at least twelve (12) inches in diameter or of an equivalent size. 
3)  Each mobile food establishment shall be clearly marked with the permit number for purposes of identifying each unit on inspection reports and other communications. 
Section 229.169(a)(1) is amended by adding the following: 
169.2 Mobile Food Vehicle Types. 
Class I - Limited Mobile Food Establishment: these mobile food establishments may provide hot and cold holding display areas from which packaged foods are displayed. Self-service by customers of unpackaged foods is not allowed. Preparation, assembly or cooking of foods is not allowed on the unit. Non-potentially hazardous beverages must be provided from covered urns or dispenser heads only. No dispensed ice is allowed. 
Examples of foods that are allowed: 
1)  Food that was prepared and packaged in individual servings at an approved commissary and transported and stored under conditions meeting the requirements of this article. 
2)  Potentially hazardous beverages such as individual servings of milk, milk products and coffee creams that have been packaged at a pasteurizing plant. All foods sold will need to meet proper labeling requirements. 
Note: If the vendor is selling prepackaged food, the vendor shall provide a copy of the commercial food establishment's Texas Food Manufacturing permit (or Meat Safety Assurance Permit - if applicable) from the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
Class II - General Mobile Food Establishment: these mobile food establishments may serve a full menu as approved by the Consumer Health Division. 
Class III - General Service Pushcarts: these mobile food units shall serve only a limited menu as approved by the Consumer Health Division. 
Menu items shall be limited to, unless authorized by the Health Inspector: those menu items listed under Class IV - Limited Service Pushcart category, hot dogs, nachos with artificial cheese base, corn on the cob, snow cones, popcorn, pretzels, sausage on a stick, tea, lemonade, fruit drinks (from dry mix only), tamales, and roasted peanuts. 
Class IV - Limited Service Pushcarts: these mobile food units may be pushed by human power to various locations and shall serve only a limited menu of non-potentially hazardous, prepackaged food items as approved by the Consumer Health Division. 
Menu items shall be limited to, unless authorized by the Health Inspector: prepackaged chips, candy, ice cream, prepackaged sodas, and bottled water. 
169.3 Class III and Class IV Mobile Food Vendors shall not: 
1)  use a vehicle that exceeds 6 ft. × 4 ft. × 3 ft.; 
2)  enter or occupy a public roadway to solicit or conduct a sale; 
3)  place any signs or other advertising devices on public property other than those signs affixed to the vehicle; 
4)  physically or visibly obstruction pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
5)  sell, distribute, or offer for sale, goods or services that have not been approved by the Health Inspector; 
6)  be located within a construction area; or 
7)  conduct business with vehicular traffic located in the street right-of-way. 
169.4 Servicing at commissaries. 
Mobile food establishments shall report to an approved commissary location for supplies, cleaning, and servicing operations as follows: 
1)  The interior of the mobile food establishment shall be cleaned at least daily, and shall be stored at a location not used as a residence when not in operation. 
2)  The mobile food establishment shall acquire needed supplies from an approved commissary or other approved vendor/supplier. 
3)  An existing food establishment may serve as a commissary for a mobile food establishment only if approved by the health officer. The existing food establishment would be required to have an approved vehicle storage facility, approved potable water hookups, approved wastewater drainage facilities, approved grease interceptor hookups and size, and any other accommodations as determined necessary by the health officer to ensure compliance with all regulatory codes. 
4)  The mobile food establishment shall provide documentation of each visit to a commissary and shall have that documentation available for inspection. This documentation shall be provided by the commissary providing service, and shall specify when and which service was provided. 
169.5 Servicing Records. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a mobile food establishment to be in operation without a valid servicing record in his possession. The operator of a mobile food establishment shall keep and maintain servicing records on the mobile food establishment for a period of one year from the date of servicing. The servicing records must be immediately available to any peace officer or health officer for inspection. 
169.6 Vehicle construction. 
a)  The interior of the vehicle shall be commercially manufactured or be approved by the health officer. 
b)  The food preparation area of the vehicle shall be completely enclosed. 
c)  Mobile food establishments may be required to provide an on board power source, such as a battery or generator, to assure maintenance of PHF/TCS foods at proper temperatures during transit, preparation and service. The vehicle must be equipped with commercial mechanical facilities. All equipment on the vehicle is to be NSF approved, ANSI approved, or of commercial grade. 
d)  The cab of the vehicle must be physically separated from the food preparation area, and the seats designated for the cook and any passengers must be located outside of the food preparation area. 
e)  All cooking equipment and hot holding units must be located at the rear of a mobile food preparation vehicle. Covers for deep fryers must be provided and installed over fryer units while vehicle is in motion. 
169.7 Exterior surfaces. 
Exterior surfaces of mobile food units shall be of weather resistant materials and shall comply with all applicable laws. 
169.8 Utility connections. 
Utility connections shall be limited to only electrical service and shall be in full compliance with the Electrical Code. All electrical extension cords shall be of industrial grade quality and shall be utilized in a safe manner as not to be a nuisance or a trip hazard. Mobile food establishments shall not be connected to any potable water service, sanitary sewer service, or fuel gas service while in the operation of preparing or vending food. 
169.9 Damage Report. 
Any accident involving a mobile food establishment that results in damage to the water system, waste retention tank, food service equipment, or any facility that may result in the contamination of the food being transported or any damage that results in a violation of this section, shall be reported within 24 hours of the time the accident occurred. Reports shall be made by the holder of the mobile food establishment health permit. 
169.10 Overhead Protection. 
Overhead protection shall be provided for mobile food units that are operated outdoors and where food is not covered at all times. The overhead protection shall consist of, but not be limited to, roofing, ceilings, awnings, or umbrellas. The overhead protection must be easily cleanable. 
169.11 Any additional equipment or the arrangement thereof other than that approved when the permit was issued shall be prohibited unless approved in advance by the Consumer Health Division. 
Section 229.169(a)(7) is amended by adding the following: 
169.12 A mobile food establishment must demonstrate mobility at any reasonable time if requested by any peace officer, health officer, or designated city employee. 
169.13 Operation capacity limited. 
The operator of a mobile food establishment shall prepare, serve, store, and display food and beverages on or in the mobile food unit itself; and shall not attach, set up, or use any other device or equipment intended to increase the selling, serving, storing, or displaying capacity of the mobile food establishment. It shall be un-lawful for the operator of a mobile food establishment to: 
1)  Allow items such as, but not limited to brooms, mops, hoses, equipment, containers and boxes or cartons to remain adjacent to or beneath the mobile food establishment; 
2)  Provide or allow any sign or banner to remain that is not attached and solely supported by the mobile food establishment; or, 
3)  Sell food outside of the vehicle, for example, from a table under a free standing canopy. All food vending shall be done from the mobile unit. 
169.14 Mobile food establishments are limited by the types and choices of approved food items being prepared and sold. Food preparation may be restricted by Consumer Health. 
Section 229.169(a)(8)(A) is amended by adding the following: 
169.15 If liquid waste results from the operation of a mobile food establishment it shall comply with the following: 
1.  It shall be stored in permanently installed, vented retention tanks that are at least fifteen percent (15%) larger than the water supply tank, but not less than thirty (30) gallons of capacity and shall be drained and thoroughly flushed during servicing operations. 
2.  All liquid waste shall be discharged to an approved sanitary sewage disposal system at the commissary. 
3.  Liquid waste shall not be discharged from the retention tank when the mobile food establishment is at an operational location. 
4.  The waste connection shall be located below the water connection to preclude contamination of the potable water system. 
5.  Connection to a sewerage system at an operation location is prohibited. 
6.  All used fats, oil, or grease shall be discharged to an approved grease interceptor at the commissary. Used fats, oils, or grease shall not be discharged to any unauthorized food establishment grease interceptor. 
Section 229.169(a)(9)(B) is amended by adding the following: 
169.16 Garbage and Refuse. 
A mobile food establishment shall provide a minimum of 20 gallons for garbage and refuse storage facilities for the operator's use; and shall have garbage and storage facilities attached to the exterior of the mobile food establishment that are insect and rodent-proof for customer use. 
169.17 Access to Restroom Facilities. 
Prior to the issuance of a health permit, the operator of a mobile food establishment shall submit to the Consumer Health Division and comply with the following: 
a)  Written proof of availability of restrooms with flushable toilets for the use of the mobile food establishment employees located in a business establishment within 500 feet of each location where the mobile food unit will be in operation for more than one (1) hour in any single day. 
b)  Proof of availability of adequate facilities shall be in the form of a written and notarized statement from the owner, or owner's agent, including the name, address and telephone number of the property owner or authorized agent, and the type of business and hours of operation, granting permission for the use of the facilities. If the business owner is a partnership or corporation, the statement shall include the name, address and telephone number of one of the partners or officers. 
c)  A copy of the notarized statement shall be displayed in the mobile food establishment in plain view of the public at all times. 
169.18 Separation and Setbacks. 
Mobile food vehicles shall be separated from existing buildings and other mobile food vehicles by a minimum of 12 feet. Mobile food vehicles shall be subject to all current zoning and setback regulations found in the Denton Development Code (DDC). Mobile food vehicles shall not set up in fire lanes or in parking spaces that are required by the Certificate of Occupancy of an existing business unless the business is closed and its required parking spaces are available. 
169.19 Food Transportation. 
1)  During transportation, food and food utensils shall be kept in covered containers or completely wrapped or packaged so as to be protected from contamination. Foods in original packages do not need to be overwrapped or covered if the original package is sealed. 
2)  Food shall be maintained at required temperatures at all times during transport. 
169.20 Closure of a Mobile Food Establishment: 
When a mobile food unit is closed by the health officer for critical violations, the health officer shall post a closed sign and the inspection report on the unit. When a commissary or warehouse is closed by a health officer for critical violations, the health officer shall post the inspection report inside the facility. No person except the health officer shall remove or alter the inspection report or closed sign. 
Section 229.169(b)(2) is amended by adding the following: 
169.21 Servicing records to be kept by commissaries 
A commissary from which a mobile food establishment operates shall issue and maintain servicing records for each unit in a manner and form prescribed by the health officer. The permit holder, person in charge, employee, or representative of any commissary shall keep and maintain servicing records at the commissary for a period of two years from the date of servicing or until retrieved by the health officer, whichever comes first. Servicing records maintained at a commissary shall be immediately available to any peace officer or health officer for inspection during normal business hours. 
169.22 Falsification of servicing records. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner, permit holder, person in charge, employee, or representative of any commissary to issue a servicing record without first verifying that the mobile food establishment has complied with all servicing requirements. It shall be unlawful for any owner, permit holder, person in charge, employee, or representative of any commissary or mobile food establishment to knowingly present or issue any false, fraudulent, or untruthful servicing record for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 229.169(c)(2) is amended by adding the following: 
169.23 Servicing operations. 
1)  Potable water-servicing equipment shall be stored and handled in a way that protects the water and equipment from contamination. 
2)  Vehicle cleaning and in-place cleaning of nonfood-contact surfaces of equipment not requiring sanitization shall be done with potable water and shall be done in a manner that will not contaminate the vehicle's food storage or food preparation areas of equipment. If hoses are used in the cleaning process, they shall be food-grade and kept off the floor or pavement, on racks or by other approved suitable means. All cleaning areas shall be paved with a smooth surface of nonabsorbent material such as concrete or machine-laid asphalt, which is sloped to drain toward an approved catch basin or floor drain where the liquid waste can be lawfully disposed. The use of liquid waste transport vehicles (otherwise known as vacuum trucks), licensed by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality for the removal and disposal of liquid waste resulting from mobile unit food operations is permitted. 
3)  Servicing operations may be performed by a commissary operator or by the mobile food establishment operator. It shall be the commissary operator's responsibility to observe or perform servicing on each mobile food unit and properly complete a servicing record. It is the responsibility of the mobile food establishment operator to confirm that the requirements of this section are fulfilled prior to resuming operations. 
4)  A current copy of each authorization must be maintained on file with the City of Denton Consumer Health Division and also in plain sight on the vehicle for inspection by the City of Denton or a peace officer upon request. 
169.24 Permitting of commissaries as food establishments. 
A commissary servicing any mobile food establishment may be an approved and permitted food establishment at which the mobile food unit is supplied with fresh water, emptied of waste water (and grease) into a proper waste disposal system, and cleaned, including washing, rinsing and sanitizing of those food contact surfaces or items not capable of being immersed in the mobile food establishment's utensil-washing sink. The servicing area must be of adequate size and scope as to accommodate its own operation, as well as those of the mobile food establishment. 
1)  Compliance with all other applicable rules and operational guidelines as may be promulgated by the health officer. 
2)  When the commissary is within another jurisdiction the permit holder shall provide a copy of the latest inspection of its facility by that regulatory authority. 
169.25 Warehouse: 
1)  If only prepackaged goods are sold, a warehouse may be accepted in lieu of a commissary. 
2)  Warehouses shall be required to meet only those rules necessary to prevent the contamination of stored foods, single service articles, utensils and equipment. In general, warehouses shall be exempt from the rules relating to finished walls, ceilings, or storage bases, light colored surfaces, restrooms, lavatories and utility facilities, provided foods are protected from contamination from dust, insects, rodents, flooding, drainage, or other contaminants. 
3)  Handling of unpackaged foods, dishwashing and ice making are prohibited in a warehouse. 
169.26 A mobile food preparation facility shall not: 
1)  Stop at any location, unless the stop is for less than one hour, to sell or serve food during any time other than the dates and times specified in the current itinerary on file with the Consumer Health Division for the mobile food preparation vehicle. 
2)  Serve as a commissary for another mobile food unit or as the base of operation for a caterer. 
3)  Apply for variances of food processing. 
4)  Use leftover foods. All PHF/TCS foods shall be served or discarded at the end of each business day. 
5)  Use time as a public health control. All PHF/TCS foods shall be controlled by mechanical means. 
6)  Park on an unimproved surface such as grass or dirt without written approval from the City Manager or his designee, unless selling for less than one hour at a site immediately adjacent to property that is currently under construction. 
7)  Park at a residence. 
8)  Be permitted to be washed-out at the location of an existing food establishment. All interior washing shall be at an approved commissary. Only exterior washing of the mobile food vehicle may be done at a commercially operated carwash. Grease or wastewater shall not be dumped or drained at a carwash. 
9)  Leave a location of operation until the area of operation is free from trash or nuisance caused by the mobile food vehicle business, its employees, or its customers. 
169.27 Inspection Procedures. 
1)  Critical violations shall result in the immediate closure of a mobile food unit, commissary or warehouse if the City of Denton Consumer Health officer determines that an imminent danger to the public health exists, and that the violation cannot be corrected immediately or an approved alternative procedure has not been implemented. Also refer to section 171.22. 
2)  For violations not resulting in closure, the corrections shall be made and approval shall be given by a City Health officer before reopening for business. 
169.28 Requirements for snow cone vendors and ice cream vendors. 
a)  A snow cone vendor shall be limited to the sale of snow cones and pre-packaged items only and shall have a: 
1)  Commercially approved source for ice and syrup; 
2)  Hand wash sink with hot and cold running water under pressure, liquid soap, and paper towels; 
3)  At least a two (2) compartment sink (with hot and cold running water under pressure) for washing and sanitizing utensils; and, 
4)  Waste-water holding tank of adequate size for operation or be connected to an existing sanitary sewer. 
b)  A snow cone vendor may also be required to meet any and all provisions required for a food service establishment, which the administrator deems necessary to protect the public health and safety. This type of establishment may be a fixed location capable of obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
c)  A water heater system capable of producing water of 100° degrees Fahrenheit interconnected with the potable water supply shall be provided. A minimum of 15 gallons of water must be available. 
d)  Adequate, conveniently located and accessible toilet and lavatory facilities shall be available to the snow cone stand at all times. A notarized letter signed by the owner/operator of the establishment where the facilities are located, must be submitted with the permit application giving written permission for the snow cone personnel to use such facilities and that the facilities will be available for use at all times during the food establishment's hours of operation. The path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet. 
169.29 Requirements for the sale of ice cream, other frozen desserts or novelties upon a public street 
(a)  A person may not sell ice cream, frozen desserts or other novelties from a vehicle before sunrise or after sunset. 
(b)  Ice cream, frozen desserts, and other novelty frozen food items shall be individually wrapped by the manufacturer before being placed in the vehicle from which they are sold and shall be sold in the original wrapping. 
(c)  Such frozen items as described in (b) above may be sold from a pushcart. 
169.30 All vehicles offering ice cream for sale shall have: 
1)  An automatic flashing device consisting of two lamps at the front of the vehicle, mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as possible and displaying simultaneously flashing amber lights, and two (2) lamps at the rear of the vehicle mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as possible and displaying simultaneously flashing amber lights, to be used at all times while each vehicle is in use for food service or solicitation of sales; 
2)  Signs in front and real bearing the word "SLOW" in letters not less than six (6) inches high; and 3) be capable of maintaining a constant temperature for food storage and contain, in a conspicuous place, a thermometer to allow for verification of temperatures. 
Section 229.170(a) is amended by adding the following: 
170.1 The term temporary food service establishment shall not include concession stands, which operate at a fixed location in conjunction with scheduled, community-based sporting or recreational events provided that the preparation and serving of potentially hazardous foods shall be restricted to only those pre-cooked, pre-packaged potentially hazardous food products that have been properly prepared in accordance with all Department of State Health Services and local requirements and are properly stored, handled, and served in the unopened, original package from said concession stands. In such instances where open potentially hazardous foods are prepared on site from a concession stand, these shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and a determination shall be made as to requirements. 
a)  A temporary food service establishment that does not comply with other requirements of this chapter or other city ordinances applicable to food service establishments is permitted if: 
1)  The health officer finds that the operation will not result in a health or safety hazard or a nuisance; 
2)  The operation is limited to a single, fixed location, which may include one or more facilities at the location; 
3)  The operation is either: 
a.  Limited to a time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days; 
b.  Operating under a city park and recreation department that has been approved by the city; and 
c.  The food service establishment complies with the other requirements of this section. 
b)  An application and non-refundable fees for a temporary event permit (per food booth) shall be submitted at least two (2) working days prior to the event, or five (5) days prior to the event if ten (10) or more booths are permitted for the same event. The application shall include the time the booth will be set up and ready for inspection. 
c)  If an application is not submitted by the deadline in (b) above, the acceptance of the application will be at the discretion of the health officer, and an administrative fee will be charged. 
d)  All requirements of the food booth must be in place before a permit will be issued. 
e)  A temporary event permit will be required if there is open food (e.g. offering samples) available. 
f)  Food manufacturers must submit a copy of the state manufacturer license with their application. 
g)  Permits for temporary food service establishments that are not operating in conjunction with a City sponsored special event or community based event shall be limited to six (6) permits per year per establishment. 
h)  A food service establishment with a current annual health permit will be required to obtain a temporary event permit if the event is at a location outside their permitted premises. 
i)  A temporary food service establishment shall not: 
1)  Prepare, serve, sell or distribute any food not approved in advance by the health officer. This prohibits the storage and preparation of food from a private residence. Any slicing, dicing or cutting of potentially hazardous foods must be done in a commercial kitchen and brought to the event under proper temperature control; this includes raw hamburger meat that must be brought in as commercially prepared frozen patties. No "gyro" type meat cookers are allowed. 
2)  Prepare potentially hazardous food; except, that the establishment may prepare potentially hazardous food that is approved in advance by the health officer and does not require substantial preparation prior to consumption (including, but not limited to, a hamburger or frankfurter) or may prepare potentially hazardous food that is obtained by the establishment in individual servings; 
Section 229.170(b) is amended by adding the following: 
170.2 Potentially hazardous food products shall be held in mechanical refrigeration that is maintained at 41° degrees or less. Frozen products may be stored in ice only if approved in advance by the regulatory authority and the duration of the event and items offered for sale is limited, typically less than four (4) hours in duration. Potentially hazardous food products shall be held in mechanical hot or cold holding equipment if the event is more than four (4) hours in duration. All foods are to be kept properly protected during storage, preparation, and service; this will include grill covers or lids to prevent contamination from overhead. 
Section 229.170(d)(3) is amended by adding the following: 
170.3 Small "crock-pots" may be used to properly store food utensils in water 135° F degrees or hotter; or utensils may be stored in running water dipper wells. 
170.4 "Sterno" heating units are not allowed for use at outdoor events to hold foods hot. 
Section 229.170(d)(4) is amended by adding the following: 
170.5 Bare hand contact with ready-to eat foods is prohibited. Single-use gloves must be worn over cleaned hands. 
170.6 Animals are prohibited from being within the interior limits of a temporary food establishment. 
Section 229.170(h) is amended by adding the following: 
170.7 A temporary food service establishment shall comply with liquid waste disposal ordinances, solid waste disposal ordinances and fire codes. 
Section 229.170(k)(3) is amended by adding the following: 
170.8 A temporary food service establishment shall comply with these Texas Food Rules and any other requirement that the administrator determines is necessary to protect the public health or safety and imposes as a condition to the lawful operation of the establishment. 
170.9 Food-handler cards required: Food safety training is required for all temporary food establishment workers. Food service workers may obtain a food-handler card through a class offered through the City of Denton Consumer Health Division's normal schedule of classes or an approved on-line course. Depending on the duration of the event and the extent of the food service being offered, the Consumer Health Division may mandate a Food Manager's Certification for a minimum of one or maximum of all personnel during the event. 
170.10 Catering operations. 
a)  All catering operations based in the City of Denton shall comply with all state rules, laws, and local ordinances. A person shall not engage in a catering operation unless the service is affiliated with a food service establishment operating from a fixed facility that is permitted by the appropriate health authority. 
b)  The base of operations for a catering operation shall be physically separate from a residential home and shall be a permanent, fixed location. 
c)  The health officer may inspect a catering operation at any time. 
170.11 The health officer may request copies of the health permit issued to the caterer from the regulatory authority having jurisdiction where the food is prepared or packaged. 
170.11 Farmer's market. 
a)  Management and Personnel. 
Responsibility, assignment. The permit holder shall be the person in charge or shall designate a person in charge and shall ensure that a person in charge is present at the market during hours of operation. Where it is allowed, food vendors that offer, sell, or distribute food that is potentially hazardous or that offer samples of food; shall have a person in charge that can show proof of successful completion of a Texas Department of State Health Services approved Certified Food Managers Course. Food vendors that offer, sell, or distribute only prepackaged foods, non-potentially hazardous foods or beverages or temporary food vendors in conjunction with a special event at such location are exempt from the food manager certification course requirement. Proof of successful completion of a certified food manager course may be required of food vendors having exemptions if judged by the regulatory authority to be capable of causing food-borne illness or may be an increased public health risk. 
b)  Food. 
1)  Preventing contamination: 
a.  Food Display. Except for plants, nuts in the shell and whole, raw fruits and vegetables that are intended for hulling, peeling or washing by the consumer before consumption, food on display shall be protected from contamination by the use of packaging, counter, service line, or salad bar food guards that comply with NSF standards, completely enclosed display cases; or other means approve by the Regulatory Authority. Letters may be required from the fabricator or installer of such food guards stating compliance with NSF standards if visual compliance is not evident through the use of labels or listings posted directly on the food guard by the authority approved to affix such label or listing. 
b.  Except for plants, nuts in the shell and whole, raw fruits and vegetables that are intended for hulling, peeling or washing by the consumer before consumption, food that is not completely packaged must be located under a cover, tent or other covering approved by the Regulatory Authority and remain under the covered protection for the duration of the operating period. 
2)  Approved Source. Only food from an approved source may be offered at a Farmer's Market or Food Market under these rules. Foraged foods are not considered to be from an approved source. Food prepared in a private home, a Cottage food production operation or from an unlicensed food manufacturer or wholesaler is considered to be from an unapproved source and may not be used or offered for sale in Farmer's Markets or Food Market as defined in this rule. Food from a kitchen regulated by a local regulatory authority and proof of such is presented shall be considered from an approved source. 
3)  Meat, non-poultry. 
a.  Meat such as game animals, ratites or equine meats (as defined in TFER) may not be sold. 
b.  Whole muscle meat shall be stored frozen and held under refrigeration capable of maintaining the meat in a hard, frozen state. Meat shall be packaged ready to offer or sell. Separating, cutting or otherwise removing meat from an intact package is prohibited. 
c.  Meat shall be produced, stored, labeled in compliance with U.S. Department of Agriculture rules and regulations. Proof of license or exemption shall be provided to the Regulatory Authority at time of application. 
4)  Poultry. 
a.  Poultry is defined as allowed by TFER, as amended. 
b.  Poultry shall be stored frozen and held under refrigeration capable of maintaining the meat in a hard, frozen state. Poultry shall be packaged in form ready to offer or sell. Separating, cutting or otherwise removing poultry from intact packaging is prohibited. 
c.  Poultry shall be produced, stored and labeled in compliance with U.S. Department of Agriculture rules and regulations. Proof of license or exemption shall be provided to the Regulatory Authority at time of application. 
5)  Seafood, prohibition. Sale of seafood is prohibited at a Farmer's Market. 
6)  Sampling: Allowed only where expressly approved by the Regulatory Authority. Where allowed, sampling shall comply with all of the following: 
a.  Non-PHF/TCS foods shall be offered to the consumer in individual servings or bites and shall not be made available for self service. Portioning foods on site is prohibited. Portions shall be completely enclosed until given to the consumer or shall be unpackaged by the consumer. 
b.  Only single-service articles may be given to the consumer for use. 
c.  PHF/TCS foods shall be maintained at proper temperatures according to TFER (41 degrees or colder; 135 degrees or hotter). Meats shall be frozen and remain frozen until sold to the consumer. 
d.  Where PHF/TCS foods are stored on ice, dry ice, or other items intended for use to cool or freeze foods, a thermometer shall be present in the container holding such foods. The thermometer must show evidence of proper temperatures in which to maintain the food item in compliance with TFER. If at any time, food stored in this manner is not at proper temperatures, the Regulatory Authority shall dispose of the food, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, if it cannot be determined if it is safe to sell or offer for sale. 
e.  Time as a public health control may not be used as the sole means for holding PHF/TCS foods safely. 
f.  Ice shall be readily drained and water or melting ice shall not come into contact with stored food. 
g.  Foods cut or constituted on site such as soups, dips, relish, condiments and sauces shall be maintained at or below 41 degrees Fahrenheit and process must comply with the Equipment and Utensils section of these rules. 
h.  Digital thermometer accurate to ± 2 degrees Fahrenheit shall be on site for use by the vendor. One thermometer shall be provided for each piece of equipment used to hold proper PHF/TCS temperatures. 
7)  Animals, prohibition. 
a.  Animals may not be offered for sale, or given away at a Farmer's Market. 
b.  Other than service animals that are conspicuously and properly identified, animals accompanying their owner, where allowed, shall be in a carrier or on a leash and under direct physical control of the owner. Animals may not be allowed within 10 feet of a food booth. 
c)  Equipment and Utensils. 
1)  Functionality of equipment. 
a.  Except for a municipally owned Farmer's Market, equipment used to keep foods under this ordinance frozen or refrigerated shall comply with TFER and be able to maintain required temperatures for the duration of operations. Municipally owned Farmer's Markets shall have mechanical temperature controlled equipment capable of maintaining proper food temperatures as required in TFER. Mechanical food equipment shall obtain approval from the Regulatory Authority for use. 
b.  Tables used within the vending area shall be made of non-porous material and be easily cleanable. 
c.  Utensils used, only when approved for sampling, shall be made of non-wood material and disposable unless compliance for cleaning and sanitizing under Section 229.165 of TFER, or as amended, is provided and approved by the Regulatory Authority for use onsite. 
2)  Equipment numbers and capacities. 
a.  At least one (1) hand wash sink or facility complying with the Temporary Food Establishment requirements in TFER (Section 229.170) shall be located within the immediate selling area of each food vendor approved to sample foods and available to each vendor where required by the Regulatory Authority. 
b.  Manual ware-washing sink requirements. At least one (1) sink with at least three (3) compartments shall be provided for manually washing, rinsing, and sanitizing equipment and utensils for vendors that are approved to sample. 
c.  Alternative manual ware-washing equipment may be used only by vendors when approved by the regulatory authority. Such written approval shall be evident and conspicuous on the permit placard issued to the vendor. 
d)  Water, Plumbing, and Waste. 
1)  Where a hand sink is required, this hand sink shall be a portable hand sink capable of producing hot water, having a portable tanked water source and having a waste tank at least 2/3 size greater than potable source water tank. Hot generation and distribution systems shall be sufficient to meet the peak hot water demands throughout the operation. If approved by the regulatory authority, other means of hand washing may be used. 
2)  Where manual ware-washing is required using a hard - plumbed system, a licensed Plumbing inspector shall inspect the work prior to use. Backflow devices may be required. 
3)  Trash receptacles shall be available and shall be non-porous. Efforts shall be made to dispose of trash offsite in a timely manner so as not to encourage pests. 
e)  Physical Facilities. 
1)  Floor construction. Floors and floor coverings of all vending areas shall meet the requirements found in the TFER or be approved by the health officer. 
2)  Vending area shall be covered and protected to minimize presence of pests. 
f)  Plan Review. 
1)  Farmer's Market vendor application shall be submitted by each food vendor. 
2)  The plans and specifications shall indicate the following (whether existing or not): 
a.  Proposed layout drawn from a "bird's-eye view" showing equipment arrangement and schedule including type and model and grease/waste storage receptacle location. 
b.  Manufacturer's specifications sheets of all equipment. 
c.  List of all food items offered or vended, listing separately foods proposed to be sampled. 
d.  Proof of food origin, copy of manufacturer's license, copy of storage license or description of approved source where food items will be obtained from; and copy of approved food labels. 
g)  Administrative Process. 
1)  All work must be inspected by the regulatory authority for compliance with these rules. After compliance with these rules is deemed to be met, a Food Vendor Permit may be approved. 
2)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension or revocation. 
3)  A notice, as required by this ordinance, is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be on file in the records of the regulatory authority. 
4)  The hearings provided by the HaBSCo shall be conducted by them at a time and place designated by HaBSCo. Based on the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
5)  Condemnation of adulterated products or on site destruction. Food found to be adulterated shall be condemned and, if no appeal be taken from such determination of condemnation, such articles shall be destroyed for human food purposes under the supervision of an inspector. 
6)  All appeals from final suspension or revocation of a Food Vendor Permit shall be made in writing to the building official or his designee. The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days of the occurrence of the suspension or revocation. The Consumer Health director (or his designee) shall attempt to hear the appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of the appeal. The Consumer Health director shall have the power to reverse a decision of the regulatory authority where he finds that such a reversal will not affect the health and/or welfare of the public. All decisions of the Consumer Health Director or his designee shall be subject to review by the City Council at one of its regularly scheduled meetings. The decision of the Consumer Health Director or his designee will be final unless reversed by the City Council. 
Section 229.171(b)(2) is amended by adding the following: 
171.1 Plans. 
a)  The owner shall submit plans and specifications for construction of work areas intended for use in the operation of a food establishment, and the location, size, and type of fixed equipment and interior finishes of such areas to the City of Denton for approval, before work is begun, when a food service establishment is constructed, or: 
1)  The nature of the operation changes; 
2)  The establishment is extensively remodeled; 
3)  When an existing structure is converted for use as a food service establishment; or 
4)  When the menu is changed to include more, or different menu items. 
b)  In a food service establishment, the food preparation area shall be of adequate size and shall constitute a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total square footage of the occupied permitted area or the minimum size deemed necessary by the Consumer Health Division. 
c)  In a food service establishment, dry storage areas shall be of adequate size and shall constitute a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total square footage of the food preparation area. At the discretion of the Consumer Health Division, additional dry storage may be required. 
d)  A menu must be submitted with all plans. If changes are made to the menu at a later time, the changes must be submitted for approval by the Consumer Health Division. 
e)  All plans submitted shall include information on the following specifications: 
1)  Aisles and working spaces: Shall be unobstructed and of sufficient width to permit employees to readily perform their duties without contaminating food or food contact surfaces by clothing or personal contact. Minimum width of aisles shall be thirty-six (36) inches. 
2)  Auxiliary equipment: Water heaters, washing machines, dryers, remote connected refrigerators, compressors, and air conditioners must be located outside of food preparation areas. 
3)  Equipment and utensils: All equipment is to be NSF (National Safety Foundation) approved or commercial grade. 
4)  Floors: In food preparation areas, storage areas, utensil washing areas, restrooms, and dressing rooms, floors shall be constructed of smooth, durable, easily cleanable, non-absorbent materials of commercial grade. Flooring must be light colored, without texture or patterns that create difficult places to clean. In addition to the kitchen areas of day care centers, floors in food service areas of classrooms shall meet these requirements. 
The health officer shall establish approved floor surfaces in food preparation areas based upon the degree of preparation expected. Food establishments involved in heavy food preparation shall incorporate quarry tile, cement-based terrazzo tile or an equivalent floor covering as approved by the health officer. Food establishments involved in light food preparation shall incorporate a commercial grade sheet vinyl or equivalent floor covering as approved by the health officer. Establishments involved in no food preparation shall incorporate sealed concrete, vinyl asbestos tile or an equivalent floor covering as approved by the health officer. An approved sealer (such as rubber cove base) shall be required at the floor/wall interface. If using ceramic tile squares in the food preparation area, the minimum size of tiles shall be 12? × 12? (twelve by twelve inches). 
5)  Ice machines: Are to be of adequate size and located in areas that meet the wall, floor and ceiling design standards for food preparation areas. Do not locate an ice machine near sources of potential contamination, such as exposed sewer lines, open stairwells, etc. 
6)  Refrigerators/freezers: Each mechanical refrigeration unit storing potentially hazardous foods must be of commercial type (even in day care center rooms) and each unit must have a numerically scaled indicating thermometer. All such units must hold foods at 41° degrees Fahrenheit or colder. Freezers must hold frozen foods at a temperature of zero (0) degrees Fahrenheit or colder. Walk-in coolers must be commercially built and have interiors of impervious, non-absorbent materials. Shelves must be resistant to rust. Mechanical refrigeration is required on salad bars, etc. for holding cold foods cold; holding foods in ice will not be acceptable. 
The processing and packaging of meat and poultry shall be conducted in a refrigerated room: 
a)  Where the temperature is kept at 50° degrees F or less; or 
b)  Which, along with processing equipment, undergoes a mid-shift cleanup after 4 (four) hours of operation. 
7)  Sinks: 
a)  Shall be the number required by law. Stainless steel hand sinks shall be located within every twenty-five (25) linear feet of unobstructed space in food preparation and utensil washing areas so it is convenient for employees to wash hands as often as necessary. Hand-wash sinks shall be freestanding or wall hung. If a sink is too close to other equipment or sinks, a splashguard may be required. Sinks are to be of adequate size to allow for the thorough washing of hands and forearms. Liquid soap and paper towels are required at the hand sink and lotion hand sanitizer is required if gloves are not used. Lavatories, soap dispensers, hand-drying devices and all related fixtures shall be permanently mounted and kept clean and in good repair. 
b)  A three (3) compartment sink that has basins large enough to allow immersion of the largest utensil and two (2) self draining drain-boards shall be required for manually washing, rinsing and sanitizing equipment and utensils. 
c)  A stainless steel, four (4) compartment sink with two (2) self-draining drain-boards shall be installed in all bar areas. This requirement may be modified if glassware is sanitized in a commercial dishwasher. 
i.  Knee pedals, electronic eye and metered faucets are not allowed in kitchen hand sinks but are allowable in public restrooms. 
ii.  Blower dryers shall not be allowed as a means of drying hands in food preparation or dish wash areas. Common towels are also prohibited. Steam-mixing valves are prohibited. 
iii.  All dishwashing equipment shall be located in one area to prevent any cross contamination from soiled to clean dish storage or food preparation. 
8)  Storage rooms: Wood shelving is allowed for dry storage use only if finished with varnish or high gloss type paint to make sure it is smooth, non-absorbent, and easy to clean. Rooms are to have finished walls (minimum finish includes: taped and bedded sheetrock painted with high gloss paint) and commercial flooring with rubber cove base at floor/wall juncture. Dry storage rooms may contain refrigerators or freezers not requiring drains to the sewer for condensate removal. 
9)  Wait areas: If remote from food preparation or service areas, and used only for non-potentially hazardous beverage preparation, wait areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
a)  Flooring shall be VCT or equivalent as approved by the Consumer Health Division. 
b)  Counters shall be laminate surface, solid surface, or equivalent. 
c)  Shelving below countertops shall be sealed, smooth, and easily cleanable. 
10)  Toilet facilities: Public access shall not be through the kitchen. 
11)  Walls & ceilings: 
a)  In food preparation, storage, utensil washing areas, and restrooms; walls, ceilings, and other architectural features shall be smooth (not textured), easily cleanable, non-absorbent, light in color, and durable. Fibrous acoustical drop-in ceiling panels are prohibited in these areas. Wall areas behind sinks or places that receive heavy use must be finished with FRP (fiberglass reinforced panels), ceramic tile, epoxy type paint or similar materials to withstand moisture. Bathroom walls shall be finished (as those listed above) behind plumbing fixtures to a height of at least four (4) feet up from the floor. Heavy food preparation areas behind stoves, grills, and fryers shall be of stainless steel from floor to ceiling. 
b)  Surface mounted pipes shall not be installed tightly against the surface of the walls. There shall be a gap of at least two (2) inches between the pipe and the finished surface of the wall. 
c)  All holes cut into walls and ceilings for pipes and conduits shall be sealed, and the clearance between the floor surface and the bottom edge of a door shall be tight fitting. 
12)  Water heater: Must be of adequate size to provide enough hot water for all hand washing, ware washing, and cleaning. Minimum size: fifty (50) gallons. Commercial tank-less water heaters may be used. 
13)  At the discretion of the City of Denton, additional sinks such as pot sinks, produce washing sinks, etc. may be required. 
14)  Kitchens in day care centers shall comply with all rules of this code except that the size of the kitchen may be determined on a case-by-case basis as approved by the City of Denton. 
15)  When a foodservice establishment is extensively remodeled it must be closed during any demolition especially if water or power service is interrupted. If remodeling pertains to only a portion of the establishment, the food preparation areas shall be protected by a solid wall that prevents any construction debris or other contaminates from entering the kitchen or food service areas. 
Section 229.171(f) is amended by adding the following: 
171.2 Permit required. 
a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association of persons, firm or corporation to operate a food service establishment in the city without having obtained a permit under the terms of this section. 
b)  Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall make written application for a permit at the office of the consumer health division. The application shall include the applicant's full name, street and post office address, and whether such applicant is an individual, firm, or corporation, and, if a partnership, the names of the partners, together with their addresses shall be included; the location and type of the proposed establishment; and the signature of the applicant or applicants. If the application is for a temporary or seasonal food service establishment, it shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed operation. 
171.3 Application fee. 
a)  The applicant shall submit the applicable nonrefundable fee as set forth by city council by ordinance, and the schedule of fees shall be available for public inspection at the offices of the city secretary or the health officer. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter the payment of any fees set under this section is not applicable to the City of Denton or any political subdivision or agency of the State of Texas and the United States of America. 
b)  Application fees for seasonal food service establishments shall be the same as those for any other similar full time food service establishment. 
c)  An applicant shall not, under any circumstances, be entitled to a refund of application fees after an application has been filed. 
d)  Fee Exemptions. 
1)  Food vendors operated by a public entity, such as D.I.S.D., university, community college, or the City, may be exempt from paying the Food Vendor fee, if approved by the regulatory authority. 
2)  A food vendor that is not permanently permitted by the regulatory authority, but that is a recognized charitable or philanthropic organization, or that has attained 501(c) (3) status from the Internal Revenue Service, may be exempt from paying the temporary food establishment fee for a permit for a temporary event, if approved by the regulatory authority. 
3)  Fee exemptions granted do not exempt any food establishment from the requirement of applying for, obtaining, and displaying a food vendor permit or from complying with the provisions of this section or any other applicable law. 
Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this ordinance, in a location conspicuous to the consumer. 
171.4 Permit issuance. 
a)  Upon receipt of an application and payment of the applicable fee, the health officer shall make an inspection of the premises where the business is to be conducted. If the premises comply with the terms of this article and with all current requirements of the zoning ordinance, other ordinances and state law, a permit shall be issued to the applicant upon payment of the permit fee. The applicable fees shall be set by city council by ordinance and the fee schedule shall be available for public inspection at the offices of the city secretary or the health officer. The applicant shall submit the applicable nonrefundable fee as set forth by city council before a permit will be issued. 
b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the payment of any fees set under this section is not applicable to the City of Denton or any political subdivision or agency of the State of Texas and the United States of America. 
1)  In the event a food permit application is rejected, the administrator shall notify the applicant of the rejection in writing. The notice shall specify the reasons why the permit is denied. The decision of the administrator is final unless the applicant shall file an appeal as provided in Section 13-34. The decision of the administrator shall continue in effect until the final decision of the committee. 
2)  Permits shall not be transferable. A person who acquires an existing food service establishment shall not operate the establishment without obtaining a new permit within ten (10) days from the date of the change of ownership. 
3)  Upon change of ownership of a business, the new owner shall be required to meet current food establishment standards as defined in this code and state food rules before a permit may be issued by the Consumer Health Division. 
4)  If the establishment changes the name of the business only, they have 10 days from the date of the name change to notify the Consumer Health Division in writing. 
5)  Each food service establishment shall display all valid health permits in public view in the establishment. 
a)  A permit shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months with the expiration date being the last day of the month the permit was issued; temporary, and seasonal permits shall expire in accordance with their terms, unless suspended or revoked by the health officer. 
b)  Acceptance of a permit issued by the administrator constitutes agreement by the establishment to: 
1)  Comply with all conditions of the permit and all applicable provisions of this chapter; 
2)  Allow the lawful inspection of its facility and operations. 
3)  Inspections of newly constructed establishments prior to opening shall be done: 
i.  when equipment is set in place; 
ii.  at least 2 weeks prior to opening; and 
iii.  At least 2 days prior to opening. 
171.5 If inspections are called for before the establishment is ready for them, the owner may be charged an administrative fee. 
171.6 Expiration and renewal of permits. 
a)  A permit lapses and is void unless the applicable permit fee is received by the City of Denton before the expiration date of the existing permit. 
b)  A permit lapses and is void if the food service establishment operating under the permit constructs a new facility or changes ownership. 
c)  Permit renewal fees that are not received by the expiration date, will be assessed an additional administrative fee. 
171.7 Revocation of permit. 
The consumer health administrator may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit if the administrator determines that the manager or owner of a food service establishment has: 
a)  Interfered with the health officer in the performance of his duties; or 
b)  Been convicted twice within a twelve-month period for a violation of this chapter; or 
c)  Failed to comply with a hold order or a condemnation order; or 
d)  Failed to comply, within the time specified, with an order to correct or abate an imminent and serious threat to the public health or safety; or 
e)  Intentionally or knowingly impeded a lawful inspection by the health officer; or 
f)  Been closed two (2) or more times within a twelve-month period for conditions that constituted a serious and imminent threat to public health. 
171.8 Prior to revocation, the health officer shall notify the holder of the permit, or the person in charge of the food service establishment, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is being revoked and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of five (5) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit within such five-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the five (5) calendar day period, a final notice of revocation shall be served. Upon receipt of the final notice of revocation, the food service establishment shall immediately cease operation and the permit shall be considered finally revoked. 
171.8 Application after revocation. 
Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit. 
171.9 Service of notices. 
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, or the person in charge of the food service establishment, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the city secretary. 
171.10 Appeal from denial or revocation of a permit. 
If the health officer denies the issuance of a permit or a permit is finally revoked, the officer shall send the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the denial or revocation and of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the health officer to the Health and Building Standards Commission - (HaBSCo) by giving written notice to the administrator within ten (10) days of the receipt of the denial or revocation notice. 
171.11 Hearing. 
A hearing of the appeal shall be conducted by the Health and Building Standards Commission. The hearing shall be held at a time and place designated by the Health and Building Standards Commission. The Health and Building Standards Commission shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the Health and Building Standards Commission shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice, or order, considered in the hearing by a majority vote and provide a written report of the hearing decision to the holder of the permit. 
The decision of the Health and Building Standards Commission is final as to administrative remedies, and no rehearing may be granted. Once the decision of the Health and Building Standards Commission is final under this section, the applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision to the state district court or court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
171.12 Registration of food service establishments based outside city. 
A food service establishment or commissary operating from a facility located outside the city that sells, distributes or transports food inside the city may not conduct operations inside the city unless the food service establishment: 
a)  Furnishes the health officer with a certificate from a health authority having jurisdiction over the establishment indicating that the establishment complies with applicable health laws; or 
b)  Furnishes the health officer other information that the administrator determines is necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter or otherwise protect the public health or safety. 
Section 229.171(g)(6) is amended by adding the following: 
171.13 Authority to inspect. 
a)  The health officer may inspect any and all things offered for sale, given in exchange or given away for use as food or drink for human consumption, and he/she shall have the authority to enter any food service establishment in the city, as authorized by law for the purpose of such inspection. 
b)  The Consumer Health Division will conduct risk-based inspections and where the risk of food-borne illness is low, the Consumer Health Division, at its discretion, may lower the number of required inspections performed to a minimum of one each year. However, if the Consumer Health Division feels that a food service establishment poses a higher risk of food-borne illness, the Consumer Health Division shall conduct inspections as often as necessary to ensure enforcement of these rules. 
171.14 Power to examine food service establishment records. 
a)  The health officer shall have the authority to examine the records of a food service establishment in order to ensure compliance with all provisions of this ordinance or of state law. 
b)  The health officer shall have the authority to require written documentation of cool down methods used and reheating times in order to verify compliance with food temperature items on the foodservice establishment inspection form. 
Section 229.171(i)(2) is amended by adding the following: 
171.15 The city health officer, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these rules. The officer shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or used, or to persons employed. 
171.16 The following types of establishments are exempt from inspection requirements: 
a)  Group homes; 
b)  Establishments selling only commercially packaged, non-potentially hazardous foods; 
c)  Vending machines that sells only commercially packaged, non-PHF; and 
d)  Facilities operated by nonprofit organizations for their members, families and invited guests. 
171.17 Facilities are not exempt when food service is provided in conjunction with a child care facility, retirement center, hospital, school, indigent feeding program, or public fundraising events. 
Section 229.171(j) is amended by adding the following: 
171.18 Report of inspections. 
Whenever an inspection of a foodservice establishment is done, the health officer shall record the findings on the inspection report form. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of these rules and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspection remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section violated and shall state the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). The health officer shall furnish a copy of the inspection report form to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. 
Section 229.171(j)(6) is amended by adding the following: 
171.19 Re-inspection. 
a)  Any food service establishment inspected by the City of Denton Consumer Health Division which receives a score of seventy-five (75) or below on any inspection shall be re-inspected. 
b)  This re-inspection shall be performed in the same manner, using the same form, as the previous inspection. 
c)  If, upon subsequent re-inspection of the establishment, the health officer finds that sufficient measures were not taken to bring the score above a total of seventy-five (75), he will issue a citation and schedule a date for another re-inspection. The health officer shall continue to perform re-inspections until the establishment has made sufficient progress to warrant a score above seventy-five (75). The issuance of a citation for failure to meet the required score upon re-inspection shall not in any way limit the ability of the inspector to issue any other citation for any violation of this chapter. 
d)  Re-inspection for failure to meet the required score shall be performed within fourteen (14) calendar days immediately following the original inspection, or as soon as possible thereafter, except that where an establishment is closed due to a score below sixty (60), pursuant to section 13-44, the original inspector shall determine the time of the re-inspection. 
e)  Any food service establishment owner or manager that receives a score which he feels is unacceptable, may request a re-inspection. A re-inspection fee shall be required and shall be paid before the re-inspection will be performed. The health inspector shall perform the requested re-inspection within two weeks of the re-inspection fee payment. Only one re-inspection may be requested within any six (6) month period. 
171.20 Fee for re-inspection. 
a)  The fee for re-inspection shall be one-half the annual permit fee of the establishment receiving the re-inspection. 
b)  A re-inspection fee will be charged for each re-inspection necessary to bring the food establishment's score above seventy-five (75). 
c)  Payment of the re-inspection fee shall not void, or in any way affect the responsibility of the owner or permit holder for payment of any fines for any other violations of this chapter. 
d)  The person, partnership, or corporation listed as "owner" on the original application shall be responsible for payment of any and all fees, including re-inspection fees. 
e)  Payment of the re-inspection fee shall be made within 5 business days after the re-inspection is performed. 
171.21 Violations. 
a)  The Building Official of the City of Denton, or any of his designated employees, shall have the responsibility and power to enforce all provisions of this chapter within the corporate limits of the City of Denton, Texas. 
b)  Whenever the health officer determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, which in his/her judgment can jeopardize the public health, or for violation of any items, which have been noted as problems on two (2) or more consecutive inspection reports, the health officer may issue a written citation for said person to appear in court. 
c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give the health officer a false name when such officer requests the name of said person for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
Section 229.171(k) is amended by adding the following: 
171.22 Authority to close. 
a)  The health officer shall close without warning any building or place described in this chapter and prevent its use for the storage, manufacture, or sale of food or drink for human consumption whenever: 
1)  The health officer, upon inspection of an establishment, finds sufficient violations which cause the rating score of said establishment to be below a total of sixty (60) points; 
2)  The health officer finds that an establishment is operating with no working refrigeration units; 
3)  The health officer finds that an establishment is operating without running water or hot water for a period of more than one (1) hour; 
4)  The health officer finds an establishment is operating without a functioning ware-washing machine or adequate sinks for manual ware-washing; and 
5)  The health officer finds any food service establishment with an unreasonable infestation of rodents or insects. 
b)  It shall be the duty of the health officer to post a notice of closure for such conditions at the entrance of such building or place and to maintain the same until such conditions or practices have been removed or abated. 
c)  No person shall remove or alter in any way a sign, which has been posted by the health officer. 
Section 229.171(n) is amended by adding the following: 
171.23 Examination and condemnation of food. 
The health officer shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The health officer shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. 
171.24 Appeal from hold order. 
The hold order shall state that a request for hearing to appeal the hold order may be filed within five (5) days and that if no hearing is requested, the food shall be destroyed. If requested, a hearing shall be held on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing by the Health and Building Standards Commission. The Health and Building Standards Commission may vacate the hold order or direct the owner or person in charge of the food to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-305, § 1, 11-6-12; Ord. No. 2014-082, § 1, 3-18-14) 
EXHIBIT A: Health Permit Fee Schedule: 
Type of Health Fee's 	Fee Amount 
1. Two year food handler card 	$25.00 
2. Manager Certification Registering Fee with the City 	$10.00 
3. Swimming Pool Operator Certification 	$50.00 
4. Replacement Cards 	$5.00 
5. Beer and wine permit—New application processing fee 	$25.00 
6. Wine and beer retailer's permit on premises 	½ of TABC charge 
7. Wine and beer retailer's off premises 	½ of TABC charge 
8. Retail dealer's on premise license beer only 	½ of TABC charge 
9. Retail dealer's on premise late hours license 	½ of TABC charge 
10. Mixed Beverage permit—Application fee 	$25.00 
11. Mixed Beverage permit fee 	½ of TABC charge 
12. Mixed Beverage Late hours 	½ of TABC charge 
13. Annual swimming pool permit 	$160.00 
14. Re-inspection Fee for pools 	$80.00 
15. Small Restaurant = 2,000 sq. ft. 	$310.00 
16. Large Restaurant = 2,001 sq. ft. 	$485.00 
17. Small Grocery Store = 12,000 sq. ft. 	$325.00 
18. Large Grocery Store = 12,001 sq. ft. 	$450.00 
19. Convenience Store, no Deli 	$250.00 
20. Convenience Store with Deli 	$300.00 
21. Bars 	$275.00 
22. Concession Stands, Seasonal Permits 	$175.00 
23. Mobile Food Unit - Class 1 (pre-packaged foods) 	$175.00 
24. Mobile Food Unit - Class 2 (foods prepared on vehicle) 	$310.00 
25. Mobile Food Unit - Class 3 	$175.00 
26. Mobile Food Unit - Class 4 	$75.00 
27. Daycare Facility 	$150.00 plus $1.00/each child licensed 
28. Nursing Home 	$275.00 
29. School Cafeteria 	$150.00 
30. Temporary Permit 	$35.00 
31. *Farmer's/Community Market Annual Permit 	$240.00 
32. *Farmer's/Community Market Monthly Permit 	$40.00 
33. **Application fee for all new permits 	$250.00 
34. ***Administrative Fee 	$35.00 
Fees are non-refundable. 
*Sales of whole or uncut produce shall be exempt from permits and fees. 
**Application fee shall not apply to Temporary Food Service Establishments. 
*** Administrative fees may be charged for the following, but not limited to: late payment of any annual health permit fees; late application and payment of fees for temporary events; failure to have a mobile unit inspected when due; change of name of business only; re-inspections of new or remodeled establishments when contractor calls for inspection but is not ready when the inspectors begin the inspection. 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-305, § 1, 11-6-12; Ord. No. 2014-082, § 1, 3-18-14)  
Chapter 14 - HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 6; food and food establishments, Ch. 13; insect and rodent control in mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, § 32-91. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH OFFICER 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Designation of city health officer. 
The duties provided in this chapter shall be performed by the city health officer. The city health officer is the consumer health manager. 
(Code 1966, § 13-18; Ord. No. 93-147, § I, 8-17-93; Ord. No. 97-114, § X, 4-1-97)  
Sec. 14-27. - Authority to make inspections and abate nuisances after notice. 
(a)  The city health officer may inspect all places and premises in the city at reasonable times with the permission of the owner or occupant or may, upon issuance of an appropriate warrant, enter in and upon any premises within the city. 
(b)  Upon finding any unsanitary, unhealthful, or unsafe condition, or any condition constituting a nuisance, the city health officer shall give the owner or occupant of such place or premises written notice to abate such condition within five (5) days. The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Unhealthful means a condition which is unclean, contaminated, or unwholesome; 
(2)  Unsafe means a condition which is capable of causing harm or injury; and 
(3)  Unsanitary means a condition containing or promoting disease-causing organisms and other harmful substances. 
(c)  Unsanitary, unhealthful, or unsafe conditions shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  An accumulation of organic bodily waste which places the health of any person or animal at risk; 
(2)  An animal shelter not in compliance with Texas Health and Safety Code Ann. § 823.003; 
(3)  Any uninterred dead animal upon a premises; 
(4)  Any unpreserved animal part or parts displayed on a premises, except in retail or wholesale establishments offering meat, fish, or poultry for sale such as grocery stores, butcher shops, or fish markets; 
(5)  A steel trap set up on a premises designed to be capable of causing injury to any person or animal; 
(6)  Any condition which is defined as a nuisance, pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code Ann. § 341.011 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 93-147, § II, 8-17-93)  
Sec. 14-28. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city health officer may abate or cause the abatement by any reasonable means any unsanitary, unhealthful, or unsafe condition if not abated by the owner or occupant within five (5) days. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow any authorized inspection of a premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, allow or maintain any unsanitary, unhealthful, or unsafe condition on a premises owned by him or under his care or occupancy after receiving a notice from the city health officer to abate such condition. 
(Ord. No. 93-147, § II, 8-17-93)  
Secs. 14-29—14-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HUMAN SERVICES COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 14.16. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a human services committee to be composed of eleven (11) members appointed by the city council for two-year terms. The committee members shall have staggered terms with six (6) members being appointed during even-numbered years and five (5) members being appointed during odd-numbered years. At its inception, the city council shall appoint six (6) members to the committee for two-year terms and five (5) members to the committee for one-year terms. Members of the committee may be removed by the city council for cause. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner provided for regular appointments. 
(b)  The city manager shall be an ex officio member of the committee. He shall attend all meetings of the committee and shall have the right to discuss any matter that is under consideration by the committee, but shall have no vote. 
(c)  Members of the committee shall be citizens of the city. 
(d)  At the first meeting each year after new members have been sworn in, the committee shall select from its own membership a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. Any five (5) of the regularly appointed members shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall meet as necessary. All meetings shall be open to the public and a permanent record of proceedings maintained. 
(Ord. No. 89-098, § I(2-80), 8-1-89)  
Sec. 14-62. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the human services committee to act in an advisory capacity to the city council and to assist in the coordination of all human services agencies with authority to hold public hearings and to study and recommend policies relating to the promotion, planning, research and related matters involving human services relations and human services delivery in the city. In addition, the human services committee shall have the duty to: 
(1)  Interact with community groups in order to bring about improvements in the human services delivery system and provide a forum which promotes better communication and coordination among the agencies; 
(2)  Serve in an advisory capacity and encourage continuing in-depth evaluation of the effectiveness of the social service delivery system in the city; and 
(3)  Recommend to the city council actions for implementation that would improve human services in the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-098, § I(2-81), 8-1-89)  
Secs. 14-63—14-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-121 , §§ 1—6, 8, adopted April 21, 2015, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 14-86—14-90.1, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2012-367, §§ 1—5, 7, 12-18-12. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention generally, Ch. 11; food establishments generally, § 13-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar means an enclosed indoor establishment that is open to the public and is devoted primarily to the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
Billiard hall means a place of amusement for which the chief purpose is providing the use of billiard/pool tables to the public. 
Bingo parlor means an establishment owned, operated, or administered by a person or entity licensed or permitted by the State of Texas pursuant to V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, Ch. 2001. 
Cigar bar means an establishment used primarily for the sale of cigars, cigar-related products, and alcoholic beverages, and does not allow admittance to or employ persons under the age of eighteen (18), and is equipped with a commercial walk-in humidor of not less than three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet or a reach-in humidor of not less than one hundred eighty (180) cubic feet with a humidifier which maintains a set humidity through evaporation and diffusion and is connected to a reverse osmosis filtration system for constant supply of water. 
Electronic cigarette (e-cigarette) means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor or aerosol of nicotine or any other substance, and the use or inhalation which stimulates the smoking of a tobacco cigarette, pipe or cigar. "Electronic cigarette" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, and electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, electronic hookah, or under any other similar produce name or descriptor. The term electronic cigarette does not include any asthma inhaler or other similar device that has been duly prescribed by a licensed physician. 
Employee means an individual in the service of another under a contract of hire, whether express or implied, or oral or written, for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or an individual who volunteers the individual's services for an employer. 
Employer means a person or entity who uses the services of another under a contract of hire, whether express or implied, or oral or written, or uses the volunteer services of one or more individuals. 
Facility means improvements of a vertical nature, including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds, garages, and stadium structures and excluding horizontal improvements such as sidewalks, streets and parking lots. 
Fraternal organization means a non-profit organization that: 
(1)  Is tax exempt under Section 501(c)(8), (10), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(2)  Operates under a lodge system with a representative form of government; and 
(3)  Is organized for the exclusive benefit of the members of the organization and their dependents. 
Healthcare facility means an office or institution in which care or treatment is provided for physical, mental, or emotional diseases or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions. 
Operator means the owner or person in charge of a public place or place of employment, including an employer. 
Open-aired outdoor patio means an outdoor space generally used for dining or recreation that adjoins a building and typically has an improved floor surface. 
Place of employment means an enclosed facility under the control of a public or private employer, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, construction areas, and temporary offices. This definition does not include such outdoor areas as construction sites, parking lots, or designated smoking areas, or any area where smoking is specifically allowed under this article. 
Private club means an organization that owns, leases, or occupies a building used exclusively for club purposes at all times and: 
(1)  Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; 
(2)  Sells alcoholic beverages only incidentally to its operation; 
(3)  The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting; 
(4)  Has established bylaws or a constitution to govern the club's activities; and 
(5)  Is exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501(a), Internal Revenue Code, as a club described by Section 501(c)(7) of that Code. 
Public place means an enclosed area the public is invited or allowed to enter. 
Restaurant means an enclosed indoor establishment that is open to the public and is devoted primarily to the sale and service of food for immediate consumption. The term includes a bar located within the establishment. 
Retail establishment means any establishment which primarily sells goods and/or services to the general public. 
Smoke/Smoking means to inhale, exhale, burn, or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other smoking equipment, containing tobacco, weed, or other plant product or the use of an electronic cigarette or similar device. 
Tobacco bar means a business that: 
(1)  Holds a permit under V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Ch. 155; 
(2)  Holds an alcoholic beverage permit or license issued under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, Chs. 25, 28, 32, or 69, or under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 11.10; 
(3)  Post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance of the establishment that contains the words "This is a Tobacco Bar. Smoking is permitted in this establishment." and which includes the universal symbol for smoking, or other language that clearly indicates that smoking is permitted in the said establishment; 
(4)  Does not employ or allow admittance of persons under the age of 18; and 
(5)  Generates at least fifteen (15) percent of its quarterly gross revenue from the sale of tobacco or tobacco-related products. 
Tobacco shop means a specialty retail establishment used primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is incidental. 
Vape shop means a specialty retail establishment used primarily for the sale of e-cigarette products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is incidental. 
( Ord. No. 2015-121 , § 1, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 14-87. - Smoking prohibited in certain public places. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to smoke or possess a lit tobacco, weed or other plant product or to smoke an electronic cigarette (e-cigarette) in any of the following public places: 
(1)  An elevator used by the public; 
(2)  Healthcare facilities; 
(3)  Any facility owned, operated or managed by the city; 
(4)  Any vehicle owned by or under the control of the city; 
(5)  Any retail establishment serving the general public except as otherwise permitted in this article; 
(6)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in retirement facilities and nursing homes; 
(7)  Any facility of a primary or secondary school; 
(8)  Child care and adult day care facilities; 
(9)  A privately owned theater auditorium, movie house, or other enclosed facility which is open to the public for the primary purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, musical recital, athletic event, or any other performance or event; 
(10)  Public libraries, including exterior corridors, and any area within thirty (30) feet of any public entrance thereto; 
(11)  Museums; 
(12)  Restaurants; 
(13)  Bars, except as otherwise permitted in this article; 
(14)  Lobbies, hallways, and other indoor public areas in hotels and motels; 
(15)  Bowling alleys; 
(16)  Pool/billiard halls; 
(17)  Polling places; 
(18)  Bingo parlors, except as otherwise permitted in this article; 
(19)  Public transportation vehicles, including buses and trains, and within thirty (30) feet of facilities in support of public transportation such as ticket, boarding, shelter, and waiting areas; 
(20)  Any establishment or facility declared to be non-smoking under section 14-89(b) of this article; 
(21)  Any location which is within thirty (30) feet of a street-front main entrance where smoking is prohibited or, if a business has a front patio where smoking is prohibited, within thirty (30) feet of the boundaries of such patio; 
(22)  On or adjacent to a city owned or operated athletic field or parks facility. "On or adjacent to a city owned or operated athletic field or parks facility" includes playing fields and any improvements of a vertical nature, including but not limited to buildings, dug outs, bleachers, restrooms, concession areas and any areas within thirty (30) feet of such areas, but does not include areas within parking lots and other designated areas containing conspicuous signage that smoking of tobacco products is permitted; and 
(23)  Within thirty (30) feet of any concrete perimeter structure that serves to contain playground fall attenuation material. 
( Ord. No. 2015-121 , § 2, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 2018-891 , § 2, 6-26-18; Ord. No. 2018-1123 , §§ 2—5, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 14-88. - Smoking prohibited in places of employment. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to smoke or possess a lit tobacco, weed or other plant product in places of employment, except as provided in this article. 
(b)  An employer shall communicate this prohibition to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
( Ord. No. 2015-121 , § 3, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 14-89. - Smoking not prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility; 
(2)  Personal vehicles; 
(3)  Private clubs and fraternal organizations; 
(4)  Open-aired outdoor patio of a restaurant or bar; 
(5)  Bingo parlors which provide a solid physical barrier to separate the non-smoking section. Any bingo parlors existing on the date of passage of this article shall have until April 19, 2016 to construct such barrier. Any bingo parlor established after the effective date of this article shall not be entitled to this exception and shall comply with all other provisions of this article; 
(6)  Tobacco shops, tobacco bars, cigar bars, and vape shops; 
(7)  Bars operating as "smoking bars" as of the date of passage of this article: 
a.  Which do not allow admittance of persons under the age of 18; 
b.  Which post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance of the establishment that contains the words "Smoking is permitted in this establishment" and which includes the universal symbol for smoking, or other language that clearly indicates that smoking is permitted in the said establishment; and 
c.  Which do not have an open-aired outdoor patio. 
A bar operating as a "smoking bar" as of the date of passage of this article shall cease operating as a "smoking bar" on or before December 31, 2017 and shall thereafter comply with all provisions of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment or facility described in this section, may declare the entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking establishment by posting the establishment or facility as such pursuant to section 14-90 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-121 , § 4, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 14-90. - Signage. 
(a)  The owner or person in control of an establishment in which smoking is prohibited by this article shall: 
(1)  Post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance to the establishment that shall contain the words "No Smoking, by City of Denton Ordinance" and which includes the universal symbol for no smoking, or other language that clearly prohibits smoking; and 
(2)  Remove all ashtrays from any area in which smoking is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 2015-121 , § 5, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 14-90.1. - Electronic cigarette or paraphernalia. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give an electronic cigarette or any paraphernalia to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
( Ord. No. 2015-121 , § 6, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 14-90.2. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
( Ord. No. 2015-121 , § 8, 4-21-15)  
ARTICLE IV.A. - ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 14-91. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Denton. 
(Ord. No. 2010-209, § 1, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 14-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Illegal smoking product shall mean any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following chemicals: 
(a)  Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts, or any synthetic cannabinoid commonly known or sold under such names as "Spice", "Spice Diamond", "Spice Gold", "Pep Spice", "Yucatan Fire", "Solar Flare", "Fire N' Ice", "Genie", "Dascents", "Zohai", "Sage", "Salvia Divinorum", "K-2 Summet" and "KO Knock-Out 2" and the same synthetic cannabinoid and any analogue or variant thereof by whatsoever name it may be called or any substance similar in nature and sold for the purpose of inducing intoxication in the human body. 
(b)  2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl1}-5-(2-methylocatan-2-yl) phenol ( also known as CP47, 497) and homologues; 
(c)  (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c] chormen-1-o1) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(d)  1-Penty1-3-(1-naphthoy1) indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(e)  Buty1-3-(1-naphthoy1) indole (also known as JWH-073). 
Ingestion device shall mean equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including: 
(a)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(b)  A water pipe; 
(c)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(d)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(e)  A chamber pipe; 
(f)  A carburetor pipe; 
(g)  An electric pipe; 
(h)  An air-driven pipe; 
(i)  A chillum; 
(j)  A bong; or 
(k)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
Persons shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-209, § 1, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 14-93. - Sell, offer, gift, display or possession. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 2010-209, § 1, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 14-94. - Use of possession of ingestion devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 2010-209, § 1, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 14-95. - Defense. 
It shall be a defense to a violation of this article that any act described in this article is under and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-209, § 1, 9-7-10)  
Secs. 14-96—14-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 14-111. - Definitions. 
The definitions of the words and terms in section 28-298 of this Code shall be applicable when those words and terms are used in this article, unless the context should clearly indicate a different meaning.  
Sec. 14-112. - Health officer inspections. 
The health officer is authorized to conduct such inspections as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with: 
(1)  All provisions of this article and of the Denton City Code relating to swimming pools; 
(2)  All provisions of article VI "Swimming Pool Code" of chapter 28 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas that relate to the maintenance and operation of pools; 
(3)  All provisions of Texas Administrative Code, title 25 "Health Services" part 1; Texas Department of Health, chapter 337 (Design Standards for Public Swimming Pool Construction), as amended, that relate to the maintenance and operation of pools; 
(4)  All provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, title 5; Sanitation and Environmental Quality, subtitle A.; Sanitation, chapter 341 (Minimum Standards of Sanitation and Health Protection), as amended; 
(5)  All provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, title 9; Safety, subtitle A.; Public Safety, chapter 757 (Pool Yard Enclosures), as amended. 
and shall have the right of entry at any reasonable hour to the public or semipublic pool for this purpose. 
If same be necessary, Chapters 337, 341 and 757 referenced above are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if copied in full herein. In case of conflict between paragraphs (1)—(5) of this section, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. 
(Code 1966, § 5-178; Ord. No. 97-240, § I, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 14-113. - Permits to operate. 
(a)  No person shall operate or maintain a public or semipublic swimming pool unless he has obtained a permit to operate such pool from the health officer. Such permits shall be valid for one (1) year, unless revoked for a violation of this article. Such permits are not transferable and shall be publicly displayed. 
(b)  The health officer is authorized to promulgate regulations and the city council shall establish fees to cover permits, inspections and other services in connection with the operation and maintenance of public and semipublic swimming pools for the protection and promotion of public health and safety. Such fees shall be set by the city council. 
(c)  An annual fee is hereby established for the inspection of swimming pools in the amount of one hundred sixty dollars ($160.00) for each pool. 
(d)  A fee is hereby established for the certification course for a swimming pool operator in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per student. 
(Code 1966, § 5-179; Ord. No. 90-148, § I, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 97-240, § II, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 98-134, § I, 5-12-98)  
Sec. 14-114. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  The health officer may revoke any permit to operate a public or semipublic swimming pool for failure to comply with this article or in cases where the permit has been obtained through nondisclosure, misrepresentation or misstatement of a material fact. 
(b)  The health officer shall make inspections of public and semipublic swimming pools and shall issue a copy of his inspection report to the pool owner, operator or representative. This report shall include a list of the deficiencies, if any, and shall prescribe corrective action to be taken within a time limit set by the health officer. Chlorine residual should be maintained according to the standard adopted by the state department of health. If significant health hazards exist, the health officer shall close the pool until the offending conditions are corrected. If noncompliance persists after two (2) reinspections, the permit will be revoked by the health officer. 
(c)  Before a permit is revoked, the person to whom the permit has been issued shall have notice in writing enumerating instances of failure to comply with this article. He shall be given an opportunity to appeal to the city manager regarding the reasonableness of the permit revocation. Such an appeal shall be in writing and addressed to the city manager within seven (7) days after the receipt of the revocation notice. If no such appeal is made within the time period provided, the revocation shall become final. 
(d)  Any revoked permit shall be reissued upon proper application and upon presentation of evidence that the deficiencies causing revocation have been corrected. 
(Code 1966, § 5-180)  
Sec. 14-115. - Requirements for both public and semipublic pools. 
(a)  No person having a communicable disease shall be employed or work at a public or semipublic pool. Any person having any considerable area of exposed subepidermal tissue, open blisters, cuts, etc., or having an infectious or communicable disease shall be excluded from a public or semipublic swimming pool. 
(b)  Spitting, spouting of water, blowing the nose, etc., in the swimming pool shall be strictly prohibited. 
(c)  No running or boisterous or rough play, except supervised water sports, shall be permitted in the pool, on the runways, diving boards, floats, platforms or in dressing rooms, shower rooms, etc. 
(d)  No pets shall be permitted in the swimming pool or pool area at any time. The pool area is defined as the decks surrounding the pool but not less than six (6) feet from the nearest edge of the pool. 
(e)  No food, drink or glass containers shall be permitted in the pool area. 
(f)  Every public and semipublic swimming pool shall be under the supervision of a capable individual who shall assume responsibility for compliance with all parts of this article relating to pool operation and maintenance and safety of bathers. Each person shall furnish to the health officer a list of the people to call in case of an emergency, and it shall be such person's responsibility to keep this list current. 
(g)  Contamination due to the presence of dead animals found in a pool will be corrected in a manner to be decided by the health officer on an individual basis. If defecation is detected in a swimming pool, all swimmers shall be immediately required to evacuate the pool and the contamination shall be removed by the most practical means. The health officer will be notified and the pool will be thereafter closed until approval for reopening the pool has been obtained by the health officer. 
(h)  Lifesaving equipment shall include the following: 
(1)  Swimming pools operated primarily for recreational use and having an area of more than two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet of water surface area shall be provided with an elevated lifeguard platform or chair. In pools with four thousand (4,000) square feet or more of water surface area, additional elevated chairs or stations shall be provided, located so as to provide a clear unobstructed view of the pool bottom in the area under surveillance. 
(2)  One (1) unit of lifesaving equipment shall be required and shall consist of a shepherd's crook type of pole having blunted ends with a minimum length capable of reaching the bottom of the middle of the pool from either side. Other lifesaving equipment, such as a ring buoy or a life pole or throwing rope, may be maintained. Not less than one (1) unit of equipment, as above, shall be provided at every public and semipublic swimming pool. One (1) unit shall be presumed to be adequate for two thousand (2,000) square feet of water surface area or less, and one (1) additional unit shall be provided for each additional two thousand (2,000) square feet or major fraction thereof of water surface area. 
(3)  Lifesaving equipment shall be mounted in conspicuous, accessible places and kept in repair and ready for use. 
(i)  Sampling for bacteriological analysis will be done when the pool is at peak or near-peak capacity. Bacteriological water sample results will be made known to the person or his representative with recommendations if any. Heavy bacteriological contamination of the pool may result in the health officer's recommendation to close a pool until the condition has been corrected. 
(j)  Depth of water shall be plainly marked at or above the water service on the vertical wall of the swimming pool and on the edge of the deck or walk next to the swimming pool at maximum and minimum points and at the points of break between the deep and shallow portions and at intermediate increments of depth, those increments being located at approximately two-foot intervals. Those pools that combine swimming facilities for both children and adults shall provide a safety line supported by buoys and attached to the side walls of the pool. This line shall be located at the breaking point of the pool or at a depth of no more than five (5) feet. "Breaking point" is defined as the peripheral edge that separates the shallow from the deep area of a swimming pool. 
(Code 1966, § 5-181)  
Sec. 14-116. - Requirements for public pools. 
In addition to the requirements of section 14-115, public pools will comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Competent lifeguards shall be on duty during all swimming periods. 
(2)  Public pools shall have a certified swimming pool operator within five (5) minutes call at all times the pool is open. 
(3)  Toilet and shower facilities shall be provided on the basis of the following fixture schedule: 
	Males 	Females 
Water closets 	1/75  	1/50  
Urinals 	1/75  	0 
Lavatories 	1/100 	1/100 
Showers (minimum of two (2)) 	1/50  	1/50  
 
(4)  All persons using the swimming pool shall take a cleansing shower bath before entering the swimming pool room or enclosure. 
(5)  A daily log of activities, to include as a minimum a record of the readings of the pH and chlorine residual every two (2) hours the pool is open, will be required. 
(Code 1966, § 5-182)  
Sec. 14-117. - Requirements for semipublic pools. 
In addition to the requirements recorded in section 14-115, semipublic pools shall keep a daily log of activities, to include as a minimum a record of the readings of the pH and chlorine residuals at least daily during the period of peak activity. A more frequent recording may be required by the health officer and will be determined on an individual scheduling and needs basis. 
(Code 1966, § 5-183)  
Sec. 14-118. - Disinfection and quality of water. 
(a)  Swimming pools in use shall be continuously disinfected by a chemical which can be easily measured for residual effect. If chlorine or other halogens are used, residuals of equivalent disinfecting strength shall be maintained. A testing kit for measuring the concentration of the disinfectant, accurate within 0.2 ppm, shall be provided at each swimming pool. The health officer may accept other disinfecting materials or methods when they have been adequately demonstrated to provide a satisfactory residual effect which is easily measured and to otherwise be equally as effective under conditions of use as the chlorine concentration required in this section and not be dangerous to public health, create objectionable physiological effects or impart toxic properties to the water. 
(b)  The swimming pool water shall be maintained in an alkaline condition as indicated by a pH of not less than 7.2 and not over 8.2. A pH testing kit accurate to the nearest 0.2 pH unit shall be provided at each swimming pool. The alkalinity of the water shall be at least 50 ppm as measured by the Methyl Orange test. 
(c)  All samples shall be collected, dechlorinated and examined in accordance with the procedures outlined in the latest edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (APHA). Bacteriological water sample results will be made known to the owner or his representative with recommendations, if any. Chemicals used in controlling the quality of water shall be demonstrated as imparting no toxic properties to the water. Chemicals used for algae control shall be approved by the health officer. 
(d)  The water, at all times when the pool is in use, shall be sufficiently clear to permit a black disc six (6) inches in diameter on a white field, when placed on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly visible from the sidewalks of the pool at all distances up to ten (10) yards, measured from a line drawn across the pool through the disc. 
(Code 1966, § 5-184)  
ARTICLE VI. - NEIGHBORHOOD EMPOWERMENT PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-013, § 1, adopted January 15, 2013, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 14-131—14-135, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2001-035, § 1, 1-16-01. 
 
Sec. 14-119. - Establishment and purpose. 
There is hereby established a neighborhood empowerment program (NEP) to provide matching city funds or in-kind services to help improve the quality of life in the city's neighborhoods. The goal of the NEP is to encourage and select prepared projects which meet the program guidelines set forth herein that foster self-help, self-management, neighborhood pride, and enhance and beautify the city's neighborhoods. The NEP will provide matching funds or in-kind services which are to be awarded on the bases of merit. A maximum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) will be available per project. The total available funding will be established in each budget year based on the amount budgeted for the NEP as approved by the city council in the annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 2013-013, § 1, 1-15-13)  
Sec. 14-120. - Neighborhood empowerment program advisory board. 
(a)  There is hereby created a neighborhood empowerment advisory board which shall be composed of seven (7) members. The city manager shall designate one member of the board from the parks and recreation, engineering, planning, police, economic development, code enforcement, and community development departments. 
(b)  The board will evaluate each application to participate in the NEP based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Project description and statement of qualifications: Precise description of project, which includes needs, benefits to the neighborhood, and sound budget. 
(2)  Implementation, tasks, and schedule: Clear demonstration of how the project will be accomplished. 
(3)  Volunteers, participation, and donations: Demonstrated participations of residents in the project and documented matching forms of letters, in-kind services, or donation of materials, or other secured funding sources. 
(c)  The board will act as an advisor to the city council in administering the NEP. It will make recommendations to the city council with regard to changes in the NEP guidelines, the success of the NEP, and the funding level of NEP which responsibilities shall include, without limitation: 
(1)  Making recommendations to the city council with respect to annual budget appropriations for the NEP. 
(2)  Making periodic reports to the city council with regard to the status and effectiveness of the NEP. 
(3)  Administering the NEP to ensure that the successful applicants comply with the terms and conditions of the NEP. 
(4)  Promulgate rules and establishing procedures to aid the board in performing its functions. 
(Ord. No. 2013-013, § 1, 1-15-13)  
Sec. 14-121. - Eligible program and projects. 
Individuals from five (5) or more separate households and living within the city limits may submit an application to the City of Denton Neighborhood Planning Program (CDNPP). The CDNPP shall establish, with the approval of the board, additional guidelines to make sure that applications are approved on the basis of merit and are consistent with NEP guidelines. Any project which promotes the public health, safety or welfare of the city by accomplishing one or more of the public purposes set forth in section 14-119 above and the preambles to the ordinance which enacts the NEP by enhancing the appearance and improving the quality of life in Denton's neighborhoods is eligible. Such projects must include the following: 
(a)  All projects are required to have a citizen project coordinator to be a liaison between the city and the neighborhood during project development implementation. 
(b)  Matching fund awards will be made only to groups of five or more separate households who can be identified with a particular Denton neighborhood. Awards will not be made to individuals, single businesses, universities, hospitals, institutions, foundations, political, fraternal, or religious organizations. Government and public agencies, social services district councils, citywide groups, and city developments are also not eligible for the program. Eligible applicants may form partnerships with any of these ineligible groups to plan and implement the project. But the eligible applicant must retain the primary role in the partnership and remain responsible for performing the project. 
(c)  Project criteria (applicability is based on project and program types): 
(1)  Provide long-term, public benefits to the neighborhood. 
(2)  Be located on public access (right-of-way, neighborhood, common area, or other public access property). 
(3)  Have demonstrated neighborhood support. 
(4)  Be compatible with adjacent properties. 
(5)  Involve neighborhood residents directly in all phases. 
(6)  Have goals which can normally be accomplished within twelve (12) months or less. 
(7)  Must demonstrate appropriate long-term maintenance programs. 
(8)  Be within the city's legal authority as determined by the city's legal department and comply with existing City of Denton's codes, regulations and policies. 
(d)  All projects shall fall within one of the following categories: 
(1)  Physical improvements to neighborhood entryways, perimeter areas, street borders and medians, parks, playgrounds, tot lots, and other neighborhood amenity areas. Such improvements may include landscaping, tree plantings, signage, equipment, decorative structures, and similar beautification or enhancement projects. Physical improvement projects must be performed in a public right-of-way or on public property. Projects on property owned by a neighborhood or homeowners association will be considered on a case by case basis, if it is shown to provide a communal benefit to the neighborhood. 
(2)  Public safety programs or initiatives, such as safety training, crime or fire prevention programs, traffic deterrent or calming projects or studies. 
(3)  Cultural, educational, and recreation programs including literacy programs, leadership training, computer labs, after-school enrichment programs, cultural arts programs, and summer camps. 
(4)  Neighborhood master plan or comparable studies that focus on enhancing the neighborhood. These must not contain plans currently being developed by the city. 
(e)  In order to obtain matching city funds or services from the neighborhood empowerment program, the neighborhood must identify matched items of equal value of the amount requested. Matched items that can be donated, include professional services, donated material or supplies, volunteer labor or cash. The value of the neighborhood match must equal or exceed the amount requested from the neighborhood requested matching NEP funds. The type of the match must be appropriate to the needs of the project. The proposed match must be extended during the life of the project or after completion. 
(Ord. No. 2013-013, § 1, 1-15-13)  
Sec. 14-122. - Application for neighborhood empowerment program matching funds. 
(a)  The applicant must attend one (1) of the four (4) neighborhood empowerment program matching grant workshops. 
(b)  Applications for neighborhood empowerment program matching funds under this article must be filed with the city's neighborhood planning program upon forms described by the board and the department for that purpose. 
(c)  The application shall include all information indicated by this article VI along with any additional information that the board deems necessary in order to perform its functions as set forth in section 14-120. 
(d)  All applications shall be verified by the applicant as to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented. 
(e)  All successful applicants shall be required to execute a contract on a form approved by the city attorney and to execute such other forms as the neighborhood planning program and the board deem necessary to insure the approved projects completion. 
(Ord. No. 2013-013, § 1, 1-15-13)  
Sec. 14-123. - Review, approval and denial by the board. 
(a)  If the CDNPP determines the application is consistent with the requirements of this article VI, the CDNPP shall forward the application to the board for its evaluation. The board shall review the application based on a matching fund project evaluation form developed by the CDNPP and approved by the board which takes into consideration all the criteria for evaluation set forth in this article. 
(b)  The board will make a recommendation to fund qualified projects to the city manager for final approval. 
(c)  If an application is approved or denied by the board, the successful applicant will be notified within thirty (30) days after the application submission is forwarded to the board by the CDNPP. Authorization to begin the project will be given after the applicant executes the contract. 
(d)  If a grant proposal is denied by the board, the applicant has thirty (30) days to appeal the board's decision, as applicable, to either the city's human services advisory committee or the community development advisory committee for funding approval or denial. 
(e)  Standard of review on appeal. In the event a grant proposal is denied by the board, other than for a lack of funding in which no appeal is authorized, the applicant has thirty (30) days to appeal the board's decision, as applicable, to either the city's human services advisory committee or the community development advisory committee. 
(1)  The human services advisory committee will review appeals associated with: 
i.  Public safety programs or initiatives, such as safety training, crime or fire prevention programs, traffic deterrent or calming projects or studies. 
ii.  Cultural, educational, and recreation programs including literacy programs, leadership training, computer labs, after-school enrichment programs, cultural arts programs, and summer camps. 
iii.  Neighborhood master plan or comparable studies that focus on enhancing the neighborhood. These must not contain plans currently being developed by the city. 
(2)  The community development advisory committee will review appeals associated with: 
i.  Physical improvements to neighborhood entryways, perimeter areas, street borders and medians, parks, playgrounds, tot lots, and other neighborhood amenity areas. Such improvements may include landscaping, tree plantings, signage, equipment, decorative structures, and similar beautification or enhancement projects. Physical improvement projects must be performed in a public right-of-way or on public property. Projects on property owned by a neighborhood or homeowners association will be considered on a case by case basis, if it is shown to provide a communal benefit to the neighborhood. 
(3)  At a public hearing relative to an appeal, each appeals committee shall render their decision based on if the grant proposal has met the following criteria: 
i.  Provide long term, public benefit to the neighborhood. 
ii.  Be located on publicly accessed property (right-of-way, neighborhood common area, etc.). 
iii.  Have demonstrated neighborhood support. 
iv.  Be compatible with adjacent properties. 
v.  Involve neighborhood residents directly in all phases. 
vi.  Have goals which can be accomplished normally in twelve (12) months or less. 
vii.  Must demonstrate appropriate long-term maintenance. 
viii.  Be within the city's legal authority and comply with existing City of Denton policies and codes. 
(4)  The decisions of the appeals committee will be final however, in no event will the denial of a grant application preclude the applicant from reapplying to subsequent neighborhood empowerment program grants. 
(Ord. No. 2013-013, § 1, 1-15-13)  
Secs. 14-124—14-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-192, § 1, adopted June 17, 2015 , repealed §§ 14-200—14-202, which pertained to prohibition of hydraulic fracturing and derived from Initiative Ord. No. 2014-01, § 2, 11-18-14 . 
 
Secs. 14-200—14-202. - Reserved.  
Chapter 15 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Building permits, use and occupancy certificates, § 10.10. 
Cross reference— Cable television, Ch. 8; fire prevention generally, Ch. 11; smoke detectors in dwelling units, § 11-81 et seq.; solid waste generally, Ch. 24; house numbering, § 25-9 et seq.; construction and repair of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, § 25-51 et seq.; utilities generally, Ch. 26; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28; building code, § 28-26 et seq.; electrical code, § 28-61 et seq.; plumbing code, § 28-141 et seq.; mechanical code, § 28-251 et seq.; fire prevention code, Ch. 29; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 30; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicles, Ch. 32. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 15-26. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the Denton Fair Housing Ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-1)  
Sec. 15-27. - Declaration of policy. 
It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city by ensuring the opportunity for every person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, sex, handicap, familial status, religion or national origin. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-2; Ord. No. 90-083, § I, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 15-28. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the individual serving as the fair housing administrator and includes the assistants, agents or employees designated by the administrator. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 15-32 of this article. 
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one (1) or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Familial status means one (1) or more individuals, who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years, being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. 
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Handicap means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment. 
Handicap does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802). 
Person includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-3; Ord. No. 90-083, § II, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 15-29. - Administration. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this article shall be the individual appointed as the fair housing administrator by the city manager. 
(b)  The administrator may delegate any of his functions, duties and powers to employees of the city under his direction, including functions, duties and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business or matter under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-8)  
Sec. 15-30. - Cooperation with federal and state agencies. 
The administrator and city attorney are authorized to cooperate with federal and state agencies charged with the administration of fair housing laws. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-12)  
Sec. 15-31. - Education and public information. 
In order to further the intent and objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-13)  
Sec. 15-32. - Discriminatory housing practices. 
Except as exempted by section 15-35 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status or national origin. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status or national origin. 
(3)  Make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(6)  Discriminate against handicapped persons in the following manner: 
a.  To discriminate in the sale or rental or to otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
1.  The buyer or renter; 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
3.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter; 
b.  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling because of a handicap of: 
1.  The person; 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
3.  Any person associated with the person. 
c.  For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes: 
1.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
2.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
3.  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is thirty (30) months after the date of enactment of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (enacted Sept. 13, 1988), a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: 
i.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
ii.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped person in wheelchairs; and 
iii.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
A. An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
B.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
C.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
D.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
d.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, commonly cited as ANSI A117.1, suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (6)c.3.iii. of this section. 
e.  As used in this subsection, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means: 
1.  Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have one (1) or more elevators; and 
2.  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units. 
f.  Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-4; Ord. No. 90-083, § III, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 15-33. - Discrimination in financing of housing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real-estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "residential real-estate-related transaction" means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or 
b.  Secured by residential real estate. 
(2)  The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property. 
(c)  Nothing in this article prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-5; Ord. No. 90-083, § IV, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 15-34. - Discrimination in provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other services, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-6; Ord. No. 90-083, § V, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 15-35. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  Nothing in section 15-32, other than subsection (3), shall apply to the following: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided: 
a.  That such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; 
b.  That in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four-month period; 
c.  That such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; 
d.  The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this section only if such house is sold or rented: 
1.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and 
2.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 15-32(3); but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his residence; 
(3)  Rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied by no more than one (1) family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four (4) such rooms are offered. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  The person has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  The person has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  The person is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five (5) or more families. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted because of race, color, sex, familial status or national origin. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit any person from owning and operating a dwelling in which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex when such dwelling contains one (1) common lavatory and kitchen facility available for the use of all persons occupying such dwelling. 
(f)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any other ordinance or state or federal law restricting the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling nor does any provision in this article regarding familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons. As used in this subsection, "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; 
(2)  Intended for and solely occupied by persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit. 
(g)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 802. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-7; Ord. No. 90-083, § VI, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 15-36. - Enforcement; complaints. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he/she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur, hereinafter referred to as the "person aggrieved," may request assistance from the administrator to file a complaint with the Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Division of the Region VI office of the U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development. The administrator, if requested by the person aggrieved, may assist with preparation and submission of the complaint to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(b)  Whenever the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern or practice of resistance to the full enjoyment of any of the rights granted by this article or that any group of persons has been denied any of the rights granted by this article, administrator may prepare and file a complaint setting forth the facts in his own name, and such complaint shall be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  If, upon electing to initiate action on the complaint, the administrator has been unable to secure voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article within sixty (60) days after the complaint was filed, yet reasonably believes that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, the administrator may refer such alleged violation to the city attorney for prosecution. 
(d)  The municipal court in which a proceeding is instituted under this article shall assign the case for hearing at the earliest practicable date and cause the case to be in every way expedited. 
(e)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, as amended (42 U.S.C. 3610), and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as other complaints filed pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Whenever the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern or practice of resistance to the full enjoyment of any of the rights granted by this article or that any group of persons has been denied any of the rights granted by this article, he may prepare and file a complaint setting forth the facts in his own name, and such complaint shall be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-9; Ord. No. 99-209, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2009-282, § 1, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 15-37. - Cumulative legal effect. 
This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue.  
Sec. 15-38. - Interference, coercion or intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of or because of his having exercised or enjoyed or because of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by sections 15-32 through 15-35 of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 9½-11)  
Chapter 16 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Permit for aircraft advertising flights, § 3-86 et seq.; alarm system permits, § 4-26 et seq.; alcoholic beverage licenses and permits, §§ 5-1, 5-2; prohibited animal permits, § 6-23 et seq.; cable television franchise, Ch. 8; occupation taxes generally, § 10-46 et seq.; food handler permits, § 13-61 et seq.; police-initiated towing service permit, § 23-96 et seq.; private waste haulers license, § 24-69 et seq.; permit for selling or vending on streets or sidewalks, § 25-6; right-of-way construction permits, § 25-71 et seq.; parade permits, § 25-201 et seq.; industrial or commercial wastewater discharge permits, § 26-201 et seq.; passenger bus permits, § 27-41 et seq.; taxicab licenses, § 27-67 et seq.; electrical licenses and permits, § 28-111 et seq.; plumbing permits, § 28-206 et seq.; fence construction permits, § 28-377 et seq.; mobile home and recreational vehicle park permits, § 32-36 et seq.; mobile home and recreational park licenses, § 32-61 et seq.; sign licenses and permits, § 33-36 et seq.; zoning specific use permits, § 35-106 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUNK DEALERS AND DEALERS IN SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste generally, Ch. 24. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junk means and includes scrap iron, tin, brass, steel, copper, lead, zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys; old bones; old rags; foil; old chain; rope or glass; wastepaper; used or damaged jars and bottles; unserviceable machines, devices and tools; unserviceable parts of machines, devices and tools; unserviceable or wrecked automobiles purchased from the general public for the purpose of being dismantled; and unserviceable parts and accessories of automobiles and any other article in such condition of hurt, damage, injury or wear as to make it no longer usable for the purpose originally intended and of such condition as not to be at least to some extent restorable to its former state of service. 
Junk dealer means any person who irregularly or continually, either at wholesale or retail, buys, sells or deals in junk, whether as an itinerant or at a fixed place of business. 
Secondhand dealer means any person carrying on or pursuing the business of buying, selling, bartering or exchanging predominantly used or predominantly secondhand motor vehicles, tires and tubes, clothing, machines, firearms, weapons, radios, appliances or devices or parts of machines, appliances or devices. A dealer will be deemed to be predominantly in such business if more than one-half of his transactions during any month of the calendar year involves used or secondhand merchandise. 
(Code 1966, § 20-33) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-27. - Reports required; subject to inspection. 
(a)  Every junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall legibly write, in duplicate, an official report, the form of which is to be approved by the city secretary, of any junk or secondhand merchandise purchased by or deposited for any purpose with such dealer, together with an accurate description in the English language of the article purchased or deposited; the amount of money paid for the article or loaned thereon; the time and date of the purchase or deposit; the name, sex and address, if known, of the person selling or depositing the junk or secondhand merchandise. 
(b)  The official reports shall be numbered consecutively and signed by the junk dealer or secondhand dealer or his agent. 
(c)  The reports required in this section shall at all times during ordinary working hours be opened to the inspection of the chief of police or any police officer. 
(d)  If such reports are not accurately kept and available, the entire inventory of the dealer's business shall be subject to reasonable inspection by the chief of police or any police officer. 
(Code 1966, § 20-40)  
Sec. 16-28. - Purchase of junk or secondhand merchandise from minors. 
No junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall purchase or receive in pledge or on deposit for any purpose any article of junk or secondhand merchandise from any minor which may be owned, claimed by or in the possession or control of the minor, unless the parents or guardian of the minor shall state in writing that the transaction is with the parents' or guardian's full knowledge or consent, which written statement shall be signed by such parents or guardian and shall have thereon the address and telephone number, if any, of such parents or guardian. 
(Code 1966, § 20-39)  
Secs. 16-29—16-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 16-46. - Required. 
Each and every junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall obtain an annual license to pursue such business from the city secretary. 
(Code 1966, § 20-34)  
Sec. 16-47. - Application form, contents. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license as a junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall file with the city secretary a written application upon a form provided by the city and signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(b)  Each application shall contain the name and address of each applicant, if an individual or a partnership, or if a corporation, its name, principal place of business and the name and address of each of the officers of the corporation. Each application shall state the place where such business is to be located or conducted. 
(c)  The application for the license shall be made at least ten (10) days prior to the issuance of the license. 
(Code 1966, § 20-38)  
Sec. 16-48. - Term. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall terminate on January 1 next succeeding the issuance date. 
(Code 1966, § 20-35)  
Sec. 16-49. - Transferability. 
No license issued pursuant to this division shall be transferable, either from person to person or from place to place. 
(Code 1966, § 20-36)  
Sec. 16-50. - Numbering; contents. 
All licenses required under this division shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state the location of the place of business, the date of issuance, date of expiration and the name and address of the licensee. 
(Code 1966, § 20-37)  
Secs. 16-51—16-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-103, § 1, adopted April 6, 2004, repealed art. III, §§ 16-71—16-77, 16-91—16-96, in its entirety. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1966, §§ 20-51, 20-52, 20-60; Ord. No. 88-096, §§ I, I(20-53—20-63), adopted June 7, 1988. 
Cross reference— Soliciting business or charitable contributions on streets, § 25-5. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-71. - Purpose. 
This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and its citizens, and all of the provisions of this article shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 16-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agricultural vendor means an individual engaged in selling only products which are planted and or naturally harvested including fruits, vegetables, plants, trees, nuts or honey. 
Conviction means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. 
Day labor site means a designated portion of the property located at 221 W. Collins Street where soliciting employment is allowed without a permit. The day labor site shall not include any area within fifty (50) feet of the intersection of the day labor site driveway entrance and West Collins Street. Nor shall the day labor site include any area within twenty (20) feet of any curb-line of the city streets adjacent to the property at 221 W. Collins Street. Additionally, if any fencing, shrubbery, or other physical barrier is added to the property at 221 W. Collins Street, then the day labor site shall only include the area of the property inside of the physical barrier. 
Goods or merchandise means any personal property of any nature whatsoever, except printed material. 
Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, flyer, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed matter of literature which is not delivered by United States mail, including, but not limited to, those which: 
(1)  Advertise for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; 
(2)  Direct attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)  Direct attention to or advertise any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the sole purpose of private gain or profit. 
Handbill distributor means and includes any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills. 
Handbill sponsor means and includes any person, firm or corporation who utilizes handbills as a medium of advertising or spreading a message. 
Home solicitation transaction means a transaction or the purchase of goods or services, payable in installments or cash, in which the home solicitor engages in a personal solicitation of a sale to a person at a residence. A home solicitation transaction shall not include a sale made pursuant to a preexisting retail charge agreement or a sale made pursuant to prior negotiations between the parties at a business establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale or a sale of realty, in which transaction the purchaser is represented by a licensed attorney or in which the transaction is being negotiated by a licensed real estate broker. 
Home solicitor means a person who goes from house to house or from place to place soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, merchandise or services, this includes distribution of handbills left at any residence. 
Itinerant merchant means a person who sets up and operates a temporary business within the premises of another business or location in the city soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods or services. An itinerant merchant does not include a person who operates a temporary business completely within a building of an existing business with the express permission of the owner or operator of that business or building. 
Multiunit complex means two (2) or more dwellings in one or more buildings that are: 
(1)  Under common ownership; 
(2)  Managed by the same owner, agent, or management company; and 
(3)  Located on the same lot or tract or adjacent lots or tracts of land. 
Police chief means the chief of police or his designee of the city. 
Residence means any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means any conduct or act whereby a person: 
(1)  Either orally or in writing, asks for a ride, employment, goods, services, financial aid, monetary gifts, or any article representing monetary value, for any purpose in any public place; 
(2)  Either orally or in writing, sells or offers for sale goods, services, or publications; 
(3)  Distributes without remuneration goods or services. 
Soliciting does not include requesting a ride, employment, goods, services, or financial aid from a friend or relative. 
Solicitor means a person who engages in soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2004-207, § 1, 7-20-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-73. - Hours for home solicitation. 
(a)  A person shall not go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell or rap or knock upon the door or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in a home solicitation transaction: 
(1)  Before 9:00 a.m. or after the earlier of dusk or 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, or 
(2)  Before 10:00 a.m. or after the earlier of dusk or 9:00 p.m. Saturday or Sunday; 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a), dusk means thirty (30) minutes after sunset. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or an appointment made by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2017-217 , § 1, 8-1-17)  
Sec. 16-74. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for a person engaged in soliciting under this article to: 
(1)  Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation; 
(2)  Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to make a purchase from that solicitor; 
(3)  Represent the issuance of any permit under this article as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation; 
(4)  Fail to carry a valid driver's license or identification card issued by the State of Texas or the state in which the defendant resides; 
(5)  Solicit operators or passengers in or on a motor vehicle on any public street. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2004-207, § 2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 16-75. - Exhibiting card prohibiting solicitors and/or handbill distributors. 
(a)  A person desiring that no merchant or other person engage in a home solicitation at his residence or at a multi-unit complex which he owns or manages shall exhibit in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance/entrances to the residence or multi unit complex a weatherproof card, or sign not less than two (2) inches by four (4) inches in size, containing the words, "No Solicitors" or No Handbills. "The letters shall be not less than two-thirds of an inch in height. Multi-unit complexes may also give notice of no soliciting by painting the words, "No Solicitors" or "No Handbills" on the curbs at major entrances to the multi-unit complex. 
(b)  Every solicitor upon going onto any premises upon which a residence is located shall first examine the residence or multi unit complex to determine if any notice prohibiting soliciting or handbill distribution is exhibited upon or near the main entrance to the residence or multi unit complex. If notice-prohibiting soliciting is exhibited, the solicitor shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant. 
(c)  No person shall go upon any residential or multi unit complex premises and ring the doorbell or rap or knock upon the door or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a home solicitation transaction if a card as described in subsection (a) of this section is exhibited in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance(s) to the residence or multi-unit complex, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant. 
(d)  No person shall distribute handbills upon any residential or multi unit complex premises if notice as described in subsection (a) of this section is exhibited in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance(s) to the residence or multi-unit complex. It is prima facie evidence that the handbill sponsor is fully responsible for the placement or distribution of the handbills. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 16-76. - Soliciting on city property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on property owned by the city, unless such person has entered into a license agreement with the city. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to execute and enter into license agreements with solicitors authorizing the use of a tract or portion thereof of city property where specific findings are made that the proposed use: 
(1)  Will not violate the provisions of the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.007 or V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.03; 
(2)  Will not cause or contribute significantly to congestion on the public sidewalks so as to render access to abutting private property unreasonably inconvenient. 
(c)  The licensee shall pay a rental fee based upon square footage. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places generally, Ch. 25.  
Sec. 16-77. - Additional requirements for itinerant merchants. 
(a)  Itinerant merchants shall not block fire lanes. 
(b)  Itinerant merchants shall provide a portable toilet or obtain written permission from the property owner to use the rest room facilities. 
(c)  Itinerant merchants shall not obstruct traffic site triangles. 
(d)  Itinerant merchants shall not obstruct required parking spaces. 
(e)  Itinerant merchants shall be set back from the edge of the right of way by at least fifteen feet. 
(f)  Itinerant merchants shall meet all requirements of the Denton Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 16-78. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business calling upon or dealing with manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors or retailers at their places of business. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to anyone or any group who is required to get a special events permit through the city parks and recreation department or to the North Texas State Fair. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to a person soliciting employment at the day labor site. 
(d)  Sections 16-77(b), 16-91, 16-95 shall not apply to agricultural vendors not engaging in any home solicitation or to organizations whose membership consists primarily of persons under 18 years of age, such as Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, school organizations, youth sports organizations, and charitable or religious youth organizations. See Denton Code of Ordinances, chapter 25. However, any agricultural vendor who engages in any home solicitation must comply with the permit requirements and all other sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2007-098, § 1, 5-15-07)  
Secs. 16-79—16-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 16-91. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant, handbill distributor, solicitor or home solicitor to distribute handbills or engage in soliciting within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city. If the solicitation is for charitable, religious or educational purposes, these solicitations shall be governed by sections 25-5, 25-5.1, and 25-5.2. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, §; 2, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2004-207, § 3, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 16-92. - Affirmative defenses to permit requirement. 
The following shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 16-91 of this article: 
That the solicitor is on the property by invitation of the person residing on such premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 16-93. - Application; duration renewal. 
(a)  Any person who wishes to engage in soliciting, home solicitation, handbill distribution or any itinerant merchant who wishes to solicit within the city shall file a written application with the police chief, which application shall show the following: 
(1)  Proof of the identity and home address of the applicant and the name and address of the employer or firm that such applicant represents; 
(2)  A brief description of the nature, character and quality of the goods to be sold, or a copy of the handbills to be distributed; 
(3)  If employed by another, the name and business address of the person, firm, association, organization or corporation; 
(4)  For any and all motor vehicles which are to be used, a description of all the vehicles, together with the motor vehicle registration numbers of all the vehicles, and the license numbers of all the vehicles; 
(5)  A description of the proposed location of the solicitation or handbill distribution; 
(6)  The period of time the applicant so wishes to solicit, sell, take orders or distribute handbills in the city; 
(7)  The names of other communities in which the applicant has worked as a solicitor or handbill distributor in the past twelve (12) months, and, if he was employed by a different company in those communities, the name of those companies shall also be stated; 
(b)  The applicant or any agent of the applicant must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States; 
(2)  Hold a valid driver's license or identification card issued by the State of Texas or the state in which the defendant resides; 
(3)  Be able to communicate in the English language; 
(4)  Not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability that is likely to endanger the public health or safety; 
(5)  Not have been convicted or placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Criminal homicide as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code Chapter 19; 
2.  Kidnapping as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code Chapter 20; 
3.  A sexual offense as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code Chapter 21; 
4.  An assaultive offense as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code Chapter 22, other than a Class C misdemeanor; 
5.  Robbery as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 29; 
6.  Burglary as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code Chapter 30; 
7.  Theft as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code, Chapter 31, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony; 
8.  Fraud as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code Chapter 32; 
9.  Tampering with a governmental record as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code Chapter 37; 
10.  Public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code Chapter 43; 
11.  The transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code, Chapter 46, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony; 
12.  A violation of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Chapter 483, Dangerous Drugs, of the that is punishable as a felony; 
13.  A violation of the Controlled Substances Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Chapter 481 that is punishable as a felony; or 
14.  Criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in 1. through 13. of this subsection; 
b.  For which: 
1.  If the applicant was convicted for a misdemeanor offense, less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date; 
2.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a misdemeanor offense, less than two years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
3.  If the applicant was convicted for a felony offense, less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction or the date of release from parole, whichever is the later date; 
4.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a felony offense, less than five years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
5.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses; or 
6.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication for the last offense, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the applicant has been placed on probation or deferred adjudication two or more times for any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses; 
c.  Not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics; 
d.  Be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest; 
e.  An applicant who has been sentenced for an offense listed in Subsection (b)(5)(a.) 1-8 which is a felony level offense or criminal attempt of (b)(5)(a) 1-8 for which the required time period provided by this article has elapsed, may qualify only if the chief of police or his designee determines that the applicant is presently fit to engage in solicitation or handbill distribution. In determining present fitness under this section, the chief or his designee shall consider the following: 
1.  The extent and nature of the applicant's past criminal activity; 
2.  The age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the crime; 
3.  The amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant's last criminal activity; 
4.  The conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and following the criminal activity; 
5.  Evidence of the applicant's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and 
6.  Other evidence of the applicant's present fitness, including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the applicant; the sheriff and chief of police or his designee in the community where the applicant resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant. 
f.  It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to secure and provide to the chief or his designee the evidence required to determine present fitness under subsection e. of this section. 
g.  Proof of a sales tax permit issued by the state or proof that the goods sold are not subject to such sales tax; and 
h.  An itinerant merchant who makes application to offer his goods for sale upon private property shall provide written proof that he has permission to use such property from the owner or the owner's agent. 
i.  The applicant shall present written proof of his authority to represent the company or individual he states he represents. 
j.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, and no permit shall be issued until such fee has been paid by such applicant. 
k.  A permit requested under this article shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed thirty (30) days for solicitors and not to exceed fourteen (14) days for itinerant merchants. 
l.  Upon expiration of a permit, the solicitor or itinerant merchant may not apply for a new permit for a period of thirty (30) days for the same business and/or location. Application for a subsequent permit must be made in the manner prescribed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2004-207, § 4, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 16-94. - Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to issue such applicant a permit to solicit or sell or take orders for such goods, services or merchandise set forth in the applicant's application within five (5) working days of the receipt of a completed application and prescribed fee, unless it has been determined that the application contains false information or the person does not meet the criteria set forth in this article. If the application contains false information or the person does not meet the criteria set forth in this article, the chief shall not issue the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 16-95. - Permit card. 
(a)  Upon issuance of a permit required under this division, the permittee shall be issued a card which shall contain the name of the permittee, the permit number and date of expiration. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any home solicitor or itinerant merchant to solicit in the city without carrying the required permit card on his person and a driver's license or identification card. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an itinerant merchant to solicit at locations other than those listed in his application for a permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person soliciting to fail or refuse to display such permit card upon the request of any person demanding the card. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to duplicate or xerox or otherwise display a facsimile of a permit card issued pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2004-113, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 16-96. - Solicitation in selected public rights-of-way prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, at any time in the public rights of ways, with or without a permit, on the following streets: 
(1)  Bell Avenue. 
(2)  Bonnie Brae. 
(3)  Carroll Boulevard. 
(4)  Colorado Boulevard. 
(5)  Dallas Drive. 
(6)  Eagle Drive. 
(7)  Elm Street. 
(8)  Ft. Worth Drive. 
(9)  Hickory Street. 
(10)  Interstate Highway 35, 35 East, 35 West and all service roads. 
(11)  Lillian Miller Parkway. 
(12)  Locust Street. 
(13)  Loop 288. 
(14)  McKinney Street. 
(15)  Oak Street. 
(16)  Teasley Lane. 
(17)  University Drive/Highway 380. 
(18)  Woodrow Lane.  
Secs. 16-97—16-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING AND SALVAGE YARDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles generally, Ch. 18; abandoned motor vehicles, § 20-41 et seq.; police-initiated towing services, § 23-81 et seq.; solid waste generally, Ch. 24; zoning generally, Ch. 35. 
 
Sec. 16-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automotive wrecking and salvage yards means any lot or tract of land whereon three (3) or more discarded, abandoned, junked, wrecked or wornout automotive vehicles, including but not limited to autos, trucks, tractor-trailers and buses, are kept or stored for the purpose of disassembling, dismantling, cutting up, stripping or otherwise wrecking such automotive vehicles to extract therefrom parts, components or accessories for sale or for use in an automotive repair or rebuilding business. 
Solid means constructed and maintained so that the outer surface thereof is continuous and without interstices, gaps, spaces or holes. This shall not be construed to prohibit any spaces or gaps left by a properly constructed and maintained chainlink fence with strips or slats as provided in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 20-71) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-127. - Property subject to inspection. 
All automotive vehicles, parts and other materials located in or on the premises of any automotive wrecking and salvage yard in the city shall be so arranged to allow reasonable access to and inspection of the premises by authorized fire, health, police and building officials of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 20-78)  
Sec. 16-128. - Drainage of flammable liquids required. 
Before any junked, wrecked or abandoned vehicle shall be placed in any automotive wrecking and salvage yard in the city for the purpose of disassembling or dismantling, cutting up, stripping or otherwise extracting parts therefrom, all fuel tanks must be removed and all gasoline and other flammable liquids shall be completely drained and removed from the vehicle. 
(Code 1966, § 20-72) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention generally, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 16-129. - Fencing required. 
Every automotive wrecking yard, excluding the office area, in the city shall be surrounded by a fence as follows: 
(1)  The fence shall be high enough to screen all junk and junked automotive vehicles from the view of the traveled way of the public streets and highways and shall be extended downward to within three (3) inches of the ground. 
(2)  It shall extend along the frontage of the automotive wrecking and salvage yard parallel to the public street or highway and perpendicular to the public street or highway along the sides of the automotive wrecking and salvage yard to a distance so that all junk and wrecked vehicles will be screened from the view of the traveled way of the public street or highway. 
(3)  Where the automotive wrecking yard adjoins any property which is occupied by a dwelling or building used as living or sleeping quarters, a living hedge, screen, dirt berm or a fence shall be erected and maintained of such height and location as to screen the junked vehicles from any point on the common property line of the wrecking yard and the adjoining occupied premises. 
(Code 1966, § 20-73) 
Cross reference— Fence construction generally, § 28-376 et seq.  
Sec. 16-130. - Characteristics of fencing. 
(a)  The fence or wall of an automotive wrecking or salvage yard shall be constructed of a permanent material such as wood, masonry, corrugated sheet metal, chain link or any combination thereof. 
(b)  The fence must be neat in appearance and of a uniform color and height. If the fence is to be painted, it shall be of uniform color. Bright, loud colors will not be acceptable. 
(c)  It is not necessary that the fence be solid. If chainlink fencing is used, wood or metal slats or strips must be run through all links of the chainlink fence; however, the open spaces must be small enough that the junk materials and vehicles are substantially screened. 
(d)  The fence shall be maintained by the owner and/or operator of the salvage yard. Should the fence become damaged or destroyed, it must be repaired within thirty (30) days. 
(e)  All fences or walls shall be constructed in compliance with applicable provisions of the building code of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 20-74)  
Sec. 16-131. - Fence may include solid walls and doors. 
Any part of a fence or wall required by section 16-130 may consist in whole or part of a solid wall and door or walls and doors of any completely enclosed building on the premises if such wall or door meets all construction requirements set forth in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 20-75)  
Sec. 16-132. - Gates required. 
Openings in the prescribed enclosure which are necessary to permit reasonable access to the automotive wrecking and salvage yard shall be equipped with a solid gate, constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements for a fence or wall set forth in this article. Such gates shall be closed and securely locked at all times except during normal daytime business hours. 
(Code 1966, § 20-76)  
Sec. 16-133. - Work restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any automotive wrecking and salvage yard owner, operator, his agents or employees to display, store or work on any junked or wrecked automotive vehicle or the parts, accessories or junk therefrom outside of or above the required fence or wall. 
(Code 1966, § 20-77)  
Sec. 16-134. - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to comply with any provision of this article shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required by the owner or operator of an automotive wrecking and salvage yard pursuant to section 16-26 et seq., or any other section of this Code. Any violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(b)  The imposition of the penalties prescribed in this section shall not preclude the city attorney from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or discontinue an unlawful operation of an automotive wrecking and salvage yard during the time such automotive wrecking and salvage yard is in violation of any provision of this article or to restrain, correct or abate a violation of this article or prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises. 
(Code 1966, § 20-79)  
Secs. 16-135—16-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASE AND SALE OF PRECIOUS METALS AND JEWELRY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Precious metals dealers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a. 
 
Sec. 16-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized vendor means a commercial supplier who deals in the wholesale distribution of regulated property in the ordinary course of business. 
Crafted precious metals includes jewelry, silverware, art objects or any other thing or object made, in whole or in part, from gold, silver, platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium, osmium, ruthenium or their alloys. 
Jewelry includes stones removed from a mounting. 
Personal identification certificate means a certificate issued by the state department of public safety under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6687b. 
Purchase means a transaction in which a person takes title to regulated property in exchange for valuable consideration. 
Regulated property means new or used: 
(1)  Gold; 
(2)  Silver; 
(3)  Jewelry; or 
(4)  Crafted precious metals. 
(Code 1966, § 20-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-152. - Regulated property purchases; records. 
A person who purchases regulated property under the provisions of this article for the purpose of resale shall: 
(1)  Keep a sales record which indicates the manufacturer or authorized vendor from which the regulated property was purchased; or 
(2)  If the regulated property was purchased from other than a manufacturer or authorized vendor the person shall: 
a.  At the time of purchase, record in a legible manner the name, address and the driver's license number or personal identification certificate number of the seller, a description of the property purchased and the price paid or other consideration exchanged for the property purchased; 
b.  At the time of purchase, determine that the photograph on the driver's license or personal identification certificate is a photograph of the seller; 
c.  Retain possession of the property purchased in its original form and withhold the property from resale for the period of time required by state law; 
d.  Make the purchased property available for inspection by any police officer during regular business hours while the property is in the person's possession; and 
(3)  Maintain on file the information required by subsections (1) and (2) of this section for one (1) year from the date of purchase or until the item is sold, whichever occurs later. 
(Code 1966, § 20-92)  
Sec. 16-153. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Violate section 16-152 of this article; 
(2)  Offer for sale regulated property purchased for resale for which he does not have a sales record indicating the manufacturer or authorized vendor from which it was purchased or for which he does not have recorded the name, address and driver's license number or personal identification certificate number of the seller from whom he purchased the regulated property; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to produce for inspection by a police officer the records required by section 16-152(1) and (2) with respect to a particular item of regulated property when requested to do so at a reasonable time by the police officer. 
(Code 1966, § 20-93)  
Sec. 16-154. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this article is punishable as provided in section 1-12 of this Code, and a violation constitutes a separate offense for each item of regulated property involved. 
(Code 1966, § 20-94)  
Secs. 16-155—16-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FILM PERMITS 
 
Sec. 16-180. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Film, when used as a verb, means to perform or undertake any activity within the city limits which constitutes, in whole or in part, a component part in, or necessary preparation for, the process of recording moving images onto a tangible medium, including, but not limited to, motion picture photographic film, videotape, videodisc, or digitized storage of video data. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § I, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 2017-234 , § 2, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 16-180.1. - Exemptions. 
This article does not apply to: 
(a)  Private use. Film made for private and not commercial use and which does not adversely impact adjacent properties. This includes amateur photography or videography. 
(b)  News media. Reporters and related crew in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio or television broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in on the spot broadcasting, reporting or photographing of current news of general public interest. 
(c)  City business. Film made for the city by city personnel or a nonprofit 501(c)3 and film made for use in a criminal investigation or court proceeding. 
( Ord. No. 2017-234 , § 2, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 16-181. - Film permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to film in the city limits without a permit issued by the city manager unless otherwise exempt under this article. 
(b)  Permit application. Any production company, business, or individual who wishes to film within the city limits, shall obtain a film permit from the city manager not less than ten (10) working days prior to filming. The ten-day requirement may be waived at the discretion of the city manager. In making such application the applicant shall provide the name of the production company or individual, as well as the dates, times and locations where filming will take place. The applicant shall also identify by type and number production equipment (trucks, automobiles and other vehicles) involved in the production, and shall disclose detailed information on the use of firearms, fire, pyrotechnics, flammable substances, explosives, or other hazardous materials or effects to be used during filming. The execution of a hold harmless agreement for the benefit of the city in the form provided by the city manager and approved by the city attorney must be included with the application. 
(c)  Fee. There is no fee for the film permit. 
(d)  Insurance. The applicant shall provide proof of comprehensive general liability insurance covering its operations within the city for bodily injury and property damage in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit on a per occurrence basis. The city manager may impose additional insurance requirements as necessary. The applicant shall ensure that all policies remain in full force and effect during all phases of the filming, that they name the city as an additional insured, and that the policies are issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of Texas. 
(e)  Indemnification. The applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits, and liability of every kind, including all expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person, or for damage to any property, arising out of or in connection with the activities performed by the applicant within the city, whether such injuries, death, or damages, are caused by the city's sole negligence or the joint negligence of the city and any other party. 
(f)  Approval criteria. The city manager will consider the potential effect on property owners in approving or denying the application, and will endeavor to define restrictions to minimize adverse impacts upon the neighborhood. A permit may be denied if, in the opinion of the city manager, the locations, hours, or other factors, such as danger to the public or neighbors, traffic disruption, or noise as requested unreasonable. A permit may also be withheld pending applicant's satisfaction of all conditions prerequisite to approval. 
(g)  Additional requirements. The permit shall incorporate all necessary requirements of this article, together with such other requirements deemed appropriate by the city manager and authorized by this article. The city manager may additionally, as a condition of the permit, require applicant to enter into a separate agreement with the city, incorporating any and all duties or responsibilities authorized by this article. The area where the filming activity is taking place must be kept in a clean and safe condition and clear of all debris. Full daily cleaning is required. All activity of the applicant conducting filming activities must comply with all local, state, and federal laws. 
(h)  Appeal. An applicant may appeal to the city council the city manager's denial of a film permit. 
(i)  Notification. The applicant is required to notify in writing all adjacent properties that may be reasonably affected by filming activity. If permitted filming activity is determined by the city to impact traffic flow, then the applicant must publish notice in the Denton Record Chronicle. 
(j)  Expiration. A film permit issued under this article will be invalid if, after one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance, no filming activity has commenced on the property designated in the permit. 
(k)  Penalty. In addition to losing the privilege to film in the city limits, any person or entity who violates any provision, section, requirement, terms or conditions of this article will, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense in accordance with section 1-12 of the Denton Code of Ordinances. The city reserves the right to pursue any other remedies allowed by law for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § I, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 2017-234 , § 2, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 16-182. - Closing streets for filming; permit application. 
An applicant for a film permit must apply for a street closing permit as provided herein if, during any portion of the filming, access to public rights-of-way are to be obstructed or denied. Any permit issued under this section may be incorporated into a film permit issued under section 16-181 of this Code. 
(a)  Application. An applicant must submit a request for a street closing permit at least fourteen (14) working days prior to the requested closing. The fourteen-day requirement may be waived at the discretion of the city manager. 
(b)  Barricade plan. Upon application, the applicant must simultaneously submit a sketch indicating the area to be closed and the location of all properties adjacent to the area being closed. A traffic control plan must be submitted to the city for review and approval. The barricade plan, provided by a professional barricade company, must indicate placement of barricades, types of barricades, warning and detour signs, and shall conform with the requirements of the Barricade Manual adopted by section 25-92 of this Code, all applicable laws, regulations, and city policies, and must be consistent with good engineering practice. 
(c)  Street closing petition. The applicant must circulate a petition and obtain signatures, names and addresses from all abutting property owners, tenants, and merchants potentially affected by the street closing. The petition must also indicate each signatory's consent or opposition to the closing. A street closing petition form will be provided to the applicant upon request. The original of the street closing petition must be submitted to the city manager five (5) days prior to the requested closing. 
(d)  Traffic control. The applicant shall coordinate traffic control plans and requirements with the City of Denton Police Department. Should the police department deem it necessary for one or more individuals to direct traffic in and around the closed area, the applicant shall utilize only police officers (as defined in the Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, Chs. 541—545, as amended or superseded) to effectuate this purpose. The applicant may arrange with the police department to hire off-duty Denton police officers to assist in project security or traffic control, or both, provided that applicant shall indemnify the city for any and all injuries sustained by any officers so hired and comply with such other terms and restrictions as the police department may deem appropriate. 
(e)  Emergencies. The city may order immediate removal or relocation of any barricades in emergency situations or for safety considerations, without notice. Such action does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city and does not create any liability against the city for any damages to the property if such removals or relocations were conducted in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 95-195, § I, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 2017-234 , § 2, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 16-183. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-234 , § 2, adopted August 15, 2017, repealed § 16-183, which pertained to closing streets for filing; permit approval and derived from Ord. No. 94-195, § I, 10-18-94.  
Sec. 16-184. - Changes in schedule. 
Changes in street closing dates, times, and location must be approved by the city manager five (5) working days prior to the actual closing. The five-day requirement may be waived at the discretion of the city manager. If an approved closure date is later adjusted to satisfy a request of the applicant, the applicant shall advise abutting property owners in writing or in person of the change in schedule, no less than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the actual planned closure. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § I, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 16-185. - Access to closed area. 
The permittee shall not deny access to the closed area to city personnel or emergency vehicles (police, fire, ambulances), and shall not deny reasonable access to property owners going to and from their property. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § I, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 16-186. - Restoration of site. 
The permittee shall restore the public area to its original condition upon completion of any or all activity requiring the blocking or closing of a public street. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § I, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 16-187. - Permit option not exclusive. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent an individual from approaching the city council directly for an ordinance to temporarily close public street. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § I, 10-18-94)  
Chapter 17 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed the former Ch. 17, §§ 17-1—17-122, and enacted a new Ch. 17 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2009-062, § 1, 3-3-09. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The regulations within this chapter shall be known as the Denton Property Maintenance Code ("DPMC"). The provisions of the DPMC shall apply to all existing structures and premises within Denton's city limits. 
(b)  The purpose of the DPMC is to establish the minimum maintenance and sanitary standards for all premises and existing structures, so as to protect against blight, neighborhood decline, and depreciation of property. It is also the intent of the DPMC to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Denton. 
(c)  Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter. All repairs, new additions, or alterations of existing structures that require a building permit shall comply with the adopted edition of the International Building Code currently in effect at the time of the repair, new addition, or alteration. [1] 
(d)  The other codes listed in sections 17-1 through 17-197 and referenced elsewhere in this Code shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. 
(1)  The International Fire Code is published by the International Code Council, Inc., Country Club Hills, Illinois.* 
(2)  The International Building Code is published by the International Code Council, Inc., County Club Hills, Illinois.* 
(3)  The International Mechanical Code is published by the International Code Council, Inc., County Club Hills, Illinois.* 
(4)  The International Plumbing Code is published by the International Code Council, Inc., County Club Hills, Illinois.* 
(5)  The International Residential Code is published by the International Code Council, Inc., County Club Hills, Illinois.* 
(6)  The International Fuel Gas Code is published by the International Code Council, Inc., County Club Hills, Illinois.* 
(7)  The National Electric Code is published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., Quincy, Massachusetts.* 
(8)  The Denton Development Code is published by the City of Denton, Denton, Texas. 
(9)  The Transportation Criteria Manual is published by the City of Denton, Denton, Texas. 
(10)  The Tree Protection Standards Manual is published by the City of Denton, Denton, Texas. 
These referenced codes and manuals are made available for viewing at City Hall West, in city libraries, in the city secretary's office and can be purchased through their noted publishers. 
* These referenced code books include City of Denton amendments. Texts of these amendments are available online on the City of Denton website and at City Hall West. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Reference Note—Land use and development regulations are governed by Chapter 35 of this Code (the "Denton Development Code" or "DDC") 
 
Sec. 17-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved means approved by the City of Denton Code Official. 
Approved sound-level meter means an instrument sensitive to sound pressure fluctuations that provides a digital decibel reading indicating the level of sound based on a reference of zero db (0.0002 Micro Bar). The instrument must also be capable of taking measurements on the A-weighted scale and on a slow response. 
A-weighted sound pressure level means the sound pressure level as measured on an approved sound-level meter using the A-weighting scale. 
Basement means a building story partially or completely underground. A basement shall be counted as a story in computing building height where any portion of a basement has more than one-half (½) of its height above grade. 
Bathroom means any room containing plumbing fixtures and an installed bathtub, shower, or toilet. 
Bedroom means any room other than a living room, family room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom, closet, or utility room, den, study, etc., and is used predominately as a sleeping room. 
Building means any structure, including manufactured homes, designed, used, or intended to be used for, or to support the human use or occupancy of land. 
Building code means the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the city. 
Building official means the official charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Carrion means the dead, putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl, or fish. 
Clearly audible means a volume of character of any sound or portion of a sound, such that any quality, nature, attribute, or information content of the sound is perceptible and identifiable to any person of normal hearing ability, including, but not limited to, understandable spoken words, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, bass reverberations, or comprehensible musical rhythms. 
Code enforcement officer means an officer employed by the city who engages in code enforcement to prevent detect, investigate, and enforce violations of laws regulating public nuisance, health, safety and welfare as specifically delegated by the city. 
Code official means the Building Official of the City of Denton or his/her designee charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Code official does not include code enforcement officer. 
Commission means the Health and Building Standards Commission of the City of Denton. 
Dangerous structure means one found to be dangerous to the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the general public or the occupants of the building or structure by not providing the minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such building or structure contains unsafe equipment, is in an unsafe or uninhabitable condition, or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, faultily constructed, or has an unstable foundation such that partial or complete collapse is possible, as defined in section 17-182. 
Daytime means from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
Duplex dwelling means a detached residential structure containing two (2) dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit means an independently accessible and defined component of a residential structure, providing complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Efficiency dwelling unit means a dwelling unit containing only one (1) habitable room and meeting the requirements of section 17-159(j) of this chapter. 
Established perimeter means the permanent or temporary fencing in place for an event, or the natural boundaries of a specific location or address. 
Exterior structure means the outside portion of any building or structure. 
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other legally approved pest elimination methods. 
Family means two (2) or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit where all members are related by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship of minors. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group that receives federal or state funding for the care of the individual. 
Filth means any matter in a putrescent state. 
Garbage means any kitchen refuse, foodstuffs, or related materials, including all putrescible waste. 
Glazing means the portion of a window unit or door that is made of glass and sits or is made to be set in frames. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized form of painting, scratching, writing, or inscription including, but not limited to, initials, slogans, symbols or drawings, regardless of the content or nature of the material that has been applied, to any wall, building, fence, window, sign or other structure or surface, which is visible from: Any public property, any right-of-way or the private property of another person. "Graffiti" does not include advertising placed on property with the owner's permission, in compliance with applicable city ordinances, state or federal law. 
Guard means a building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces, that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
Habitable space means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Hot water means water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than 110° F (49° C) measured at the faucet outlet. 
Imminent danger means a condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
Improved parking surface means a parking area constructed in compliance with the Denton Development Code and the Transportation Criteria Manual (Parking Lot Design-Materials and Pavements Section). 
Infestation means the presence of insects, rats, vermin, or other pests, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is not in operating condition because it is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, or has one (1) or more flat tires. 
Inoperable vehicle means a vehicle without a motor, including but not limited to trailers, campers, camper shells, and wheeled towing frames, that is not in operating condition because it is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, or has one (1) or more flat tires. 
Junk means worn out, worthless, or discarded material, objects, or items. 
Junked vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; and 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Labeled means devices, equipment, appliances, or materials, to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items, and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards. 
Let for occupancy or let means to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement or contract. 
Manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F.R. Section 3282.8(g). 
Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
Motor vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle or a vehicle that is propelled by electric power from overhead trolley wires. The term does not include an electric bicycle or an electric personal assistive mobility device (meaning a two (2) non-tandem wheeled device designed for transporting one (1) person that is: (1) self-balancing; and (2) propelled by an electric propulsion system with an average power of seven hundred fifty (750) watts or one (1) horsepower.) 
Multi-family dwelling means a structure or portion designed for three (3) or more dwelling units or for occupancy by members of a fraternity or sorority, or by three (3) or more boarders. 
Nighttime means from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Nuisance means whatsoever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; whatsoever renders the ground, the water, the air, or the food hazardous or injurious to human life or health; whatsoever is offensive to the senses; or whatsoever is detrimental to the public health or welfare, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Whatsoever is identified as a public nuisance by common law or in equity jurisprudence; 
(2)  Whatsoever attracts and may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations or structures; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation that may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors; 
(3)  Abandoned structures or facilities such as basin chambers, pools or tanks located indoors or outdoors containing artificial bodies of water intended to be used for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing, including spas or hot tubs, which become unfit to be used for the purpose intended; 
(4)  Exceeding the number of persons allowed to live in a single-family dwelling in accordance with the definition of overcrowding as defined herein; 
(5)  Structures with insufficient ventilation or illumination; 
(6)  Structures with inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities; 
(7)  Whatsoever renders ground, air, food or water unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings; and 
(8)  Whatsoever is offensive to the physical senses. 
Occupancy has the meaning as stated in the International Building Code. 
Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Openable area means that part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Outdoor music festival means any form of musical entertainment provided by live performances if: 
(1)  More than two hundred (200) persons are in attendance at any one (1) performance; or 
(2)  The event requires paid admission; 
(3)  Any of the performers or performance are not within a permanent, enclosed structure; and 
(4)  Any of the performance involves the use of amplified sound. 
Outside display means the display, outside of a structure, of objects, items, products, or other merchandise that is intended and available for immediate sale, rental, or special order. 
Outside storage means the storage, collection, or safekeeping of any goods, materials, products, appliances, equipment, or containers that are not enclosed by a structure with walls on all four (4) sides and a roof. Outside storage does not include moveable toys such as tricycles or pedal cars. 
Overcrowding means the number of persons in excess of the number allowed to live in a single dwelling unit, including family and unrelated individuals. No single dwelling unit shall have more than four (4) unrelated individuals residing therein, nor shall any family, as herein defined, have more than four (4) unrelated individuals residing with such family. 
Owner means any person or entity shown as the property owner on the latest property tax assessment rolls or any person having any legal or equitable interest in the property, including any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing or operating the property and including any tenant. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent or adoptive parent of a minor. As used herein, "parent" shall also include a court-appointed guardian or other person twenty-one (21) years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of the minor. 
Perimeter fence means an enclosure used as a boundary or means of providing protection, confinement, or privacy and is located along the limits of the developed area and is adjacent to an alley, utility easement, or right-of-way. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, proprietorship, association, corporation, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, social or fraternal organization, or any other group or combination acting as a legal entity, and including any trustee, assignee, executor, or other representative. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
Property means all privately owned, occupied or unoccupied land, structure, facility, or premises, including vacant land, and/or a structure designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial or religious purposes. The term "property" shall also include, but not be limited to, a yard, ground, wall, driveway, fence, porch, steps or other structure appurtenant to the property. 
Public way means any street, alley or similar parcel of land which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use, primarily for transportation purposes. 
Refuse means a heterogeneous accumulation of worn-out, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials including, but not limited to, garbage, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable matter. 
Rental unit means a single-family dwelling unit, duplex dwelling unit, a townhome dwelling unit, or a multi-family dwelling unit or portion thereof that is rented, let, leased, or offered for rent as a residence. 
Rooming house means a building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
Single-family dwelling means an attached or detached residential unit other than a manufactured home, hotel or motel. 
Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the sound amplification of the human voice, music, musical equipment, or any other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment" shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
Street means the width between the boundary lines of a publicly or privately maintained way, any part of which is open to the public for vehicular travel. 
Structure means any building or structure which is built for the support, shelter, or enclosure or partial enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind. 
Structure, accessory means any structure on the same lot with, and is incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. Flatwork, in-ground swimming pools and fences or walls used as fences are excluded. 
Substandard means any structure or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guestroom or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, that does not meet the minimum standards as defined in this chapter. 
Temporary carport or auto shade cover means a structure that is not permanently secured below grade or which has a nonrigid top material used for the purpose of providing shade, shelter, and/or weather protection for automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and similar vehicles. 
Tenant means a person, corporation, partnership or group occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit under an arrangement of rent. 
Toilet room or water closet means a room containing a commode, water closet, or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Townhome (single-family attached dwelling) means single-family dwelling that is a part of a single structure containing at least three (3) but not more than eight (8) such dwellings, and each dwelling: 
(1)  Is one (1) or more stories in height; 
(2)  Has an outside individual front and rear entrance on the ground floor; 
(3)  Is separated from the other dwellings in the structure by fire-rated common walls; 
(4)  Has an individual meter for each utility; 
(5)  Has access to a public street or alley; 
(6)  Has frontage on a public street; 
(7)  Occupies its own individual lot. 
Trash and debris means all manner of refuse including, but not limited to junk, carrion, filth, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter, grass and weed clippings, paper trash, useless fragments of building material, rubble, useless household items, items of salvage such as scrap metal and wood, old barrels, old tires, objects that hold water for an extended time, tree and brush trimmings, and other miscellaneous wastes or rejected matter. 
Truck-tractor means a motor-driven vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing another vehicle and not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load to be drawn. 
Unfit for human occupancy means a structure which is: unsafe, dangerous, or unlawful because of the state of disrepair or poor maintenance; unsanitary; vermin or rat infested; contains filth and contamination; lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitation, heating facilities, or other essential equipment required by this chapter; or which, because of the location of the building or structure, constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building or structure or to the public health or welfare. 
Unsecured structure means any structure that is vacant and open. A structure is open if any door, window or other opening is not securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry. 
Vehicle means a device in or by which a person or personal property is or may be transported or drawn on a public highway, or on any waterway, and shall include all motor vehicles, trailers, campers, camper shells, wheeled towing frames, recreational vehicles, truck-tractors, travel trailers, self-propelled farm equipment, motor-boats or boat trailers. For the purposes of this chapter, "vehicles" shall not include nonmotorized bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, or any other nonmotorized toy vehicle. 
Vegetation means any plant life, including, but not limited to, shrubs, trees (including saplings), brush, bushes, wildflowers, cultivated flowers, native or ornamental grasses, grass (lawn), weeds, ground cover, annuals, perennials, or vines. 
Ventilation means the natural or mechanical process of circulating outdoor air (including heated or chilled air) into or out of a structure. 
Vibration (bass reverberation) means a temporal and spatial oscillation of displacement, velocity, or acceleration in a solid material created by the use or operation of a stationary loudspeaker, amplifier, musical instrument, or any other sound amplifying equipment, as well as any ground or structure-borne vibrational motion that is perceptible by sensation by touch, visual observation of moving objects, or means other than through the sense of hearing. 
Workmanlike means skillful, masterly, careful, thorough, adept and proficient manual, industrial or artisan work executed to be generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2011-132, § 1, 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4a., b., 5-9-17)  
Sec. 17-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Code Enforcement Officers of the City of Denton are hereby authorized and directed to enforce any violations of the Code of Ordinances as directed by the city manager including, but not limited to the following provisions in this chapter: Sections 17-21, 17-34, 17-35, 17-37, 17-40, 17-41, 17-42, 17-50, 17-60, 17-61, 17-62, 17-70, 17-80, 17-90, 17-100, 17-101, 17-112, 17-121, 17-122, 17-124, 17-144, and chapter 17, article XIII, divisions 2 and 3, and chapter 24, articles I and II, and sections 18-197 and 18-198. Code enforcement officers shall also have the authority to interpret these provisions and apply such interpretations to these provisions in the interest of public safety, health, and general welfare. Code enforcement officers shall not have the authority to waive structural, fire or sound engineering requirements relative to public safety. Code enforcement officers shall not have the authority to inspect properties for compliance with Denton Development Code rules and regulations or chapter 28 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Denton. 
(b)  Code enforcement officers shall make, or cause to be made all of the inspections required to enforce the provisions in section 17-3(a). Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of these provisions or whenever the code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any condition or violation which makes such structure or premises unsafe by virtue of violations of these provisions, the code enforcement officer, as authorized by law, may enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the code enforcement officer under this section. If such structure or premises is occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such structure is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having care or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused or if the code enforcement officer is otherwise unable to obtain the owner's consent to enter, the code enforcement officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
( Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4i., 5-9-17; Ord. No. 2018-1531 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Secs. 17-4—17-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOISE AND ODORS 
 
Sec. 17-20. - Noise. 
(a)  Declaration of intent. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to minimize the exposure of citizens to the potential physiological and psychological harm of excessive noise and to protect, promote, and preserve the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare. It is the express intent of the city council to control the level of noise in a manner that promotes commerce; protects the sleep and repose of citizens; promotes the use, value, and enjoyment of property; and preserves the quality of the environment. 
(b)  Sound measurement criteria. For purposes of this chapter, sound measurements will be made using the A-weighting scale on an approved sound-level meter, based on the reference sound pressure (0 dba). Measurement times will be no less than two (2) minutes in length, and violations will be determined based on the highest registered reading in that measurement period. All measurement levels will be inclusive of any ambient noise that exists at the time of the measurement. 
(c)  General noise violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person to make or cause any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise, which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration as to substantially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(3)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be noise nuisances in violation of this chapter, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
a.  The playing of any phonograph, television, radio, or any musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, so as to be clearly audible to a person in a residence the person playing the instrument does not have the right to occupy; and 
1.  During the daytime, measure more than sixty-five (65) dba on the A-weighting scale on an approved sound-level meter at more than fifty (50) feet from the source; or 
2.  During the nighttime, measure more than sixty-five (65) dba on the A-weighting scale on an approved sound-level meter at more than fifty (50) feet from the source; or 
3.  During the daytime, in a multi-family dwelling, measure more than fifty (50) dba on the A-weighting scale on an approved sound-level meter in any adjacent unit; or 
4.  During the nighttime, in a multi-family dwelling, be clearly audible within any unit that is not the source of the sound. 
b.  The use of any stationary loudspeaker, amplifier, musical instrument, or sound amplifying equipment in such a manner or with such volume so as to be clearly audible to a person in a residence the person using the instrument does not have the right to occupy; and 
1.  During the daytime, be of such intensity and volume so as to measure more than sixty-five (65) dba on the A-weighting scale on a sound-level measuring device at more than fifty (50) feet from the source; or 
2.  During the nighttime, be of such intensity and volume so as to measure more than sixty-five (65) dba on the A-weighting scale on a sound-level measuring device at more than fifty (50) feet from the source; or 
3.  During the daytime, in a multi-family dwelling, measure more than fifty (50) dba on the A-weighting scale on an approved sound-level meter in any adjacent unit; or 
4.  During the nighttime, in a multi-family dwelling, be clearly audible within any unit that is not the source of the sound; or 
5.  At any time on Sunday. 
Provided, however, that the city council may make exceptions upon application for sound levels or hours of operation when the public interest will be served thereby. 
c.  The creation of vibration or bass reverberations at any time that is perceptible inside a complaining person's residence, through the sense of touch, or through visual observation of moving objects, or through the sense of hearing. 
d.  The use of any radio, stereo, amplifier, sound amplifying equipment, or other musical device installed or contained in a motor vehicle at a volume such that it is clearly audible to any person from more than thirty-five (35) feet from the vehicle. 
e.  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler or the blowing of any other loud or far-reaching steam whistle within the city limits, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger; 
f.  The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair work on any building at anytime other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. Monday through Friday from June 1 to September 30; between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. Monday through Friday from October 1 to May 31; between 8:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. on Saturday; and between 1:00 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. on Sunday; provided, however, that the city council may issue special permits for such work at other hours in case of urgent necessity and in the interest of public safety and convenience; 
g.  The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates or containers; 
h.  The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noises to any performance, show, theater, motion picture house, sale of merchandise, or display which causes crowds or people to block or congregate upon the sidewalks or streets near or adjacent thereto. 
(d)  Outdoor music festivals. At any outdoor music festival, it shall be unlawful for any person or group sponsoring the event to make, cause, allow, or permit any noise that: 
(1)  Exceeds seventy (70) dba on an approved sound-level meter when measured at the established perimeter of the event. 
(2)  Provided, the city council may make exceptions upon application for sound levels or hours of operation when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(e)  Prosecution for an offense under this section does not prevent the use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person charged with or the conduct involved in the offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-21. - Odors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create or cause any unreasonably noxious, unpleasant or strong odor which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create or cause any odor, stench or smell of such character, strength or continued duration as to substantially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(c)  The following acts or conditions, among others, are declared to be odor nuisances in violation of this chapter, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Offensive odors from cow lots, hog pens, fowl coops and other similar places where animals are kept or fed which disturb the comfort and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities; 
(2)  Offensive odors from privies and other similar places; 
(3)  Offensive odors from the use or possession of chemicals or from industrial processes or activities which disturb the comfort and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities; 
(4)  Offensive odors from smoke from the burning of trash, rubbish, rubber, chemicals or other things or substances; or 
(5)  Offensive odors from stagnant pools allowed to remain on any premises or from rotting garbage, refuse, offal or dead animals on any premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 17-22—17-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INOPERABLE AND JUNKED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 17-30. - Authority to take possession of abandoned motor vehicles. 
(a)  As authorized by law, the police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private property. 
(b)  The police department may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire persons, equipment and facilities to remove, preserve and store an abandoned motor vehicle it takes into custody. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-31. - Notification of owner and lienholders of abandoned vehicle. 
(a)  When an abandoned motor vehicle is taken into custody, the police department shall notify not later than the tenth day after taking the motor vehicle into custody, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lienholders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, V.T.C.A. Transportation Code ch. 501 or V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.001 et seq., that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held, inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle not later than the twentieth day after the date of the notice, upon payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody, or garage keeper's charges if notice is under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 683.032. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. 
(b)  If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration contains no address for the owner or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lienholders, notice by one (1) publication in the official newspaper of the city is sufficient notice under this article. The notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles, shall be published within the time requirements prescribed for notice by certified mail and shall have the same contents required for a notice by certified mail in this section. 
(c)  The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle are as set forth in a valid notice given under this section. 
(d)  The police department or an agent of the police department who takes custody of an abandoned motor vehicle is entitled to reasonable storage fees for: 
(1)  A period of not more than ten (10) days beginning on the day the police department takes custody and continuing through the day the department mails notice as provided by this section; and 
(2)  A period beginning on the day after the day the police department mails notice and continuing through the day any accrued charges are paid and the vehicle is removed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-32. - Auction of abandoned motor vehicles. 
If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided by section 17-31, the police department shall sell the vehicle at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given, and in the case of a garage keeper's lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified of the time and place of the auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle takes title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, shall receive a sales receipt from the police department and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and receive a certificate of title. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction; the costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle that resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody; and all notice and publication costs incurred under section 17-31. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain available for the payment of auction, towing, preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs that result from placing another abandoned vehicle in custody, if the proceeds from a sale of another abandoned motor vehicle are insufficient to meet these expenses and costs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-33. - Disposal of abandoned vehicle by demolition. 
(a)  If an abandoned motor vehicle is not reclaimed in accordance with section 17-31, the Texas Department of Transportation, on notification of that fact by the applicant, shall issue the applicant a certificate of authority to sell the motor vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking or dismantling. A demolisher shall accept the certificate in lieu of the certificate of title to the motor vehicle. 
(b)  The Texas Department of Transportation may issue the applicant a certificate of authority to dispose of the motor vehicle to a demolisher without following the notification procedures of section 17-31 if the motor vehicle is more than eight (8) years old and has no engine or is otherwise totally inoperable. 
(c)  A person in possession of an abandoned vehicle that was authorized to be towed in by the police department and that is more than eight (8) years old and has no engine or is otherwise totally inoperable may, on affidavit of that fact and approval of the police department, apply to the Texas Department of Transportation for a certificate of authority to dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking or dismantling only. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-34. - Inoperable vehicles, inoperable motor vehicles, junked vehicles declared public nuisance; maintaining public nuisance prohibited. 
(a)  An inoperable vehicle, inoperable motor vehicle, or junked vehicle that is visible from any right-of-way or adjacent property and/or is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates a fire hazard, is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, or produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, occupant or anyone having supervision or control of any real property within the city to maintain a public nuisance as determined under this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, occupant or anyone having supervision or control of any real property within the city to have more than one (1) inoperable vehicle, inoperable motor vehicle, or junked vehicle upon their property. This subsection shall not apply to auto sales lots, vehicle repair businesses, and salvage yards as long as all inoperable and junked vehicles on these properties shall be kept in compliance with subsections (d), (e), (f), and (g). 
(d)  Any inoperable vehicle, inoperable motor vehicle, or junked vehicle shall be screened from any right-of-way or adjacent property by means of a solid opaque fence or shall be enclosed within a building. In no case shall any cover placed over an inoperable vehicle, inoperable motor vehicle, or junked vehicle constitute adequate screening. 
(e)  Vehicle repair businesses may have up to five (5) inoperable vehicles, inoperable motor vehicles, or junked vehicles legally parked on the business property which are not screened from public view regardless of whether the vehicles are currently registered and inspected, provided that the vehicles are not wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, have broken window glass, or have one (1) or more flat tires. 
(f)  Auto sales lots are exempt from subsection (d) when operating in compliance with all state laws and any other city ordinances regulating auto sales, and which are not displaying vehicles that are wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, have broken window glass, or have one (1) or more flat tires. 
(g)  Vehicle repair businesses may not maintain inoperable or junked vehicles on their property in excess of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days. The vehicles on the property must be on the property for the purpose of repair. Additionally, a current, valid work order must be maintained for every vehicle. A current, valid work order is a work order that is one hundred twenty (120) days old or less. 
(h)  It shall be presumed that a vehicle that is not demonstrated to be operable upon request of the designated city official is an inoperable vehicle. 
(i)  An inoperable motor vehicle that remains inoperable for more than thirty (30) consecutive days becomes a junked vehicle. 
(j)  At no time shall a tarp or any cover not designed to cover a motor vehicle or vehicle be used as a cover for an operable motor vehicle or operable vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-35. - Procedures for abating nuisance; exception. 
(a)  The city may abate and remove a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance from private property, public property or public rights-of-way as provided in this section. 
(b)  For such nuisance on private property, the city shall give not less than ten (10) days' notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property, that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than 10 days after the date of the return. 
(c)  For such nuisance on public property, the city shall give not less than ten (10) days' notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, that the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten (10) days. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record and the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return. 
(d)  A public hearing shall be held before the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part as a public nuisance. The hearing shall be held before the municipal court. An order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site. 
(e)  Notice shall be given to the Texas Department of Transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. The notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part. The department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title to the vehicle pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, V.T.C.A. Transportation Code ch. 501. 
(f)  The procedures in this section shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, a vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard or an unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2011-132, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 17-36. - Disposal of junked vehicles. 
A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, demolisher or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. The process of disposal must comply with the provisions of section 17-33. The city may transfer the vehicle or vehicle parts to a disposal site if the disposal is only as scrap or salvage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-37. - Enforcement. 
The code enforcement officer may enter private property as authorized by law for the purposes specified in the procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance: 1) with consent of the owner or person in control of the property; 2) with a valid warrant issued by a magistrate; or 3) when the private property is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4c., 5-9-17)  
Secs. 17-38, 17-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION 
 
Sec. 17-40. - Grass or weeds in excess of twelve (12) inches in height declared a nuisance and prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to fail to remove or mow any weeds or grass growing in excess of twelve (12) inches in height on said real property, including easements and rights-of-way. It is a violation of this section if the tall grass and weeds are visible from a right-of-way or an adjacent property. 
It shall be a defense to prosecution that the real property is owned by the State of Texas. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to fail to remove or mow wildflowers after such time as seeds have matured following the final blooming of the majority of the plants, or native grasses after such time as the majority of a species have gone dormant. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property within the city to fail to remove vegetation growing within one (1) foot of the street or alley adjacent to that private property. 
However, it shall be a defense to prosecution if the vegetation does not encroach upon a lane of traffic or obstruct the view of any operators of motor vehicles on any streets, driveways or alleys. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property within the city to fail to remove limbs existing lower than thirteen and one-half (13.5) vertical feet above a street, seven (7) feet above a sidewalk, or twelve (12) feet above an alley. 
However, it shall be a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the trees do not obstruct the safe passage of vehicles, including fire and emergency vehicles, sanitation vehicles, recreation vehicles, or buses. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property within the city to fail to remove any vegetation growing or encroaching upon the surface of any portion of an improved right-of-way, or any dirt that has encroached upon a sidewalk. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to fail to remove any weeds or grass growing in excess of twelve (12) inches in height on said real property, within one hundred (100) feet of any structure on parcels of land of five (5) or more acres. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any area greater than one hundred (100) feet from any open street or thoroughfare, as measured from the right-of-way line of such street or thoroughfare, and greater than one hundred (100) feet from any adjacent property under different ownership and on which any building is located or on which any improvement exists, as measured from the property line for lots, tracts, or parcels of land of five (5) or more acres. 
(h)  Hay grown for the purpose of cultivation which is a part of a predominantly homogeneous plant population must be mowed if within twenty (20) feet of an adjacent property under different ownership on which any building or improvement exists. It will be an affirmative defense to this subsection if no citizen complaint has been filed with the city. 
(i)  Property designated as an Environmentally Sensitive Area ("ESA") per Subchapter 17 of the Denton Development Code and/or required by an ordinance to be maintained in a natural state are exempt from these provisions. 
(j)  Property included as part of a conservation easement shall be exempt from these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2011-132, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 17-41. - Abatement of dangerous grass or weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches. 
(a)  The city, as authorized by law, may go upon property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this article without notice when: 
(1)  Grass or weeds have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches; and 
(2)  Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. 
(b)  No later than the tenth day after the date the city causes the work to be done under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by article XI of this chapter. 
(c)  The notice shall contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
(2)  A description of the violations of the article that occurred on the property; 
(3)  A statement that the city abated the weeds; 
(4)  An itemized statement of the charges incurred by the city in doing or in having such work done as necessary to bring the real property into compliance with this article; and 
(d)  The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens as provided in article XI. 
(e)  Routine abatement of grass or weeds not meeting the standards of this section shall follow the procedures of article XI. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-42. - Maintenance of irrigation. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property within the city to knowingly make, cause, or permit a use of water contrary to the land and landscape irrigation and water waste ordinance, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4g., 5-9-17; Ord. No. 2018-1531 , § 3, 11-6-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4g., adopted May 9, 2017, amended § 17-42 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 17-42, pertained to tree preservation and maintenance; landscape maintenance. See Code comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Secs. 17-43—17-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TRASH AND DEBRIS 
 
Sec. 17-50. - Trash and debris declared a nuisance and prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to fail to remove any refuse, trash, debris, filth, carrion, junk, or garbage from any such real property, including easements and rights-of-way. It is a violation of this section if the refuse, trash, debris, filth, carrion, junk, or garbage is visible from a right-of-way or an adjacent property. 
(b)  It is unlawful to maintain premises in a manner that creates unsanitary conditions that are likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes, rodents, vermin, or disease-carrying pests. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 17-51—17-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OUTSIDE STORAGE AND OUTSIDE DISPLAY 
 
Sec. 17-60. - Outside storage. 
(1)  In addition to complying with EPA regulations, the International Fire Code, and all other applicable rules and regulations, outside storage shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Shall not be located in any portion of the front yard, and shall be screened from public view at all times. Screening shall be of natural vegetation, masonry, wood, metal, vinyl, PVC, or composite fence materials only, and shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times. At no time shall a tarp of any kind be used for screening. Play structures such as swing sets, jungle gyms and erected play areas, associated with a residential use, shall be exempt from the screening requirements. 
(b)  Properties zoned IC-E or IC-G, and all industrial uses that are legally permitted are exempted from the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, provided that no items are stored in any part of a fire lane, required parking space, maneuvering lane, public right-of-way, or visibility triangle. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that the following items are maintained in good repair, are for residential use, and are not a nuisance to the public: 
(a)  Storage, collection, or safekeeping in a carport of: 
i.  Building materials that are temporarily stored in a workmanlike manner as part of, and in conjunction with, an active building permit; 
ii.  Motorized lawn equipment; 
iii.  Storage containers, if stored and maintained in an orderly manner against a permanent wall; or 
iv.  Household and yard tools, and household cleaning implements, if stored and maintained in an orderly manner against a permanent wall, using pegboards, shelves, hooks, storage containers, or tool chests. 
(b)  A washer or dryer which is connected and regularly used where the only washer or dryer connection is located under a carport or breezeway. 
(c)  Furniture designed for outdoor use. 
(d)  Firewood stored and maintained in an orderly manner. 
(e)  Smokers, barbeque grills, lawn maintenance equipment, and appliances designed for outdoor use, if in current use. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that the following items are maintained in good repair and are not a nuisance to the public: 
(a)  Play structures such as swing sets, jungle gyms and erected play areas or houses built and maintained as part of a playground located at a church, school, or state-regulated commercial daycare. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2011-132, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 17-61. - Outside display. 
Outside displays shall comply with the following criteria: 
(a)  Shall be arranged in an orderly manner and is part of the merchandise of an authorized retail business that is located in zoning districts that allow retail sale. 
(b)  Shall not be displayed in a manner that creates an unsafe condition or obscures any sight visibility line or sight visibility triangles. 
(c)  Shall not be located on any public property; within an easement; within a designated fire lane; within any required parking spaces; or located so as to obstruct safe vehicular or pedestrian passage, ingress, or egress. 
(d)  Shall be maintained so as to not become a nuisance to the public or any adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-62. - Solid waste container maintenance. 
The code enforcement officer shall enforce chapter 24, articles I and II, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4h., 5-9-17; Ord. No. 2018-1531 , § 4, 11-6-18)  
Secs. 17-63—17-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ENVIRONMENTAL NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 17-70. - Stagnant water. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and considered a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing or occupying real property, within the limits of the City of Denton, to fail to remove the accumulation or ponding of standing, stagnant, or nonmaintained water thereon or permit the same to remain, which may harbor or be a breeding ground for mosquitoes, flies, or other pests, or which may cause a foul odor, or adversely impact the public health and safety by any means. Accumulations or ponding of water shall not exceed a forty-eight-hour period under normal rainfall conditions as described by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Weather Service (NOAA). 
(b)  A finding by a code enforcement officer or heath inspector of the City of Denton shall constitute prima-facie evidence that standing, stagnant, or nonmaintained water is conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects. Potential tools to make this finding may include measures of water turbidity, the presence of excessive organic matter in the water, the presence of foul odors, visually apparent algal growth, or the presence of mosquitoes, flies, or other pests. The presence of mosquito larva is not required for standing, stagnant, or nonmaintained water to be classified as a public nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, occupant or anyone having supervision or control of any real property within the city to maintain a public nuisance as determined under this section. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of said persons to abate nuisances described in this article by: 
(1)  Draining, filling or re-grading any lots, ground, or yards which have standing or stagnant water thereon; or 
(2)  Treating the area with material, either natural or manmade that will eliminate any offensive odor and render the area harmless to the public health and eliminate the potential breeding ground for mosquitoes, flies, or other pests. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of said persons to maintain items that are capable of collecting water, including but not limited to birdbaths, fountains, reflecting pools or ponds, private or semi-private swimming pools or other items so that they cannot harbor or be a breeding ground for mosquitoes, flies, or other pests or which may adversely impact the public health and safety or create an odor nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 17-71—17-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FENCES 
 
Sec. 17-80. - Maintenance of perimeter fences. 
(a)  An owner shall maintain all perimeter fences in sound structural condition. 
(b)  All perimeter fences, including those existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, shall be maintained at all times in a state of good repair with no broken, loose, damaged, removed or missing parts, and in safe and secure condition with all braces, bolts, nails, supporting frame and fastenings free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot, rust or loosening, and able to withstand the wind pressure for which they were designed. 
(c)  Perimeter fences shall not lean at an angle from the vertical plane any greater than five (5) degrees. 
(d)  Perimeter fence repairs shall be made using the same material, or a very similar material with comparable composition, color, size, shape, and quality of the original fence to which the repair is being made. 
(e)  If fifty (50) percent or more of the length of one (1) side of a perimeter fence that is made of nonpermitted material(s) is broken, damaged, removed, or missing parts, the entire length of said side of the fence shall be replaced in accordance with the requirements of the Denton Development Code. 
However, it is a defense to prosecution if the perimeter fence to be replaced is barbed wire, razor wire, or electrified wire, if the fence is associated with a legally permitted agricultural or industrial use. 
However, it is a defense to prosecution if the perimeter fence to be replaced is of chain link construction. 
(f)  All areas between the fence or wall and the back of the curb, the edge of the street, or any adjacent property shall be maintained in a manner that is clear of trash and debris and high grass and weeds at all times. 
(g)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a), if an owner completely removes a fence which was in disrepair, provided that the owner is not required to keep a fence pursuant to any other law or regulation. 
(h)  All nonperimeter fences that can be viewed from a public right-of-way and whose ownership has been clearly determined must comply with the provisions as outlined for perimeter fences in subsections (a) through (g) above. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-81. - Applicability of other laws regarding fences. 
Nothing in this article shall limit any other requirements regarding fencing, including but not limited to requirements established by the following: 
(a)  Homeowner's associations; 
(b)  The Denton Development Code; 
(c)  Regulations relating to businesses where alcohol is sold; 
(d)  Regulations regarding swimming pool fences; 
(e)  Zoning requirements; and 
(f)  Any other applicable local, state, or federal law regarding fencing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 17-82—17-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - TEMPORARY CARPORTS OR AUTO SHADE COVERS 
 
Sec. 17-90. - Temporary carports and/or auto shade covers prohibited. 
The use of temporary carports and/or auto shade covers are expressly forbidden in both residential and commercial districts in the city with exceptions for licensed car dealerships, car washes, and auto detailers whose structures are in compliance with other city ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 17-91—17-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CERTAIN PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-100. - Vehicles for sale. 
(a)  No vehicle for sale may be parked or stored on any right-of-way or easement except those lawfully parked upon a city street. 
(b)  No vehicle for sale may be parked or stored within two hundred (200) feet of the right-of-way or easement on vacant lots or on commercial properties that do not have a certificate of occupancy to operate as a new or used car dealership. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-101. - Parking nuisances. 
(a)  Parking regulations. It is a nuisance and shall be deemed illegal for any person to park in violation of the following provisions: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person to park or store or allow another to park or store a vehicle in the front, side, or rear yard of any property upon any surface other than an improved parking surface. 
(2)  See the Denton Development Code and the Transportation Criteria Manual for allowed materials and construction specifications for parking surfaces for properties other than single-family homes and duplex dwellings. 
(3)  For single-family homes and duplex dwellings, if an improved parking surface exists in a front, side, or rear yard, any improved parking surfaces that are added shall be attached in a parallel fashion to create a contiguous parking surface. The added parking surface shall be constructed of the same material as the existing parking surface and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width, the maximum lot coverage as specified in the Denton Development Code, or encroach within three (3) feet of a neighboring property line. If the added parking surface runs parallel to a sidewalk, there must be at least five (5) feet between the edge of the sidewalk that is closest to the property line and the added parking surface. 
(4)  Single-family homes and duplex dwellings may use gravel for existing dirt driveways, excavated and poured to a four-inch depth and bordered to create a parking surface level with the existing driveway. 
(5)  Single-family homes and duplex dwellings that have existing concrete, parallel parking ribbons may maintain said as improved parking surfaces as long as said concrete surfaces are maintained in good and safe condition. Any improved surfaces added for the purpose of parking vehicles shall be attached in a parallel fashion to the existing parking surface and shall be constructed in the same manner and of the same material as the existing parking surface. 
(6)  For single-family homes and duplex dwellings, if no improved side or rear yard parking surface exists which to attach an added improved parking surface, the vehicle may be placed in the side or rear yard provided that the vehicle is concealed from view from all points along streets and alleys by a solid, opaque fence or wall providing full screening from the ground to a minimum height of six (6) feet, or stored in an enclosed structure. Any fencing must be in compliance with the Denton Development Code and all applicable ordinances and laws regarding fencing. See the Denton Development Code for accessory structure regulations. 
(7)  Vehicles screened as provided for in subsection 17-101(a)(6) may forgo the improved parking surface requirement in subsection (1). 
(8)  Added parking surfaces shall not be located within an easement or right-of-way, or obscure any sight visibility line or sight visibility triangle. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or store any objects, items, or personal property in or upon any right-of-way. 
(10)  This section shall not apply to a vehicle legally parked on a public street or highway. For the purposes of this section, a right-of-way shall include: 
a.  The entire width of all public streets and highways including any shoulders of these roadways; 
b.  The entire width of any alleys; and 
c.  All other public easements, including any easements running adjacent to any public roadways and alleys. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store or allow another to park or store a vehicle on any surface on any unimproved lot, easement, or right-of-way. 
(12)  It shall be unlawful to use a vehicle for living or sleeping quarters, or for the storage of trash, debris or personal property not normally associated with the vehicle. 
(13)  Residential properties with homesteads that exceed two (2) acres may have operable agricultural equipment, two (2) of which may be trailers, parked on an unimproved surface. The surface must be located one hundred fifty (150) feet from the street and adjacent properties and behind the front building line. Additionally, the agricultural equipment may not be parked on any easement or right-of-way. Agricultural equipment is equipment used for farming operations that is not required to be registered by the State of Texas. 
(b)  Maintenance of improved parking surfaces. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to maintain all improved parking surfaces in good and safe condition, and free of any defects affecting the use, safety, and drainage of the surface or of the adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 17-102—17-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - GENERAL ABATEMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 17-110. - Failure of owner to comply with chapter provisions; issuance of notice. 
If any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, fails to comply with articles IV, V, or VII of this chapter, the city manager or his duly appointed representative may initiate abatement under this article by providing not less than ten (10) days notice of such violation as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-111. - Service of notice. 
Notice of violations of this chapter may be delivered to the owner or occupant in person, by notice left at the location, mailed to the occupant's address, or mailed to the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located, and delivered by United States Mail. Rental property notifications shall be sent to both the owner and occupant. 
The property will be reinspected no sooner than after ten (10) days of the date on the notice. If the property is not in compliance at this time, citations may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-112. - City may correct violation. 
(a)  Procedure. If at least ten (10) days has expired after notice has been given in accordance with section 17-111 and the owner has failed to correct the violation, the city may enter upon the property and do the work, or pay for the work to be done, as necessary to correct the violation. If the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary of the date of a notice of a violation as required in section 17-110 and the city has not received written notification by the owner of an ownership change, the city without further notice, as authorized by law, may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expenses against the property as provided by this section. 
(b)  Owner assessed costs. A statement of the costs incurred by the city in correcting a violation shall be mailed or delivered to the property owner in accordance with the notice requirements of section 17-111. The costs shall include an administrative fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. The payment shall be due within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing. 
(c)  Lien to secure costs. If the statement is not timely paid, the city may file a statement with the county clerk of the costs incurred, including administrative costs. Upon filing the statement, the city shall have a privileged lien on the land upon which the costs were incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The amount of the lien shall include ten (10) percent on the delinquent amount from the date payment was made by the city. The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city. To collect the costs, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall limit the code enforcement officer's authority under V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Ch. 342, and the code enforcement officer is hereby vested with all authority therein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4d., 5-9-17) 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code §§ 342.006—342.008.  
Secs. 17-113—17-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 17-120. - City requirement. 
Prior to the issuance of any notice required to be issued by this article, the city shall, in writing, offer to remove graffiti from an owner's property free of charge and determine that the property owner failed to timely respond to, or refused, the offer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-121. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Graffiti is declared to be a public nuisance. Whenever the existence of graffiti on any property within the city shall come to the attention of the city, provided the owner of the property has refused the offer of the city to remove the graffiti free of charge, the code enforcement officer shall cause a written notice as provided in this article identifying the graffiti and direct its removal. 
In addition to any penalty provided in this chapter, the city shall have all remedies available at law and equity to abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4e., 5-9-17)  
Sec. 17-122. - Owner responsibility. 
(a)  An owner of property commits an offense if, after notification by the city, the owner fails to paint over or remove all graffiti from the owner's property that is visible from any public property or right-of-way or from any private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists. 
(b)  The property will be re-inspected no sooner than the 15th day after the date on the notice. If the property is not in compliance at that time, a notice to remove the graffiti shall be given to the owner by the city. The notice shall: 
(1)  Contain the date and nature of the violation; 
(2)  Contain the physical location of the violation by street address; 
(3)  Contain the name of owner; and 
(4)  Require the owner to remove the graffiti on or before the 15 th day after the date the property owner receives the notice described in this article. 
(5)  If the condition is not corrected on or before the 15 th day of receipt of such notice or the owner fails to file an appeal on or before the 15 th day of receipt of notice from the city, the city may, without further notice, enter upon the property by its agent or its contractors, remove the graffiti and charge the expenses of removal to the owner in accordance with a fee schedule established by the city. If the graffiti is removed by the city, the expenses of removal may be charged to the property owner and a lien may be filed against the property. 
(c)  Notice of the violation may be delivered personally to the owner in writing; by letter sent by certified mail, addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address as contained in the records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or, if service cannot be obtained by such methods, by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Denton County or the City of Denton; by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the notice relates; or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the notice relates. 
(d)  An owner maintains a public nuisance if he fails to remove graffiti or refuses to allow graffiti to be removed from his property after having been notified by the city or in the event of appeal, upon order by the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-123. - Exception. 
It is an exception to the requirement that an owner of property remove graffiti from the owner's property if: 
(1)  The graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure; and 
(2)  The removal of the graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-124. - Imposition of civil penalty for applying, permitting, or allowing graffiti. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that graffiti applied to any natural or manmade surface on public or private property creates an objectionable, or unsightly condition that damages the surrounding homes and businesses in the community. 
(b)  Any person who applies or creates graffiti, or any parent who knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows their minor child to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface or any public property is liable for a civil penalty. 
(c)  The civil penalty for which the person or parent is liable is the fees and costs incurred for removing the graffiti, which shall be in addition to any expenses assessed for removal of the graffiti. 
(d)  The civil penalties collected will be placed in reserve or used exclusively in city-initiated abatement proceedings. 
(e)  Civil enforcement; procedures. 
(1)  In order to impose a civil penalty under this section of this article, the code enforcement officer shall send a notice of violation to the person or parent liable for the civil penalty not later than the 30th day after the date the graffiti is ordered removed. A notice issued under this section of this article shall be sent to: 
a.  The last known address of the person or parent of the accused minor; or 
b.  Hand-delivered in person to the person or parent of the accused minor alleged to be responsible for the civil penalty. 
(2)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain the following: 
a.  A description of the violation alleged; 
b.  The location where the violation occurred; 
c.  The date and time of the violation or when the violation was discovered; 
d.  The name and address of the owner of the property involved in the violation; 
e.  A copy of a recorded image of the graffiti involved in the violation; 
f.  The amount of the civil penalty to be imposed for the violation, including the fees and costs for removal of the graffiti; 
g.  The date by which the civil penalty must be paid; 
h.  A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil penalty; and 
i.  Information that informs the person or parent named in the notice of violation: 
1.  Of the person's or parent's right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person in an administrative adjudication; 
2.  Of the manner and time in which imposition of the civil penalty may be contested; 
3.  That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability and that failure to appear at an administrative adjudication hearing after having requested a hearing is an admission of liability; and 
4.  That failure to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed shall result in the imposition of a late-payment fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(4)  A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received either on the fifth day after the date the notice of violation is mailed or on the date personal delivery is made to the person or parent of the accused minor alleged to be responsible for the civil penalty. 
(5)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the city may mail a warning notice to the owner that, in addition to any other information contained in the warning notice, must contain the information required by subsection (c). 
(f)  Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(1)  A person who receives a notice of violation under this article may contest the imposition of the civil penalty by requesting in writing an administrative adjudication of the civil penalty within the time provided in the notice (which period shall not be less than fifteen (15) days following the receipt of notice). Upon receipt of the request, the city shall notify the person of the date and time of the hearing on the administrative adjudication. The administrative adjudication hearing shall be held before one (1) or more hearing officers appointed by the city manager. 
(2)  Failure to pay a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability in the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation and constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal under this section. 
(3)  Failure to appear at an administrative adjudication hearing after having requested a hearing is an admission of liability for the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation and constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal under this section. 
(4)  A person or parent who fails to pay a civil penalty within the time allowed by this article shall be additionally liable for a late-payment penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(5)  The civil penalty shall not be assessed if after a hearing, the hearing officer(s) enter(s) a finding of no liability. 
(6)  A person or parent who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing or who requests an administrative adjudication hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing is liable for administrative hearing costs in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to the amount of the civil penalty assessed for the violation. A person or parent who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the civil penalty and costs within ten (10) days of the hearing. 
(7)  In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proven at the hearing by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(8)  A person or parent who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing may appeal that finding of liability to the municipal court by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the municipal court. The notice of appeal must be filed not later than the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of liability and shall be accompanied by the payment of an appellate filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Unless the person, on or before the filing of the notice of appeal, posts a bond in the amount of the civil penalty and any late fees, an appeal does not stay the enforcement of the civil penalty. An appeal shall be determined by the municipal court by trial de novo. Any affidavits submitted under this section shall be admitted by the municipal judge in the trial de novo, and the issues must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(g)  Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy; enforcement. 
(1)  The imposition of a civil penalty under this section is not a conviction and may not be considered a conviction for any purpose. 
(2)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit to enforce collection of a civil penalty assessed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 4f., 5-9-17)  
Secs. 17-125—17-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-141. - Purpose. 
This article is established pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 214.001, et seq., as subsequently amended, and as otherwise provided by state law or municipal home rule authority. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises to provide minimum standards: to safeguard those buildings, structures or premises from any cause that could potentially endanger life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants; as to the occupancy of existing structures and premises; and for administration, enforcement and penalties. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with this chapter shall be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished to meet minimum standards as defined in this chapter. However, notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, the legal occupancy or use of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to continue without alteration of the structure, except as provided in divisions 2 and 3 of this article for the general health, safety or welfare of the occupants or the public. 
Furthermore, this exemption shall only apply provided the structure was legally constructed and inspected and has been maintained in compliance with the code which was in effect at the time the structure was originally constructed or subsequently remodeled. At any time should any component of the structure require alteration or repair that requires a permit from the city, the alteration or repair shall be inspected by the city and shall comply with currently adopted codes. Repairs performed under notice of violation from the city shall require inspection. 
For information regarding the enlargement or reconstruction of structures with a nonconforming use status, refer to subchapter 11 of the Denton Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-142. - Applicability. 
General. In the event of a specific case where any section of this chapter specifies different requirements from any other ordinance or code, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(a)  Application of other codes. Any and all changes of occupancy, alterations, additions, or repairs to any structure shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the codes referenced in section 17-1(e), all as currently adopted and amended by the city council. 
(b)  Existing remedies. This ordinance shall not eliminate or impede any existing remedies of the city, or its officers, or other agencies as to the removal or demolition of any structure deemed dangerous, unsafe and/or unsanitary. 
(c)  Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance, alterations, or installations shall be performed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and in a workman-like manner in those cases in which the work performed is the result of the enforcement of this chapter. 
(d)  Historic buildings. Buildings or structures designated as historic by the State of Texas or by the Federal Government, and deemed safe by the code official, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
In accordance with the Denton Development Code, application shall be made to the city historic landmark commission (HLC) for a certificate of appropriateness prior to the commencement of any exterior alteration or repairs of a structure that is located within a historic overlay district or is legally designated as a historic building. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-143. - Substandard structure program. 
The substandard structure program is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-144. - Enforcement. 
The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article. The code official shall also have the authority to interpret this article and apply such interpretation to provisions of this chapter in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare. The code official shall not have the authority to waive structural or fire performance requirements nor shall he make exceptions which clearly violate accepted engineering principles relative to public safety. 
(a)  The code official shall keep all official records relating to the provisions of this article. Such records shall be kept in the official records as long as required by city, state and/or federal government regulations. 
(b)  Inspections. The code official shall make, or cause to be made, all of the inspections required to enforce the provisions of this article, and chapter 28 of the Code. The code official may accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise. 
(c)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any condition or violation which makes such structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the code official, as authorized by law, may enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the code official by this article, and chapter 28 of the Code. If such structure or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having care or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(d)  Responsibilities of owner. 
(1)  An owner of a property remains liable for violations of this article, and chapter 28 of the Code regardless of any agreement between the owner and any other party that imposes or attempts to delegate responsibility for the premises to the other party. 
(2)  The owner of a premises which is substandard or dangerous commits an offense. 
(e)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done or exist on property or premises in violation of this article and chapters 28 and 29 of the Code. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of any premises to be in violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant of a single family or multi-family or duplex dwelling to occupy, or allow occupation of any structure or building that has been placarded as substandard or dangerous by the city. 
(3)  It is a violation for any person to deface or remove an official city placard without the approval of the code official. 
(4)  The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with this chapter. 
(5)  The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(6)  In addition to imposing a criminal penalty, the city shall have the power to enforce any provision of this article, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 214, and V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 54, Subchs. B and C. No enforcement remedy shall be exclusive of any other remedy the city may have under state law or city ordinances. 
(f)  Notice of violation. Notices shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a legal description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
(3)  Include a statement of the violation or violations. 
(4)  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit, structure, or property into compliance with the provisions of this article and chapter 28 of the Code. 
(5)  Include a statement of the city's right to file a lien on the property in accordance with this article. 
(g)  Method of service. Notice issued under this section is properly served if: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or about the building or structure affected by such notice for a period of not less than ten (10) days. 
(h)  Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the city from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-145. - Buildings declared public nuisances. 
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard or dangerous as defined in this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this article or in an order issued by the Health and Building Standards Commission of the City of Denton. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-146. - Approval. 
(a)  Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this article, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this article impractical, and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this article, and that such modification does not lessen health, life, and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. 
(b)  Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this article or chapter 28 of the Code, provided that any such alternative has been approved in advance by the building official. An alternative material or method of construction may be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this article or chapter 28 of the Code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this article or chapter 28 of the Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(c)  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this article or chapter 28 of the Code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this article or chapter 28 of the Code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the city. 
(1)  Test methods shall be as specified in this article or chapter 28 of the Code, or by other industry recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency. 
(2)  Reports of tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
(d)  Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 17-147—17-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 17-150. - Minimum standards for continued use and occupancy. 
All buildings, structures, and portions thereof shall conform to the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy set forth in this division. Each owner of any building, structure, or premises within the city shall comply with the applicable provisions of this division. The standards established in this division shall be the minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings, structures, and premises. The owner of any building, structure, or premises that is in violation of these minimum standards and this division may be ordered to perform one (1) or more of the following: Repair, vacate, secure, remove, or demolish such building, structure, or premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-151. - Criteria for establishing minimum standards. 
The owner of premises is in violation of this division if any one (1) or more, in any combination, of the minimum standards identified in this division are not met. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-152. - Exterior premises. 
(a)  Private sidewalks and driveways. All private sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar outdoor areas shall be maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(b)  Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior premises shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
(c)  Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge hazardous or potentially hazardous gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-153. - Exterior structure. 
The exterior of a structure or accessory structure must be maintained in good condition, structurally sound and kept clean and sanitary so as to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(a)  Protective treatment. Exterior surfaces, including but not limited to walls, windows, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good and reasonable condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting* or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking, chalking, and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted*. Siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. Metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
* "Pre-1978 structures undergoing paint removal or stabilization may be subject to "safe work practices" as promulgated by the environmental protection agency. Reference should be made to current federal regulations prior to the initiation of work. 
(b)  Premises identification. 
(1)  The owner of every house and building in the city shall place the street number assigned by the building inspections division in some conspicuous place on or near such house or building so that the number may be plainly seen from the street. 
(2)  The house numbers shall be at least four (4) inches high and shall be made of some bright metal or material in a color which is in clear contrast with its background. 
(c)  Structural members. All structural members of walls, roofs, partitions or other supports shall: be maintained so as to not sag, split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; be of sufficient size to carry all imposed loads safely; and, not show any other evidence of structural fatigue. 
(d)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb, and free from open cracks and breaks, and in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
(e)  Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be maintained free from holes, breaks, loose, missing, or rotting materials, and all exterior walls and exposed surfaces shall be maintained to protect them from the elements and against decay or rust, by periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(f)  Roofs and drainage. Any and all repairs or replacements of roof coverings or materials shall utilize approved roofing materials and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation requirements. Roof coverings shall not be missing or completely lacking, broken, rotted, split, curled or buckled. The roof, roof coverings and flashing shall be maintained in a sound and tight state without defects that may admit rain or surface drainage water. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in good condition and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(g)  Additional features. Garage doors, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings, manufactured and mobile home skirting, and other similar decorative features shall be maintained in good condition with proper anchorage, and in a safe condition. 
(h)  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good condition and properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. All exposed surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(i)  Stairways, decks, porches, and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(j)  Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(k)  Window, skylight and door frames. Windows, skylights, doors and all framework shall be maintained in sound, good condition, and weathertight. 
(l)  Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from open cracks and holes that could admit wind or moisture. 
(m)  Openable windows. At least one (1) window per sleeping room shall be easily openable and capable of being held in an open position. If there is an operable exterior door in the room, this section does not apply. 
(n)  Insect screens. During the period from April 1 st to October 31 st , every window which opens directly to or from an outdoor space shall be equipped with a tightly fitting insect-proof screen of not less than 16 mesh per inch. Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains, air conditioning or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
(o)  Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. 
(p)  Basement hatchways shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
(q)  Building security. All doors, windows, hatchways, or other openings that allow access to the interior of an occupied structure from the exterior shall be provided with operable and properly maintained security devices that require no special knowledge or effort to use. All unoccupied structures must be secured from unauthorized entry by means of locking or boarding up all possible access points to the interior of the structure until such time as the structure may be safely re-occupied or is repaired or demolished. 
(r)  Door locksets. Exterior doors providing access from the interior of a structure to the exterior shall be equipped with a doorknob lock, single-cylinder dead bolt, or sliding door pin lock with a bar, maintained in good, operable condition and requiring no special knowledge or effort to use. Exterior doors to any unit used for dwelling purposes shall also meet the requirements of V.T.C.A. Property Code, Ch. 92, Subch. D, § 92-153. 
(s)  Windows. All operable windows within a structure are required to be equipped with a locking security device that is maintained in good operable condition and that requires no special knowledge or effort to operate. In addition, the locking device for any window which opens in any part within six (6) feet of the ground level or above a walking surface must operate without a key, and open only from the interior. 
(t)  Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall have good water clarity with main drain visibility from edge of pool, and all components shall be kept in proper working condition. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2011-132, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 17-154. - Interior structure. 
The owner and manager shall maintain the interior of a structure and equipment in a good, structurally sound, and sanitary condition. Occupants shall maintain that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. The above conditions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  The owner and manager shall maintain all structural members structurally sound, and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(b)  The owner and manager shall maintain all interior surfaces, including windows, doors, ceilings, floors and walls, in good, clean, safe and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking, or abraded paint* shall be repaired, removed, or covered. Deteriorated, crumbling, cracked, or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
* Pre-1978 structures undergoing paint removal or stabilization may be subject to "safe work practices" as promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency. Reference should be made to current federal regulations prior to the initiation of work. 
(c)  The owner and manager shall maintain every stair, ramp, landing, floor, or other walking surface in good repair and in sound condition. 
(d)  The owner and manager shall ensure that handrails and guards shall be firmly secured to withstand normally imposed loads, and be maintained in good repair. 
(e)  The owner and manager shall ensure that every interior door fits reasonably well within its frame and is capable of opening and closing, by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers, or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2011-132, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 17-155. - Handrails and guardrails. 
Every exterior and interior flight of stairs in a residential dwelling unit having more than four (4) risers, and commercial stairs greater than one (1) riser, shall be maintained in a good and safe condition with a handrail on one (1) side of the stair. Every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp, or other walking surface which is more than thirty (30) inches above the floor or grade shall be equipped with guards not less than thirty-four (34) inches in height measured from the nose of the treads. Handrails shall not be less than thirty-four (34) inches high or more than thirty-eight (38) inches high, measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards for nonresidential stairways and landings, and for all stairways and landings outside individual dwelling units of multi-family structures, shall not be less than forty-two (42) inches high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp, or other walking surface. Intermediate rails shall be spaced to prohibit the passage of: a four-inch sphere for rails installed after April 6, 1993, a six-inch sphere for rails installed between September 15, 1986 and April 6, 1993, or a nine-inch sphere for rails installed prior to September 15, 1986. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened, capable of supporting normally imposed loads, and maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-156. - Extermination. 
The owner shall maintain all structures and exterior premises reasonably free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, the owner shall take proper precautions to prevent re-infestation. The owner, manager and occupant shall maintain those portions of the interior of a structure under his or her control free from rubbish, garbage, and other substances that may encourage infestation by insects, rodents, or vermin, and from all unsanitary conditions. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-157. - Light. 
(a)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. 
(b)  Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be well-lighted at all times. In occupied buildings other than residential occupancies, interior and exterior means of egress, including stairways, shall be illuminated at all times at floors, landings, and treads. 
(c)  Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
(d)  Exterior lighting. Exterior illumination must be operational. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-158. - Ventilation. 
(a)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum glazed area required in section 17-157(a). Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent on the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet. The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
(b)  Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by section 17-158(a), except that a window shall not be required if equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors, and shall not be recirculated. 
(c)  Cooking facilities. All rooms and other enclosed spaces shall be ventilated in a manner sufficient to keep them free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, offensive odors, smoke, and fumes. Further, habitable spaces may not be used as cooking facilities, unless: 
(1)  Approved through a certificate of occupancy; 
(2)  Approved in writing by the code official; or 
(3)  Only allowable devices are being used. Coffee pots and microwaves are not considered cooking appliances. 
(d)  Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
(e)  Clothes dryer exhaust. Dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other ventilation systems, and shall convey the moisture to the outdoors, unless ductless, condensing clothes dryers are installed. Intake and exhaust air ducts shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the entrance of dust, dirt, and any other contaminating materials. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-159. - Occupancy limitations. 
Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create conditions that endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants, or otherwise violate the terms of the article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-160. - Required facilities. 
Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink, each of which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-161. - Major appliances.* 
If major appliances are provided in rental units, they shall be maintained in operable condition. If provided major appliances become in need of repair, a reasonable length of time will be allowed for the landlord to make the required repairs to said appliance. 
*Major appliance includes, but is not limited to: Refrigerator, range, wall oven, cooktop, or range hood. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-162. - Plumbing systems and fixtures. 
All plumbing fixtures, facilities, and systems shall be maintained and connected in compliance with the adopted codes of the City of Denton, so as not to pose any health or sanitation hazard. 
All occupied areas and all plumbing equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition at all times, and all connected plumbing fixtures and heating equipment shall be maintained in compliance with applicable laws. Owners or managers shall take immediate action to clear stoppages and partial blockages of all sanitary sewer systems. Within twenty-four (24) hours after notice of a malfunctioning sewer system, properly functioning sewer service shall be reinstated. However, if a city permit is required due to the extent of the repairs, a properly functioning sewer service shall be installed in a reasonable period of time in light of the required repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-163. - Water system. 
All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to plumbing systems as required by adopted codes and ordinances of the City of Denton, be maintained so as not to pose any health or sanitation hazard, and be provided with both hot and cold running water. 
(a)  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(b)  Supply. The water supply system shall be maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
(c)  Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110° F (43° C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room that is normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-164. - Sanitary drainage system. 
All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved water supply system and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for normal operation. All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or a similarly nonabsorbent material. 
Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-165. - Storm drainage. 
Drainage of roofs, paved areas, yards, courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-166. - Mechanical facilities. 
Heating and air conditioning facilities shall be maintained in structures as required by this article. 
(a)  Heating. Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68° Fahrenheit at a point three (3) feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the adopted building code, the adopted mechanical code and all other applicable laws. Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall not be permitted as the sole source of heating for any room or space. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type, and at no time, shall cooking appliances be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Air conditioning. If refrigerated air equipment is provided in rental units, it shall be maintained in operable condition and must be capable of maintaining a maximum inside temperature that is 20° lower than the outside temperature or 81° F, whichever is warmer, in each room of a structure intended for human occupancy from May 1 through October 1. If provided refrigerated air equipment becomes in need of repair, a reasonable length of time will be required to allow for repair of said equipment. If no refrigerated air equipment is provided then screens shall be provided on all operable windows. 
(c)  Employee work spaces. Indoor employee work spaces shall be supplied with sufficient heat to maintain an ambient temperature of 65° F measured at a point three (3) feet above the floor near the center of the room or space. Spaces designed to be maintained at a temperature below 65° F, including but not limited to coolers, freezers, computer cold rooms and other similar areas, shall be exempt from this requirement. Additionally, areas whose primary function is not for human comfort and in which employees engage in vigorous physical activity during the normal course of their duties may also be exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-167. - Mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(b)  Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation are excepted from this requirement. 
(c)  Clearances. All fuel burning equipment shall be provided and maintained with all required clearances to combustible materials, as required by chapters 28 and 29, and by manufacturer specifications. 
(d)  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(e)  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
(f)  Additional devices. Any modification or connection of additional devices to a fuel burning appliance, its fuel supply, or its venting system shall be made using products that are listed and labeled for the specific application and shall be specifically approved by the code official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-168. - Electrical facilities. 
Every structure provided with an electrical system shall be maintained in safe operating condition, and compliant with the requirements of this article and all other adopted codes of the City of Denton. 
(a)  Electrical service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the National Electric Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than sixty (60) amperes, or other service approved by the code official. 
(b)  Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-169. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in safe operating condition. All electrical equipment shall be listed and labeled for the proposed use. 
(b)  Receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) supplied electrical convenience outlets or one (1) convenience outlet and one (1) supplied electrical light fixture. Every bathroom, laundry room, interior stairway, kitchen, boiler room, furnace room, and public hallway shall contain at least one (1) supplied electric light fixture. Electrical circuits and outlets shall be maintained in a safe operating condition and shall be sufficient to safely carry a load consistent with the standards contained in the version of the National Electrical Code most recently adopted by the city. Ground-fault circuit-interrupter protected receptacles shall be provided in the following locations: 
(1)  Bathrooms; 
(2)  Kitchens where the receptacles are installed to serve the countertop surfaces; and 
(3)  Laundry, utility, and wet bar sinks where the receptacles are installed within six (6) feet of the outside edge of the sink. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-170. - Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. 
Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) A17.1. The most current certification of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodical intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction. 
In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one (1) elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. Buildings equipped with only one (1) elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. 
This section does not apply to single-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-171. - Duct systems. 
Intake and exhaust air ducts shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the entrance of dust, dirt, and any other contaminating materials. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-172. - Means of egress. 
A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code, the International Building Code, or be approved by the building official or fire official. 
(a)  Aisles. The width of aisles required by the International Fire Code, the International Building Code or approved by the building official or fire official shall remain unobstructed at all times. 
(b)  Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to the International Building Code or is permitted by the building official or fire official. 
(c)  Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following: Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-173. - Fire-resistance ratings. 
(a)  Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained. 
(b)  Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-174. - Fire protection systems. 
All systems, devices, and equipment to detect a fire, smoke, actuate an alarm, or to suppress or control a fire, or any combination thereof, shall be provided and maintained in operable condition at all times in accordance with the adopted International Fire Code. 
(a)  Smoke alarms. All single or multiple-station smoke alarms, regardless of occupancy type or occupant load, shall be maintained in operable condition at all times in the following locations: 
(1)  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separated sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms and in each room used for sleeping purposes. 
(2)  In all dwellings or dwelling units with open, split levels that do not have a door between the levels, including areas of basements and cellars, but not uninhabited attics or crawl spaces, smoke alarms installed on the upper level shall suffice as adequate coverage for the lower level, provided that the upper level is not more than one (1) story above the lower level. Smoke alarms, single or multiple-station, must be installed in other types of group occupancies in compliance with the requirements of the adopted International Fire Code. 
(b)  Power source. Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring, be permanent, without a disconnecting switch other than for over-current protection, and be equipped with a battery backup. In a building where no construction is taking place, or where there is no access to a municipal or commercial power source, or in an existing building undergoing repair or alteration which does not include the removal of a wall or ceiling exposing the structure, battery powered smoke alarms are permitted. 
(c)  Interconnection. All smoke alarm systems shall be interconnected as required, and shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the International Fire Code, International Building Code and International Residential Code as adopted and amended by the City Council of the City of Denton. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 17-175—17-179. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 17-180. - Securing vacant structures. 
No owner or person having charge of any unoccupied building or structure within the city shall leave said building or structure unlocked, unboarded or otherwise unsecured so that unauthorized persons may enter said building or structure. An unsecured building or structure shall constitute prima facie evidence of a condition of immediate danger to the building or structure and adjoining buildings or structures, and the code official shall immediately notify the owner of said unsecured building or structure to secure the same, and if said building or structure is not secured within seventy-two (72) hours after the date of issuance of notice to the owner or person in charge of the building or structure, the code official is authorized to secure the building or structure at the expense of the owner or person in charge of said building or structure, the cost of expense of the work required to secure such building or structure to be charged against the owner of the property as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-181. - Conditions or defects constituting dangerous structure. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building or structure and a public nuisance, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered, as defined by this chapter or state law. 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, as defined in section 17-173, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(5)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation of the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (½) of that specified in the building code for such buildings or structures. 
(6)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar construction. 
(7)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof is likely to partially or completely collapse because of: 
(i)  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
(ii)  Faulty construction; 
(iii)  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or structure; 
(iv)  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
(v)  Any other cause. 
(8)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(9)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
(i)  An attractive nuisance to children; 
(ii)  A harbor for vagrants, criminals; or 
(iii)  Enables persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts. 
(10)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the Code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(11)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the code official to be unsanitary, unfit for human occupancy or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(12)  Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire resistive construction, faulty electrical wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a fire hazard. 
(13)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(14)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or structure or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(15)  Whenever any building or structure that is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner may, nevertheless, be deemed to be a dangerous building or structure under the foregoing criteria: 
(i)  The building or structure constitutes a danger to the public, even though secured from entry; or 
(ii)  It is found that the means utilized to secure the building or structure are not adequate to prevent unauthorized entry of the building or structure in contravention of subsection (a)(10) above. 
(16)  Any building or portion thereof, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any condition or defect prohibited by, or inferior to the minimum standards defined in division 2, to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-182. - Alterations, additions and repairs. 
All buildings or structures that are required to be repaired under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to those provisions of chapters 28 and 29 which are in effect at the time of the repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-183. - Notices and orders of code official. 
(a)  Notice to property owner. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this division or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the property owner in the manner prescribed in section 17-144(f) and (g) for the violation. The notice and order shall: 
(1)  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal, specifically: 
(i)  That any person having recorded title or legal interest in the building or structure may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the code official to the health and building standards commission, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this chapter and filed with the building official within thirty (30) days from the date of service of such notice and order; and 
(ii)  That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and termination of the matter. 
(2)  Include a statement of the city's right to file a lien. 
(3)  Include statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work, is not commenced within the time specified, the building official may order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed. 
(b)  Placarding of structures. Upon any vacant structure being deemed dangerous by the code official, the code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a placard including, but not limited to, the following language: 
"Do Not Enter, Unsafe to Occupy. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for persons authorized by the owner to enter for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs therein under permit and under inspection by inspectors of the City of Denton. This notice shall remain on this building until it is repaired or demolished." 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any structure marked by such placard, except for persons authorized by the owner to enter for the purpose of securing the structure or making the required repairs therein under permit, and inspectors of the City of Denton. Such placard shall remain on the structure until it is repaired or demolished, or until removed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-184. - Recordation of notice and order by the building official. 
If compliance with a notice and order described by section 17-183 is not secured within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the building official may file in the deed records of the office of the county clerk a certificate describing the property, and certifying that the building or structure has been determined to be a dangerous building or structure by the building official and that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter be completed or the building or structure demolished so that it no longer exists, the building official shall file a new certificate with the county clerk certifying that the building or structure has been demolished or that all required corrections have been made so that the building or structure is no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2012-254, § 1, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 17-185. - Emergency measures authorized by the building official. 
(a)  Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this division, whenever, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(b)  Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the building official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the building official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(d)  Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work may be paid by the city. The city attorney may institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises for the recovery of such costs. 
(e)  Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the health and building standards commission, be afforded a hearing as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-186. - Termination of utility services. 
(a)  The building official may initiate termination of utility services, or place a hold on reconnecting or reinstituting utility services that have been terminated to a dwelling unit that is substandard, dangerous, or unfit for human occupancy by certifying in writing that the dwelling unit is substandard, dangerous, unfit for human occupancy, or that the electrical system constitutes a hazard to the occupants. 
(b)  Upon initiating a utility termination or hold, the building official shall promptly notify the owner by written notice. The owner may appeal the decision of the building official to the health and building standards commission by serving the building official with a written notice within five (5) days from the date the notice was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-187. - Appeals from orders of building official. 
(a)  Form of appeal. Any person entitled to service of a notice issued pursuant to section 17-183 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the code official under this division by filing at the office of the building official a written appeal and filing fee as determined by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. The appeal shall contain the following: 
(1)  A heading in the words: "Before the Health and Building Standards Commission of the City of Denton, Texas"; 
(2)  A caption reading: "Appeal of _______," giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal; 
(3)  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order; 
(4)  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
(5)  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside; 
(6)  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses; and 
(7)  The verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of at least one (1) appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. 
The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of such order or action of the code official; provided, however, that if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with section 17-183(b), such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of the service of the notice and order of the code official. 
(b)  Processing of appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this article and receipt of the filing fee, the building official shall present the appeal at the next available regular or special meeting of the health and building standards commission. 
(c)  Scheduling and noticing appeal for hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the health and building standards commission shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the commission. Such date shall be not less than ten (10) days, or more than sixty (60) days, from the date the appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2012-254, § 1, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 17-188. - Scope of hearing on appeal. 
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-189. - Staying of order under appeal. 
Except for vacation orders made pursuant to section 17-190(a)(3), enforcement of any notice and order of the code official issued under this division shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2012-254, § 1, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 17-190. - Order to repair, vacate, remove or demolish. 
The following standards shall be followed by the building official or by the health and building standards commission regarding any order to repair, vacate, remove or demolish substandard or dangerous buildings or structures: 
(a)  When, in the opinion of the building official; 
(1)  There is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life; 
(2)  When any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure; or 
(3)  When there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. 
(b)  If the building official has determined that the building or structure constitutes an immediate danger and must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure to be vacated before a date certain, as determined by the building official to be reasonable, but not to exceed ten (10) days. 
(c)  If the building or structure is in a dangerous condition, but does not present an immediate threat to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, the deadline to vacate may be extended to not less than sixty (60) days from the date of the order. 
(d)  Any building or structure declared substandard or dangerous under this division shall be repaired or demolished in accordance with the current building code or current code applicable to the type of substandard condition(s) requiring the repair, or demolition, as follows: 
(1)  If in the opinion of the building official, the repair is not feasible, the health and building standards commission may issue an order to demolish and remove such structure; or 
(2)  If such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, then the building official or the health and building standards commission may issue an order to repair and make safe and sanitary, provided that the owner agrees to the following conditions, which will also be listed in the order: 
(i)  He or she exclusively assumes all risk, expense and responsibility for ensuring that all legal requirements and standards are fully and strictly satisfied within the strict time constraints of the order, regardless of whether such standards are required under Denton's Code or any other law. 
(ii)  Neither the city, nor its staff, assume any responsibility for identifying these standards, nor for guiding the owner towards a timely, successful or feasible repair. 
(iii)  Neither the city, nor its staff, warrant, assure, represent or recommend that timely, compliant, affordable, complete, or satisfactory repairs are feasible, or even possible, whether under ideal circumstances or in the face of hidden, unforeseen or unforeseeable circumstances. 
(3)  Any building permit for repairs is strictly conditioned: 
(i)  Upon the limitations set forth in the order; 
(ii)  Upon application of Denton's current code standards to any repair; 
(iii)  Upon the owner's expressed assumption of his or her exclusive responsibility for strict, timely and complete compliance with these restrictions; and 
(iv)  Upon the owner's understanding and acceptance that the order could be strictly applied to authorize demolition of the structure if repairs are not timely and completely completed: regardless of any cause, condition or circumstance, even if unforeseen or unforeseeable; regardless of any other statement or representation made by the city, or its staff; regardless of time, money or effort already invested into the repairs upon expiration of the time allocated for repairs; and regardless of the amount of progress made toward completion upon expiration of the time allocated for repairs under the order. 
(4)  If an order has been issued to allow repairs, the owner still retains the option to demolish or remove the structure for which the order has been issued. 
(5)  Upon any structure deemed substandard and/or dangerous by the building official, the building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure, a placard including, but not limited to, the following language: 
"Do Not Enter, Unsafe to Occupy. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for persons authorized by the owner to enter for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs therein under permit and under inspection by inspectors of the City of Denton. This notice shall remain on this building until it is repaired or demolished." 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any structure marked by such a placard, except for persons authorized by the owner to enter for the purpose of securing the structure or making the required repairs therein under permit, and inspectors of the City of Denton. Such placard shall remain on the structure until it is repaired or demolished, or until removed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-191. - Public hearing required for order of demolition. 
(a)  Hearing required. In cases where the building official has determined that a building or structure should be demolished, a public hearing before the health and building standards commission shall be held, regardless of whether or not an appeal from such determination has been filed by any person. 
(b)  Diligent effort must be made to locate the owner, lien holder, or a mortgagee on the property. Diligent effort is met if the city follows the procedures of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.035 or 214.001, as amended. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given as in cases where an appeal has been filed. In addition, the secretary of the commission shall cause a notice to be published in the official newspaper of city at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled hearing date. The published notice shall be directed to any person having any interest in the property, stating the names of such persons, if known. The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the structure is located; 
(2)  A statement that the code official has found the building or structure located thereon to be dangerous and constitutes a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens; and 
(3)  A statement that a public hearing will be held before the health and building standards commission on a date and time and at a place therein specified to determine whether the building or structure should be demolished in accordance with the notice and order of the code official. 
(d)  Nuisance determination required to demolish. A notice and order to demolish a building or structure shall be issued only in those cases where the commission after the hearing has determined that the building or structure is dilapidated, substandard, dangerous, or unfit for human occupancy, does not meet minimum standards, and that the building or structure constitutes a nuisance, in so far as it is a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public and the occupants. 
(e)  Notice of demolition. Notice of demolition shall be by the following methods within ten (10) days after the date that the order of the commission is issued: 
(1)  Notice by mail. Whenever the commission has determined that a building should be demolished, the commission's notice and order shall be sent to all record owners, interested parties of record or other persons known to have an interest in the property informing such persons of the commission's determination and that, pursuant to the determination, the building will be demolished. The notice shall state that the costs of demolition shall be assessed against the property. All notices shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(2)  Notice by publication. In addition to the notice provided for in subsection (e)(1) of this section, the code official shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the city, a notice of the commission's determination. The notice shall contain: 
(i)  The street address or legal description of the property; 
(ii)  The date of the hearing; 
(iii)  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; 
(iv)  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained; and 
(v)  A statement that the building or structure on the premises will be demolished and that the cost of demolition will be assessed against the property. 
(3)  A copy of the order shall be filed with the office of the city secretary. 
(4)  A copy of the order shall be filed with the county clerk. 
(5)  Appeals from nuisance determinations of health and building standards commission. 
a.  Any person entitled to service of a notice issued pursuant to section 17-183 may appeal a determination of nuisance associated with an order to demolish issued by the health and building standards commission under this division, by filing a verified petition in the municipal court, alleging that the decision is illegal or unconstitutional, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the alleged illegality or unconstitutionality. 
b.  The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within thirty (30) calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the final decision of the health and building standards commission is personally delivered to them, mailed to them by first class mail with certified return receipt requested, or delivered to them by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or such decision shall become final as to each of them upon the expiration of each such thirty-calendar-day period. 
c.  Appeal hearings in the municipal court shall be a de novo determination of any applicable legal or constitutional impediments to demolition clearly raised and identified in writing by the owner, lienholder or mortgagee as a legal basis for appeal, but shall not embrace other matters of fact, such as feasibility or cost of repair. The court may reverse or affirm the health and building standards commission's determination of nuisance, or may otherwise remand back to the health and building standards commission any demolition order found to be unconstitutional or legally deficient, either in the finding that the building or structure constitutes such an immediate danger to public health and safety as to constitute a nuisance, or because the order otherwise fails to satisfy any required legal standard imposed by state or federal law to allow demolition. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No 2012-254, § 1, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 17-192. - Compliance. 
(a)  General. After any order of the building official or the health and building standards commission made pursuant to this division shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is subject to all penalties of law and this chapter. 
(b)  Failure to obey order. If after any order of the building official or health and building standards commission made pursuant to this division has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may (i) cause such person to be prosecuted under this section; and/or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such building or structure as a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-193. - Performance of demolition. 
When any demolition is to be done pursuant to this division, the code official shall cause the work to be done by city personnel or by private contractor under the supervision of the code official. All contracts for demolition work shall be entered into pursuant to procedures specified by ordinance or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-194. - Salvage materials. 
When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and any valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, to the person who is entitled thereto. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 17-195. - Recovery of remedial costs. 
The code official shall send an invoice to the owner of the premises requesting payment of the securing or demolition costs within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice. Any such assessment remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date the invoice was sent to the owner of the premises shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at ten (10) percent per annum. The amount of the assessment shall be subject to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided by the laws of the state for real property taxes. The code official shall keep an itemized account of the expense incurred by the city in the securing or demolition of any building or structure done pursuant to this division, and the entire costs of securing or demolition, less any salvage value recovered, shall be levied, assessed and collected by the office of the code official. Upon completion of the securing or demolition, a privileged lien, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, may be filed and perfected against the property on which the demolition occurred. The cost levied against the property may include an administrative fee as established by the city council and filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10) 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 214.001(n).  
Sec. 17-196. - Penalty provision. 
Any person violating any provision of Articles I through XII of the Denton Property Maintenance Code shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). If any person has been convicted or received a deferred adjudication for two (2) or more violations of this chapter and at least two (2) of the violations have different offense dates and occurred on the same property, the person shall be considered a chronic offender upon the third conviction on the same property within twenty-four (24) months of the first violation. Any person violating any provision of Articles I through XII of the Denton Property Maintenance Code as a chronic offender shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Any person violating any provision of Article XIII of the Denton Property Maintenance Code shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). If any person has been convicted or received a deferred adjudication for two (2) or more violations of this chapter and at least two (2) of the violations have different offense dates and occurred on the same property, the person shall be considered a chronic offender upon the third conviction on the same property within twenty-four (24) months of the first violation. Any person violating any provision of Article XIII of the Denton Property Maintenance Code as a chronic offender shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
Civil fines for health and safety violations of this chapter shall not exceed the maximum penalty generally authorized by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 54.017, as amended, or specifically authorized by any other statutory provision that may apply to such violations, whichever is greater. This chapter is cumulative of all other civil remedies provided by state law, including: money damages; injunction and other extraordinary relief; recovery of costs, expenses, and attorney fees; and such other remedies and mechanisms of enforcement that may be available or applicable to violations of the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-132, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Chapter 18 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire lanes; fire apparatus access roads, § 11-101 et seq.; automotive wrecking and salvage yards, § 16-126 et seq.; vehicles in parks, § 22-30; police generally, Ch. 23; traffic and parking controllers, § 23-56 et seq.; police-initiated towing services, § 23-81 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 25; parades, § 25-191 et seq.; vehicles for hire, Ch. 27; passenger buses, § 27-26 et seq.; taxicabs, § 27-66 et seq.; ambulances, § 27-101 et seq.; landscaping of traffic barriers, § 31-66; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicles generally, Ch. 32; access and traffic circulation in mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, § 32-82. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Alley means a public thoroughfare which ordinarily affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, public and private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the state board of health, emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the city council, private vehicles operated by volunteer firemen or certified emergency medical services employees or volunteers while answering a fire alarm or responding to a medical emergency, industrial ambulances and other industrial emergency response vehicles when operating in an emergency situation, provided the vehicle is also operated in adherence with criteria established by the Texas Industrial Fire Training Board of the State Firemen's and Fire Marshals' Association of Texas as the criteria are in effect on September 1, 1989, and vehicles operated by blood banks or tissue banks, accredited or approved under the laws of this state or the United States, while making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs or medicines or organs. 
Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when, within any six hundred (600) feet along such highway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings, which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
Compact vehicle means a motor vehicle that is one hundred eighty (180) inches or less in length and with a wheel base that is one hundred five (105) inches or less. 
Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. The word "crosswalk" also means any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Driver or operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two (2) roadways, thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
Limited-access or controlled-access highway means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to propel itself with not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in this city. 
Official traffic-control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Park means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
Police officer means every officer of the city police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a street or highway not comprising a business district when the property on such street or highway, for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more, is, in the main, improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
Right-of-way means the right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision, unless one (1) grants precedence to the other. 
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. This shall include the campus streets of the University of North Texas and of Texas Woman's University when open for general use. 
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
Traffic-control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1966, § 24-1; Ord. No. 2014-384, § 2, 11-18-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar state law definitions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 1—20.  
Sec. 18-2. - Authority of chief of police to make traffic regulations. 
The chief of police is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days, nor shall it be effective until approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 24-3)  
Sec. 18-3. - Authority of traffic engineer. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter. The traffic engineer shall designate the placement of stop signs, yield signs, traffic-control signals and all other signs, signals and devices other than those denoting speed limits, one-way streets, parking, school zones and right turns on red lights. It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary; 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; 
(3)  Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city. 
(4)  Establish parking zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem advisable for solid waste containers and bus stops, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1966, §§ 24-78, 24-79; Ord. No. 2009-081, § 1, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2017-300 , § 1, 10-17-17) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices and signals, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(2), 31.  
Sec. 18-3.1. - Stop intersections. 
The traffic engineer may designate any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersections. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the traffic engineer shall cause the same to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop, and it shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle approaching such a sign to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control signal. After having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver, after having so yielded, may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the intersecting street shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection. 
(Code 1966, § 24-118; Ord. No. 2011-113, § 1, 7-19-11) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to designate stop intersections, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(6), 91(a); duty of drivers with respect to stop signs, §§ 73, 91(c).  
Sec. 18-4. - Application of chapter to persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals, etc. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1966, § 24-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 25.  
Sec. 18-5. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1966, § 24-6) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention generally, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 18-6. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 24-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 23.  
Sec. 18-7. - Obedience to devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Code 1966, § 24-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 32.  
Sec. 18-8. - Validity of traffic-control devices, signs and signals. 
In prosecutions for any traffic offense, the authorized installation and official nature of all traffic-control devices, signs and signals shall be presumed. 
(Code 1966, § 24-89)  
Sec. 18-9. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1966, § 24-9)  
Sec. 18-10. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1966, § 24-11)  
Sec. 18-11. - Use of roller skates, skateboards, etc., on roadway. 
It shall be unlawful for any person upon a skateboard, roller skates or riding in or by means of any toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1966, § 24-13)  
Sec. 18-12. - Designation of restricted turns. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to approval by the city council, to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs. 
(Code 1966, § 24-40)  
Sec. 18-13. - vehicles and toy devices prohibited on sidewalks in designated areas. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a bicycle, motor assisted scooter, neighborhood electric device, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, or other similar device at any time on any sidewalks running adjacent to the streets listed below: 
(1)  On Pecan Street from five hundred (500) feet west of its intersection with Cedar Street to five hundred (500) feet east of its intersection with Austin Street. 
(2)  On Oak Street from five hundred (500) feet west of its intersection with Cedar Street to five hundred (500) feet east of its intersection with Austin Street. 
(3)  On Hickory Street from five hundred (500) feet west of its intersection with Cedar Street to five hundred (500) feet east of its intersection with Austin Street. 
(4)  On Walnut Street from five hundred (500) feet west of its intersection with Cedar Street to five hundred (500) feet east of its intersection with Austin Street. 
(5)  On Cedar Street from five hundred (500) feet north of its intersection with Pecan Street to five hundred (500) feet south of its intersection with Walnut Street. 
(6)  On Elm Street from five hundred (500) feet north of its intersection with Pecan Street to five hundred (500) feet south of its intersection with Walnut Street. 
(7)  On Locust Street from five hundred (500) feet north of its intersection with Pecan Street to five hundred (500) feet south of its intersection with Walnut Street. 
(8)  On Austin Street from five hundred (500) feet north of its intersection with Pecan Street to five hundred (500) feet south of its intersection with Walnut Street. 
This section shall not apply a mobility-impaired individual using a personal assistive mobility device such as a motorized wheelchair. 
(Ord. No. 96-139, § I, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 2004-187, § 1, 7-20-04)  
Secs. 18-14—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Yielding right-of-way. 
The traffic engineer, as authorized from time to time by the city council, may install and maintain yield right-of-way signs at intersections. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 1966, § 24-48)  
Sec. 18-32. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  Whenever any resolution or ordinance of the city council designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated by signs. 
(Code 1966, § 24-50) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to designate one-way streets and require traffic thereon to move in one specific direction, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(4).  
Sec. 18-33. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver to enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1966, § 24-55)  
Sec. 18-34. - Driving between vehicles of procession. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while the vehicles are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously identified. This section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1966, § 24-60)  
Sec. 18-35. - Driving on fresh pavement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of the streets in the city that have been freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street is ready for travel. 
(Code 1966, § 24-64)  
Sec. 18-36. - Vulnerable road users. 
(a)  In this section, a "vulnerable road user" means a person utilizing the roadway for travel including: 
(1)  A pedestrian, a runner, a physically disabled person, a highway construction or maintenance worker, tow truck operator, a utility worker, or any other worker with legitimate business in or near the road or right-of-way, or a stranded motorist or passenger, or one assisting or providing aid to a stranded or injured motorist; 
(2)  A person on horseback; 
(3)  A person operating equipment other than a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a bicycle (including an electric bicycle), tricycle, hand-cycle, moped, horse-drawn conveyance, skateboarder, rollerblader, roller-skater, or a person operating a manual scooter, so long as any such equipment is legally operable on public streets; or 
(4)  A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device in compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  A person may operate an electric personal assistive mobility device on a residential street, roadway, or public highway with a speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour or less only: 
1.  While making a direct crossing of a highway in a marked or unmarked crosswalk; 
2.  Where no sidewalk is reasonably accessible; or 
3.  When so directed by a traffic control device or by a law enforcement officer. 
b.  A person may operate an electric personal assistive mobility device on a path set aside for use by bicyclists or pedestrians. 
c.  Any person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device on a residential street, roadway, or public highway shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand edge. 
d.  Except as otherwise provided by this section, provisions of this section applicable to the operation of bicycles apply to the operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
(b)  In this section, a "motor vehicle" means a self-propelled vehicle or a vehicle that is propelled by electric power from overhead trolley wires. The term does not include an electric personal assistive mobility device. 
(c)  Pedestrians, runners, and physically disabled persons shall utilize a sidewalk when reasonably available and accessible or, if none, shall travel against traffic as close as practicable to the edge of the roadway. 
(d)  Vulnerable road users, as defined by subsections (a)(2), (a)(3) and (a)(4) above, shall comply with the requirements for bicycles set forth as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided by subsection (2), a person operating a bicycle on a roadway who is moving slower than the other traffic on the roadway shall ride as near as practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway, unless: 
a.  The person is passing another vehicle moving in the same direction; 
b.  The person is preparing to turn left at an intersection or onto a private road or driveway; 
c.  A condition on or off the roadway, including a fixed or moving object, parked or moving vehicle, pedestrian, animal, or surface hazard prevents the person from safely riding next to the right curb or edge of the roadway; or 
d.  The person is operating a bicycle in an outside lane that is: 
1.  Less than fourteen (14) feet in width and does not have a designated bicycle lane adjacent to that lane; or 
2.  Too narrow for a bicycle and a motor vehicle to safely travel side by side. 
(2)  A person operating a bicycle on a one-way roadway with two (2) or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near as practicable to the left curb or edge of the roadway. 
(3)  Persons operating bicycles on a roadway may ride two (2) abreast. Persons riding two (2) abreast on a laned roadway shall ride in a single lane. Persons riding two abreast may not impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic on the roadway. 
(e)  An operator of a motor vehicle passing a vulnerable road user operating on a highway or street shall: 
(1)  Move to the left lane if the highway has two (2) or more marked lanes running in the same direction; or 
(2)  Pass the vulnerable road user at a safe distance. 
(f)  For the purpose of subsection (e)(2), when road conditions allow, safe distance is at least: 
(1)  Three (3) feet if the operator's vehicle is a passenger car or light truck; or 
(2)  Six (6) feet if the operator's vehicle is a truck, other than a light truck, or a commercial motor vehicle as defined by the V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 522.003. 
(g)  An operator of a motor vehicle that is making a left turn or a U-turn at an intersection, including an intersection with an alley or private road or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to a vulnerable road user in all circumstances in which the operator would be required to yield right-of-way pursuant to the traffic law. 
(h)  An operator of a motor vehicle may not overtake a vulnerable road user traveling in the same direction and subsequently make a right-hand turn in front of the vulnerable road user unless the operator is safely clear of the vulnerable road user in light of all conditions impacting safety. 
(i)  An operator of a motor vehicle may not maneuver the vehicle in a manner that: 
(1)  Is intended to intimidate or harass a vulnerable road user; or 
(2)  Places the vulnerable road user at risk of unreasonable imminent bodily injury. 
(j)  An operator of a motor vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any vulnerable road user on a roadway including public rights-of-way. 
(k)  A vulnerable road user on a roadway or public right-of-way shall exercise due care and comply with all applicable city ordinances and state statutes. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that at the time of the offense, the vulnerable road user was acting in violation of state law or local ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2011-046, § 1, 4-5-11)  
Sec. 18-37. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-38. - Use of wireless communication devices while operating a vehicle. 
(a)  In this section, a "hands-free device" means speakerphone capability or a telephone attachment to other piece of equipment, regardless of whether permanently installed in/on the vehicle, that allows use of the wireless device without use of either of the operator's hands, except for the use of the operator's hands for the purpose of answering or terminating a voice telephone call. 
(b)  In this section, "stop" or "stopped" means to halt an occupied or unoccupied vehicle: (1) in a location other than a lane of traffic on a roadway; (2) in a lane of traffic on a roadway pursuant to the direction of a traffic control device; or (3) otherwise lawfully stopped in a lane of traffic on a roadway. 
(c)  In this section, "vehicle" shall have the meaning set forth in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 541.201(23). 
(d)  In this section, "wireless communication device" has the meaning assigned in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 545.425 (Use of Wireless Communication Device; Offense). 
(e)  An operator of a vehicle may not use a wireless communication device for any purpose while operating a vehicle on any street or highway within the City of Denton, unless employing a hands-free device. 
(f)  This section does not apply to an operator of a vehicle using a wireless communication device: 
(1)  For initiating or terminating a telephone call while the vehicle is stopped; or 
(2)  For initiating or terminating navigation with mapping software or a global positioning system, while the vehicle is stopped; or 
(3)  By an operator of an authorized emergency vehicle using a wireless communication device while acting in an official capacity; or 
(4)  By an operator who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission operating a radio frequency device other than a wireless communication device. 
(g)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under this section if a wireless communication device is used: 
(1)  For obtaining emergency assistance to report a traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious traffic hazard, or to prevent a crime about to be committed or being committed; or 
(2)  In the reasonable belief that a person's life or safety is in immediate danger. 
(h)  To the extent that this section conflicts with the V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 545.424, regarding the use of wireless communication devices while operating a vehicle by minors, or V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 545.425, regarding the use of wireless communications devices in school zones or by the operators of school busses, this section does not apply. 
(i)  To the extent that this section conflicts with the V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 545.4251 regarding the use of wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle to read, write, or send an electronic message, this section does not apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-112, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2016-394 , § 2, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 2017-282 , § 2, 9-19-17)  
Secs. 18-39—18-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRUCKS AND TRUCK ROUTES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-120, § I, adopted Aug. 6, 1991, repealed former Div. 2, §§ 18-51—18-56, relative to trucks and truck routes, and § II of said ordinance enacted a new Div. 2 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Div. 2 derived from Code 1966, § 27-67(a)—(f) and Ord. No. 88-007, § I, adopted Jan. 15, 1988. 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the following meaning: 
Commercial vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, not including a passenger bus, passenger automobile, panel delivery truck or pickup truck. 
Garage shall mean a place of enclosed shelter or repair facility for vehicles. 
Gross vehicle weight shall mean the total weight of a vehicle including any load being carried by the vehicle. 
Motor vehicle shall mean every vehicle as herein defined which is self-propelled. 
Pole trailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed, or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Residential street shall mean a street whose predominate purpose is to provide access to abutting single-family or two-family residential properties. 
Semitrailer shall mean every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle. 
State-designated roadway shall mean any interstate highway, U.S. highway, F.M. highway, or loop. 
Trailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power designed or used for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck terminal shall mean an end of a carrier's line containing a truck yard, dock and lighterage facilities, management offices, or storage sheds for vehicles or cargo. 
Truck-tractor shall mean every vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
Vehicle shall mean every mechanical device in, upon or which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including motor vehicles, truck-tractors and semi-trailers, severally, as herein defined, but excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 91-120, § II, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 94-059, § IV, 4-5-94)  
Sec. 18-52. - Truck routes; use required; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated upon any public street within the corporate limits of the city any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or any combination thereof except on such street or streets as are designated as truck routes. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply: 
(1)  To a vehicle traveling to or from a truck terminal, garage, place of repair, place of performing a service or a place of loading or unloading, over the shortest practicable route to a point on a truck route. Any such vehicle shall be permitted to proceed from one point not on a truck route to another such point without returning to a truck route if to return would unreasonably increase the distance to be traveled between such points. The operator of any such vehicle shall have in his possession for inspection of police officers, his log book, delivery slips, or other evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route and shall present said evidence on demand of any police officer for this exception to apply. 
(2)  To an emergency vehicle operating in response to any emergency call. 
(3)  To a vehicle operated by a public utility while cruising in an assigned area for the purpose of inspecting the facilities of such public utility or providing maintenance service to such facilities. 
(4)  To a city-owned vehicle operated for the collection of solid waste. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, any vehicle operated pursuant to a certification of surety bond for the transportation of ready-mix concrete issued by the State of Texas pursuant to Texas Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 6701d-12 (Vernon 1994), shall travel exclusively on streets within the incorporated limits of the city over the shortest distance from the point of their origin or designation to the closest state highway. 
(Ord. No. 91-120, § II, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 94-059, § II, 4-5-94; Ord. No. 94-084, § I, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-53. - Truck routes designated. 
The following portions of streets, to be used in accordance with the provisions of this article, are hereby established as truck routes: 
Airport Road (F.M. 1515) from Interstate 35W to the Municipal Airport. 
Bell Avenue from Mingo Road to the intersection of Eagle Drive and Dallas Drive. 
Carroll Boulevard from Sherman Drive to Forth Worth Drive. 
Colorado Boulevard from Spencer Road to Loop 288. 
Country Club Road (F.M. 1830) from U.S. 377 (Forth Worth Drive) to the south city limits line. 
Dallas Drive from the intersection of Eagle Drive and Bell Avenue to Interstate 35E. 
Eagle Drive from Interstate 35E to the intersection of Bell Avenue and Dallas Drive. 
East Hickory from Bell to North Bradshaw. 
F.M. 1173 from Interstate 35 to the west city limits line. 
Fort Worth Drive (U.S. Highway 377) from Eagle Drive to the south city limits line. 
Interstate 35 from the north city limits line to Interstate 35E and 35W Junction. 
Interstate 35E from Interstate 35E and 35W Junction to the south city limits line. 
Interstate 35W from Interstate 35E and 35W Junction to the south city limits line. 
Lillian Miller Parkway from Teasley Lane to Interstate 35E. 
Locust Street (F.M. 2164) from Sherman Drive to Eagle Drive. 
Locust Street (F.M. 2164) from the north city limits line to Highway 77 (Elm Street). 
Loop 288 from Interstate 35E to Interstate 35. 
McKinney Street from Carroll Boulevard to the east city limits line. 
Mesa Drive from Highway 380 (University Drive) to Barcelona Street. 
Metro Street from Interstate 35W Service Road to its end. 
Mingo Road from Ruddell Street to Bell Avenue. 
Morse Street from Loop 288 to Mayhill Road. 
North Bradshaw from East Hickory to East McKinney. 
Prairie Street from Bell Avenue to Elm Street. 
Ruddell Street from U.S. 380 (University Drive) to Mingo Road. 
San Jacinto Boulevard from Interstate 35E to Colorado Boulevard. 
Shady Oaks Drive from Willow Springs Drive to Woodrow Lane. 
Sherman Drive from the north city limits line to Carroll Boulevard. 
Spencer Road from Loop 288 to Mayhill Road. 
Teasely Lane from Dallas Drive to the south city limits line. 
U.S. 77 from Interstate 35E to Fort Worth Drive. 
U.S. 380 (University Drive) from the east city limits line to Loop 288. 
U.S. 380 (University Drive) from the west city limits line to Interstate 35. 
Willow Springs from Dallas Drive to Shady Oaks Drive. 
Woodrow Lane from McKinney Street to Spencer Road. 
(Ord. No. 91-120, § II, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 92-085, § I, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 94-059, § III, 4-5-94; Ord. No. 97-173, §§ I, II, 6-17-97)  
Sec. 18-54. - Certain use of residential streets prohibited. 
No person shall operate a diesel-powered tractor or truck-tractor combination on any residential street between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 91-120, § II, 8-6-91)  
Sec. 18-55. - Operation of concrete trucks. 
(a)  The owner of any vehicle used to transport ready-mix concrete shall file with the City Engineer a surety bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and conditioned that the owner of any such vehicle will pay to the city the cost of repairing all damages to streets by reason of the operation of any such vehicle with a tandem-axle load in excess of thirty-six thousand pounds (36,000 lbs.). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle transporting ready-mix concrete unless it contains a functioning device attached to the concrete chute which traps concrete. 
(Ord. No. 91-120, § II, 8-6-91)  
Sec. 18-56. - Maximum vehicle load limit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate, cause to be operated, or permit to be operated on any public street within the city, a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles having a weight in excess of any one or more of the following limitations: 
(1)  In no event shall the total gross weight, with load, of any vehicle or combination of vehicles, exceed eighty thousand (80,000) pounds. 
(2)  No axle shall carry a load in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds. An axle load shall be defined as the total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two (2) parallel transverse vertical planes forty (40) inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
(3)  The total gross weight concentrated on the highway surface from any tandem-axle group shall not exceed thirty-four thousand (34,000) pounds for each such tandem-axle group. "Tandem-axle" is defined as two (2) or more axles spaced forty (40) inches or more apart from center to center having at least one (1) common point of weight suspension. 
(b)  The provisions of section 18-56(a) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person operating or causing to be operated a motor vehicle for which a valid permit for the operation of overweight equipment used for transporting commodities which cannot be reasonably dismantled has been issued by the State Highway Department under the provisions of Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated article 6701a (Vernon 1977), as amended; 
(2)  Any person operating an emergency vehicle in response to any emergency call; 
(3)  Any person operating a vehicle for the purpose of constructing or maintaining any public utility in the City of Denton; or 
(4)  Any person operating a city-owned vehicle while performing public service, i.e., garbage pick-up, street repair, and water service. 
(c)  Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mix concrete shall be operated in accordance with the provisions of Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated article 6701d-12, Section 2 (Vernon 1977, Supp. 1991), as amended. 
(1)  No vehicles regulated by this paragraph shall carry a tandem-axle load which exceeds forty thousand (40,000) pounds, a single-axle load which exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds, and a gross load which exceeds fifty-six thousand (56,000) pounds. 
(2)  Vehicles regulated herein when traveling upon city streets shall travel exclusively on streets designated under section 18-53 of Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances, except when traveling to or from a truck terminal, garage, place of repair, place of performing a service, or a place of loading or unloading. Any route travelled in accordance with this paragraph shall be over the shortest distance from the point of origin or destination to the closest street designated under section 18-53. The operator of any such vehicle shall have in his possession for inspection of police officers, his log book, delivery slips, or other evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route and shall present said evidence on demand of any police officer for this exception to apply. 
(3)  Vehicles regulated herein exceeding the weight requirements as specified in (1) above shall be operated exclusively upon state-designated roadways and pursuant to all regulations of state law. 
(d)  Vehicles used exclusively to transport milk may be operated if the distance between the front wheel of the forward tandem-axle, measured longitudinally, is at least twenty-eight (28) feet, and the maximum load carried on any group of axles does not exceed sixty-eight thousand (68,000) pounds. 
(e)  Vehicles used exclusively to transport solid waste (except hazardous waste), as defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Texas Health and Safety Code Ann. section 361.003 (Vernon 1991), may be operated upon the public streets of the City of Denton with a tandem-axle gross load not to exceed forty-four thousand (44,000) pounds, a single-axle gross load not to exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds and a gross load for the vehicle not to exceed sixty-four thousand (64,000) pounds provided that when the vehicle is to be operated with a tandem-axle load in excess of thirty-four thousand (34,000) pounds, the owner shall have first filed with the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation a surety bond as required by Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated article 6701d-10a (Vernon 1977). 
(f)  Any peace officer having reason to believe that the gross weight or axle load of a loaded motor vehicle is unlawful, as provided herein, is authorized to weigh the same by means of portable or stationary scales, or cause the same to be weighed by any public weigher, and to require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest available scales for the purpose of weighing. In the event the maximum gross weight or axle load of such vehicle is found to exceed by more than five (5) percent, the maximum weight authorized by law, such peace officer may issue a citation, unless the operator possesses a valid overweight permit issued by the Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation or the Commissioners Court of the County of Denton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 91-120, § II, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 94-059, § I, 4-5-94)  
Sec. 18-57. - Penalty provision for violations. 
Any person, partnership, limited partnership, association, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon first conviction shall be fined a sum of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and on a second or subsequent conviction a sum of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 91-120, § II, 8-6-91)  
Sec. 18-58. - Marking of truck routes. 
The city engineer may cause to be posted appropriate signs and markings giving notice of designated truck routes. 
(Ord. No. 91-120, § II, 8-6-91)  
Secs. 18-59—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPEED OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Maximum speeds. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the city at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour or on any public alley at a speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed. 
(Code 1966, § 24-99(a); Ord. No. 88-181, § I, 11-1-88) 
State Law reference— Maximum speeds of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. XIX, § 166.  
Sec. 18-72. - Maximum limits near schools, churches and hospitals. 
The maximum speed limit within the same block of any school, church or hospital shall be twenty (20) miles per hour, and when signs are erected it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle at a speed greater than such limit. 
(Code 1966, § 24-101)  
Sec. 18-73. - Speed limits on certain roads and highways. 
Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.356, the following prima facie speed limits hereafter indicated for vehicles are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe; and such speed limits are hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling upon the named streets and highways, or parts thereof, described as follows: 
Extent 	Speed Limit 
I. FM 426/McKinney Avenue 
	From Locust Street/US 77 to Mack Drive. 	30 mph 
	From Mack Drive to Glengary Drive. 	45 mph 
	From Glengary Drive to the south/easterly city limits. 	55 mph 
II. FM 428/Sherman Drive 
	From Elm Street/US 77 to Monterrey Drive. 	35 mph 
	From Monterrey Drive to Long Road. 	45 mph 
	From Long Road to the north/easterly city limits. 	55 mph 
III. FM 1173 		
	From the IH-35 southbound frontage road to the westerly city limits. 	60 mph 
IV. FM 1515/Airport Road 
	From IH-35E northbound frontage road to Corbin Road. 	45 mph 
	From Corbin Road to Masch Branch Road. 	55 mph 
V. FM 1830/Country Club Road 
	From Ft. Worth Drive/377 to Sanders Road. 	45 mph 
	From Sanders Road to the southerly city limits. 	50 mph 
VI. FM 2164/N. Locust 
	From N. Locust Street/US 77 to Loop 288. 	45 mph 
	From Loop 288 to the northerly city limits. 	60 mph 
VII. FM 2181/Teasley Lane 
	From IH 35 E Southbound Frontage Road to Savannah Trail. 	35 mph 
	From Savannah Trail to 500 feet west of Pennsylvania Drive. 	45 mph 
	From 500 feet west of Pennsylvania Drive to Lillian Miller Parkway. 	40 mph 
	From Wind River Lane to the south/easterly city limits. 	45 mph 
VIII. IH-35E Frontage Road Northbound 
	From the southerly city limits to Loop 288. 	50 mph 
	From Loop 288 to Oak Street. 	45 mph 
IX. IH-35E Frontage Road Southbound 
	From Oak Street to Lillian Miller Parkway. 	45 mph 
	From Lillian Miller Parkway to the southerly city limits. 	50 mph 
X. IH-35 Frontage Road Northbound 
	From Oak Street to Elm Street/US 77. 	50 mph 
	From Elm Street/US 77 to the northerly city limits. 	55 mph 
XI. IH-35 Frontage Road Southbound 
	From the northerly city limits to Elm Street/US 77. 	55 mph 
	From Elm Street/US 77 to Oak Street. 	50 mph 
XII. Loop 288 
	From IH-35E southbound main lanes to Spencer Road. 	40 mph 
	From Spencer Road to University Drive/US 380. 	50 mph 
	From University Drive/US 380 to IH-35. 	60 mph 
XIII. US 77/Dallas Drive 
	From IH-35E southbound main-lanes entrance ramp to Teasley Lane/FM 2181. 	45 mph 
	From Teasley Lane/FM 2181 to Smith Street. 	35 mph 
	From Smith Street to Eagle Drive/US 77/Bell Avenue. 	30 mph 
XIV. US 77/Eagle Drive 
	From Dallas Drive/US 77/Bell Avenue to Elm Street/US 77. 	30 mph 
XV. US 77/Elm Street 
	From the IH-35N southbound frontage road to Donna Road. 	55 mph 
	From Donna Road to FM 2164. 	45 mph 
	From FM 2164 to Sherman Drive/FM 428. 	35 mph 
	From Sherman Drive/FM 428 to Eagle Drive/US 77. 	30 mph 
XVI. US 77/Locust Street 
	From Eagle Drive/US 77 to Sherman Drive/FM 428. 	30 mph 
	From Sherman Drive/FM 428 to Elm Street. 	35 mph 
XVII. US 377/Ft. Worth Drive 
	From Lindsey Street to IH 35 E Southbound Frontage Road. 	35 mph 
	From IH 35 E Southbound Frontage Road to 550 feet north of Massey Road. 	40 mph 
	From 550 feet north of Massey Road to 250 feet south of CountryClub Drive/FM 1830. 	45 mph 
	From 250 feet south of Country Club Drive/FM 1830 to the south/westerly city limits. 	55 mph 
XVIII. US 380/University Drive 
	From the western city limits to Masch Branch Road. 	65 mph 
	From Masch Branch Road to 500 feet west of Cindy Lane/N. Western Boulevard. 	50 mph 
	From 500 feet west of Cindy Lane/N. Western Boulevard to Bonnie Brae Street. 	45 mph 
	From Bonnie Brae Street to Locust Street or US 77. 	40 mph 
	From Locust Street/US 77 to Bell Avenue. 	40 mph 
	From Bell Avenue to Loop 288 northbound ramp. 	45 mph 
	From Loop 288 northbound ramp to Riverside Drive. 	55 mph 
	From Riverside Drive to the easterly city limits. 	60 mph 
XIX. FM 2499/Barrel Strap 
	From the IH-35 southbound frontage road to FM 2181. 	45 mph 
XX. Cowling Road 
	Within city jurisdiction, from Rector Road to Deer Run Drive. 	40 mph 
 
That any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), unless the violation occurs in a work zone and then the penalty shall not exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(Ord. No. 2004-103, § 2, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2005-173, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2006-134, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-329, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2008-048, § 1, 2-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-233, § 1, 11-15-11; Ord. No. 2017-067 , § 1, 2-21-17; Ord. No. 2017-162 , §§ 1—3, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 2017-379 , § 1, 12-5-17; Ord. No. 2019-391 , § 2, 2-26-19)  
Secs. 18-74—18-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and parking controllers, § 23-56 et seq.; bus stops, § 27-29; off-street parking and loading, § 35-301 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(1). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-91. - Prohibited in specific places. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle or cause a vehicle to be stopped or parked between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon the following portions of public streets in the city: 
(1)  The east side of Lakey Street from the south right-of-way line of Sycamore Street to the north right-of-way line of Wilson Street. 
(2)  The south side of East Prairie Street from the east right-of-way line of Lakey Street to the west right-of-way line of Bradshaw Street. 
(3)  The west side of Bradshaw Street from the south right-of-way line of Sycamore Street to the north right-of-way line of Wilson Street. 
(4)  The south side of Wilson Street from the east right-of-way line of Lakey Street to the west right-of-way line of Bradshaw Street. 
(5)  The north side of Wilson Street from the west right-of-way line of Bradshaw Street two hundred ninety (290) feet to the west. 
These parking regulations may be temporarily suspended by ordinance for special events. 
(Code 1966, § 24-115(c); Ord. No. 94-178, § I, 9-27-94) 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing or parking prohibited at places where official signs prohibit stopping, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 95(a)(1)(I).  
Sec. 18-91.50. - Stopping or parking prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  An operator may not stop or park a vehicle: 
(1)  On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(2)  On a sidewalk; 
(3)  In an intersection; 
(4)  On a crosswalk; 
(5)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of a place on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the governing body of a municipality designates a different length by signs or markings; 
(6)  Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction if stopping or parking the vehicle would obstruct traffic; 
(7)  On a bridge or other elevated structure on a highway or in a highway tunnel; 
(8)  On a railroad track; 
(9)  Where an official sign prohibits stopping; or 
(10)  Within five (5) feet of a public or private driveway or blocking any portion of a public or private driveway or access to such driveway. 
(b)  An operator may not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger, stop or park an occupied or unoccupied vehicle: 
(1)  In front of a public or private driveway or within five (5) feet of a driveway; 
(2)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; 
(3)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, where crosswalk means: 
a.  The portion of a roadway, including an intersection, designated as a pedestrian crossing by surface markings, including lines; or 
b.  The portion of a roadway at an intersection that is within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(4)  Within twenty (20) feet of the extension of the curbs or, in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable area of the adjacent cross-street; 
(5)  Within thirty (30) feet on the approach to a flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to a fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance, if the entrance is properly marked with a sign; or 
(7)  Where an official sign prohibits stopping or parking. 
(c)  An operator may not, except temporarily to load or unload merchandise or passengers, park an occupied or unoccupied vehicle: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or 
(2)  Where an official sign prohibits parking. 
(d)  A person may stop or park a bicycle on a sidewalk if the bicycle does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic on the sidewalk. 
(e)  A person may not stop or park a vehicle on a public right-of-way or a state or city easement for the purpose displaying the vehicle for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2011-113, § 2, 7-19-11; Ord. No. 2016-388 , § 1, 12-6-16)  
Sec. 18-91.51. - Additional parking regulations. 
(a)  An operator who stops or parks on a two-way roadway shall do so with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  An operator who stops or parks on a one-way roadway shall stop or park the vehicle parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of authorized traffic movement with the right-hand wheels within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway or the left-hand wheels within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. This subsection does not apply where a local ordinance otherwise regulates stopping or parking on the one-way roadway. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply if the city has established angled parking spaces on the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2011-113, § 3, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 18-91.52. - Compact motor vehicle-only parking spaces. 
When sign(s) or marking(s) are installed giving notice thereof, it shall be an offense to park a vehicle that is not a compact motor vehicle in a parking space marked for only compact motor vehicles or to park any motor vehicle in a manner that does not fit completely within the innermost edge of all the applicable marking(s) designating the parking space. 
(Ord. No. 2014-384, § 3, 11-18-14)  
Sec. 18-91.53. - Parking within designated spaces. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any parking spaces designated by the City of Denton in a manner that any part of the vehicle extends over any sidewalk, into any lane of traffic or over any driveway. 
(Ord. No. 2014-384, § 4, 11-18-14)  
Sec. 18-91.54. - Back-in only parking spaces. 
When sign(s) or marking(s), are installed giving notice thereof, it shall be an offense to park a vehicle in a parking space that is designated as a back-in only parking space in any manner other than by backing into the parking space. 
(Ord. No. 2014-384, § 5, 11-18-14)  
Sec. 18-92. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in the city for the purposes of: 
(a)  Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle; 
(b)  Advertising or soliciting business; or 
(c)  Selling merchandise from such vehicle. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) if the repair was necessitated by an emergency and if the repair was done or the vehicle was towed away within twenty (20) hours of the time the vehicle broke down or ceased to operate properly on the roadway. 
(Code 1966, § 24-116; Ord. No. 2009-060, § 1, 3-3-09)  
Sec. 18-92.1. - Parking nuisances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to park or store or allow another to park or store a recreational vehicle, travel trailer, boat or boat trailer, tow truck, truck, truck-tractor, pull trailer, semi-trailer or any vehicle other than a passenger car on any public right-of-way in any residential zoned district. 
(b)  No person shall park any vehicle upon the street in any manner as to obstruct the loading or unloading of any solid waste container. 
(c)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) if the vehicle was parked on the public-right-of-way in compliance with section 18-52 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-060, § 2, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-113, § 4, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 18-93. - Blocking roadway. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a police officer. 
(Code 1966, § 24-117)  
Sec. 18-94. - Parking or standing in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to have available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1966, § 24-125)  
Sec. 18-95. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2011-113, § 1, adopted July 19, 2011, renumbered § 18-95 as § 18-3.1.  
Sec. 18-96. - Designation and marking of parking spaces and areas where parking is prohibited or limited. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall cause parking spaces to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time, and he shall cause spaces in which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time. The traffic engineer shall also cause time limit parking areas to be maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets as may be designated by the city council from time to time. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or markings on the pavement. 
(b)  In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the council, the areas to be designated with clearly distinguishable markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area. 
(c)  Any time limit on parking established under this section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the council. 
(Code 1966, § 24-121)  
Sec. 18-97. - Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking; owner prima facie responsible for illegal parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited as provided in section 18-96 or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible, and should any vehicle be found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this article regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
(Code 1966, § 24-122)  
Sec. 18-98. - Overnight parking. 
Overnight parking for storage on any paved street is hereby prohibited. "Overnight parking for storage" is hereby defined as the habitual parking or storing of cars, trucks, tractors or other vehicles on paved streets during the hours from sundown to sunup, except temporarily disabled vehicles which are protected by flares or other approved signal devices. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit or interfere with passenger cars temporarily parked at night when such parking is not in excess of twenty (20) continuous hours and if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The vehicle displays current vehicle inspection; 
(2)  The vehicle displays current vehicle registration; and 
(3)  The owners maintain current insurance or other proof of financial responsibility. 
(Code 1966, § 24-126; Ord. No. 2011-113, § 5, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 18-99. - Loading and unloading of freight trucks. 
All freight trucks shall be and are hereby required to be loaded and unloaded from the alley entrance, if practicable. Where conditions are such as to make the loading or unloading thereof from an alley impracticable, such trucks shall be parked on the street in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 24-127)  
Sec. 18-100. - Application for loading zone. 
(a)  Loading zones may be granted to any business where a loading zone is necessary for the conduct of the business, subject to the provisions provided in this section. 
(b)  The owner or manager of a business desiring a loading zone shall make written application to the citizens traffic safety support commission. The application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the business; 
(2)  The types of goods and/or services provided by the business; 
(3)  The types and numbers of commercial vehicles operated by the business; 
(4)  The types of commercial vehicles making deliveries to the business and the frequency of the deliveries made by the vehicles; 
(5)  A statement of the specific use to be made of the proposed loading zone; 
(6)  The types and numbers of personal vehicles, if any, which may be parked in proposed loading zone when zone is not being used for loading or unloading purposes. 
(c)  If the citizens traffic safety support commission approves the application for the loading zone, the commission shall direct appropriate city personnel to cause the loading zone to be installed as provided in (d) of this section. 
(d)  If approved, a loading zone shall be installed upon receipt of an advance payment, in an amount as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(e)  Upon granting the application for a loading zone permitting the parking of vehicles, the permit holder shall be issued an official numbered decal or device, as determined by the citizens traffic safety support commission, which shall be displayed on or in a place visible from any personal vehicle at all times in order to be legally parked in the loading zone designated for the applicant. 
(f)  The citizens traffic safety support commission shall annually review loading zone renewal applications during September of each year to determine whether a need for each loading zone exists. If the commission determines such a need continues to exist, the loading zone shall be renewed upon the receipt of a renewal fee, if applicable, and as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, prior to October 1 of each year. Failure to pay any applicable renewal fee prior to October 1 will result in the need for reapplication at a cost, as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(g)  An applicant may appeal the decision to deny a loading zone permit or renewal to the city council. 
(h)  Loading zones may only be used for the actual loading and unloading of commercial or customer vehicles, except as follows: 
(1)  Personal vehicles bearing a properly affixed or painted sign or logo located on the exterior of the vehicle identifying it as a vehicle utilized by the business which has been registered by the owner with the citizens traffic safety support commission and the chief of police and displaying the device or decal issued for said vehicle as provided in paragraph (e) of this section; or 
(2)  Commercial vehicles registered by the owner with the citizens traffic safety support commission and the chief of police bearing a properly affixed sign located on the exterior of the vehicle identifying it as a commercial vehicle. 
(i)  The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following meaning: 
(1)  Commercial vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle (other than a passenger car) designed or used primarily for transportation of property, including any passenger car which has been reconstructed so as to be used, and which is being used, primarily for delivery purposes. 
(2)  Personal vehicle shall mean a passenger car or any other motor vehicle designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons. 
(Code 1966, § 24-128; Ord. No. 93-089, § I, 6-1-93)  
Sec. 18-101. - Marking of loading zones. 
Every loading zone approved by the citizens traffic safety support commission shall be designated by city personnel by markings painted on the curb adjacent thereto and/or signs adjacent thereto the words "LOADING ZONE—VIOLATORS WILL BE TOWED." 
(Code 1966, § 24-129; Ord. No. 93-089, § II, 6-1-93)  
Sec. 18-102. - Parking restrictions in loading zone. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle, other than a properly authorized commercial or personal vehicle as provided in section 18-100(h), in a loading zone. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that materials were being expeditiously unloaded from or loaded into the vehicle from a business holding the loading zone permit. 
(Code 1966, § 24-129.1; Ord. No. 93-089, § III, 6-1-93)  
Sec. 18-102.1. - Penalties for violation of loading zone restrictions. 
(a)  Any person violating provisions of section 18-102 of this Code shall be punished upon conviction by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(b)  Any vehicle found to be parked in violation of the terms of section 18-102 shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be subject to impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 93-089, § IV, 6-1-93)  
Sec. 18-103. - Designation and use of taxicab stands. 
(a)  Taxicab stands or zones may be granted to any taxicab business where such stand or zone is necessary for the conduct of the business of the taxicab business subject to the provisions provided in this section. 
(b)  The owner of one (1) or more licensed taxicabs desiring a taxicab zone or stand for a taxicab use shall make written application to the traffic support commission on forms provided by such commission. 
(c)  If the commission finds that there is a need for such taxicab stand or zone it may approve such application and direct that such stand or zone be designated by sign or other appropriate markings upon receipt by the applicant of a fee as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. Thereafter, the applicant receiving such taxicab zone or stand shall pay an annual fee prior to October 1 of each year, as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary in order to renew the use of such zone or stand for taxicab purposes for one (1) year. 
(d)  The denial of an application for a taxicab zone or stand may be appealed to the city council. 
(e)  The driver of a taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any time other than at a taxicab stand, except such vehicle may temporarily stop or park in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(f)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand or zone when such zone or stand has been officially designated and appropriately marked, except that a driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such stand or zone. 
(Code 1966, § 24-130)  
Sec. 18-104. - Impoundment of standing or parked vehicles. 
(a)  A vehicle removed and towed under the authority of V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 545.305 shall be kept at the place designated by the police department until application for redemption is made by the owner or his authorized agent or other person legally entitled to possession of the vehicle. The police department shall require adequate proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. The fees set forth below are also applicable to vehicles towed by towing companies pursuant to chapter 23, article IV, of this Code of Ordinances. The fees for towing and storage of vehicles are as follows: 
(1)  Towing fees. The towing fee shall be one hundred forty-five dollars ($145.00). 
(2)  Storage fees. Storage fees for any vehicle twenty-five (25) feet in length or less shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per day, or any part of a day, after the first twenty-four (24) hours. Storage fees for any vehicle more than twenty-five (25) feet in length shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per day, or any part of a day, after the first twenty-four (24) hours. 
(3)  Impound fee. The impoundment fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) and may be assessed pursuant to V.T.C.A. Occupations Code § 2303.155. 
(4)  Notification fee. The notification fee for any towed vehicles registered in the State of Texas shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be charged to the registered owner of the vehicle. Notification will be sent to the vehicle's last registered owner and all recorded lienholders by certified or registered mail no sooner than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the vehicle and no later than five (5) days after receipt of the vehicle. 
(5)  Fee for dollies. If dollies are used to tow a vehicle, a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) may be charged. 
(6)  Miscellaneous fees. Unless specifically listed by local rules established under the authority of the director given to him by section 23-82 of Ordinance 2006-174, any miscellaneous tow service fees should be listed with the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Whenever the police department takes into custody a vehicle removed from the streets under the authority of this section, it shall attempt to ascertain the name and last known address of the registered owner as provided by the state department of highways and public transportation, and if the vehicle impounded has not been reclaimed within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of its impoundment, the police department shall notify, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the last known owner of the vehicle and all lienholders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6687-1, that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall be as provided in section 20-43 of this Code. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove a vehicle from a city pound location without first paying the towing and storage fees which have accrued on the vehicle. 
(d)  Upon payment of all towing and storage fees, a vehicle impounded by the police department pursuant to the enforcement of the provisions of this Code may be released to the lienholder or his authorized agent holding a valid and existing mortgage lien on the vehicle impounded, provided the mortgage lienholder complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  Furnish the police department, for its inspection: 
a.  The mortgage lien contract or a certified copy thereof specifying that upon default of the mortgagor the mortgagee is entitled to possession of such vehicle; 
b.  The certificate of title with the lien appearing thereon. 
(2)  Furnish to the police department an affidavit stating that he holds a lien on the vehicle impounded, that the mortgagor has defaulted, that the mortgage lienholder desires possession and is entitled to possession of such vehicle under a valid court order and agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its police department and its employees or agents upon delivery to him of the vehicle. 
(e)  The city shall refund all towing and storage fees to the registered owner or lienholder or other person legally entitled to possession of the vehicle if the municipal court or other court of competent jurisdiction determines that the impoundment of the vehicle was improper. Application for a refund shall be on forms prepared by the city attorney's office. 
(f)  When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year, make, model, vehicle identification number and license plate number and year displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date of tow, by what commercial towing service, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing, the name of the officer authorizing the tow and copies of all notices to owners or lienholders. 
(Code 1966, § 24-131(c), (d), (f), (h)—(j); Ord. No. 90-160, §§ I, II, 10-16-90; Ord. No. 99-310, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2004-074, § 1, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 2006-272, § 1, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2015-386 , § 1, 12-15-15) 
State Law reference— Removal of illegally parked vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 94.  
Sec. 18-105. - Presumption of ownership of illegally parked vehicle. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred. 
(Code 1966, § 24-132)  
Sec. 18-106. - Parking of vehicles or storage of goods in rights-of-way prohibited. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, a "right-of-way" shall include: 
(1)  The entire width of all public streets and highways including any shoulders of these roadways; 
(2)  The entire width off any alleys; and 
(3)  All other public easements including any easements running adjacent to any public roadways and alleys. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or store any goods in or upon any right-of-way, notwithstanding the location of any drive or driveway in such right-of-way. This section shall not apply to a vehicle legally parked on a public street or highway nor shall this section apply to a vehicle legally parked in a driveway provided no sidewalks are blocked by the vehicle. 
(Code 1966, § 24-133; Ord. No. 2007-193, § 1, 9-18-07)  
Sec. 18-107. - Designation of parking spaces for disabled persons. 
A person who owns or controls property used for parking may designate one (1) or more parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. Such parking spaces shall be designated by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each space a nonmovable sign that: 
(1)  Has a notice of the penalty for a violation of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, § 10; 
(2)  Is permanently mounted on a pole at least five (5) feet in height; 
(3)  Has a profile view of a wheelchair with an occupant in white on a blue background; and 
(4)  Meets the design criteria established by the state department of highways and public transportation as provided in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, § 5(b). 
(Code 1966, § 24-134(a)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, § 6A.  
Sec. 18-108. - Parking of unauthorized vehicles in spaces designated for disabled persons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave any vehicle in any parking space designated as exclusive parking for disabled persons pursuant to section 18-107 unless such vehicle is displaying a specially designed symbol, tab or other device issued by the state department of highways and public transportation affixed to the license plates of such vehicle indicating the operator thereof or a passenger therein is permanently disabled or unless such vehicle is displaying an identification card issued by the department indicating the operator of such vehicle or a passenger therein is temporarily disabled. It shall be unlawful to block or encroach on a handicap access. 
(Code 1966, § 24-135(a); Ord. No. 2011-113, § 6, 7-19-11) 
State Law reference— Parking privileges for handicapped persons, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, § 6; international symbol of access, parking privileges, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, § 6D.  
Sec. 18-109. - Designation of parking spaces for exclusive use of disabled persons upon public property. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person at any time to stop, stand, park or leave standing any vehicle not displaying special license plates or a parking placard issued pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Department of Transportation indicating that the owner or a passenger thereof is permanently or temporarily disabled at any of the following locations: 
(1)  One (1) parking space on the north side of Oak Street, east of Elm Street; 
(2)  One (1) parking space on the south side of Oak Street, approximately one-half the distance between Locust Street and Elm Street; 
(3)  One (1) parking space on the south side of Hickory Street, west of Locust Street; 
(4)  One (1) parking space on the north side of Walnut Street, east of Locust Street; 
(5)  Two (2) parking spaces on the west side of Austin Street, south of Hickory Street; 
(6)  One (1) parking space on the east side of Locust Street, south of Oak Street; 
(7)  One (1) parking space on the east side of Elm Street, approximately one-half the distance between Oak Street and Hickory Street; 
(8)  One (1) parking space on the west side of Elm Street, north of Hickory Street; 
(9)  One (1) parallel parking space adjacent to the elevator entrance to the First Methodist Church on Mulberry Street; 
(10)  Two (2) parallel parking spaces in the parking lot of the Denton Civic Center near the handicapped access ramp; 
(11)  Three (3) parking spaces at the Denton Senior Center, 509 North Bell Street, on the north side of the building and adjacent to the access ramp; 
(12)  Two (2) parking spaces at the Texas Employment Commission, 510 I-Hwy. 35E, in front of the access ramp leading to the entrance of the building; 
(13)  One (1) parking space nearest the handicapped access ramp at the Denton Public Library; 
(14)  One (1) parking space adjacent to the handicapped access ramp at the southwestern entrance to the Municipal Building at 215 E. McKinney Street in the U.S. Post Office/Municipal parking lot; 
(15)  One (1) parking space at Mack Park on the south side of McKinney Street adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the tennis courts; 
(16)  One (1) parking space at Mack Park on the north side of McKinney Street adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the park's concession stand; 
(17)  Two (2) parking spaces at North Lakes Park nearest the access ramp and entrance to the park; 
(18)  Two (2) parking spaces adjacent to the handicapped access ramp at Denia Park; 
(19)  One parking space on the north side of Hickory Street, forty (40) feet east of its intersection with the east curb line of Miller Street; 
(20)  Two (2) parking spaces at Denton Police Department, 221 N. Elm Street, adjacent to the south handicapped entrance ramp; 
(21)  Three (3) parking spaces at the Denton Municipal Complex, 601 E. Hickory, on the north side of East Hickory, east of Railroad Avenue; 
(22)  Three (3) parking spaces at the Denton Municipal Complex, 601 E. Hickory, on the south side of East Hickory, east of Railroad Avenue; 
(23)  Four (4) parking spaces at the Denton Municipal Complex, 601 E. Hickory, in the parking lot which is south of the southwest corner of the Denton Municipal Complex; 
(24)  Two (2) parking spaces on the south side of Mulberry Street thirty-nine (39) feet east of its intersection with the east curbline of Locust Street; 
(25)  One (1) parking space on the west side of Cedar Street, immediately north of West Hickory Street; 
(26)  One (1) metered parking space directly in front of 101 Avenue A; 
(27)  Two parking spaces on the south side of Cordell Street, two hundred sixty-eight feet (268) feet west of the west curbline of Fulton Street. 
(b)  The provisions of this section prohibiting the parking of unauthorized vehicles shall apply at all times to the parking space and any part of the parking space as designated in this section, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
(Code 1966, § 24-136(a), (b); Ord. No. 91-107, § I, 7-16-91; Ord. No. 92-120, § IV, 7-21-92; Ord. No. 94-143, § I, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 94-039, § I, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 96-132, § IV, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 97-263, § III, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 2001-213, § 2, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2001-280, § 1, 8-21-01) 
State Law reference— Designation of handicapped parking spaces by political subdivision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, § 6A.  
Secs. 18-110—18-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS 
 
Sec. 18-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether such vehicle is occupied or not. 
Parking meter means a device which indicates thereon the length of time during which a vehicle may be parked in a particular place; which has a receptacle or chamber for receiving and storing coins of the United States, a slot or place in which such coins may be deposited and a timing mechanism to indicate the passage of the interval of time during which parking is permissible; and which displays an appropriate signal when such interval of time elapses and contains brief instruction as to its operation. 
(Code 1966, § 24-138) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-122. - Installation authorized. 
For the purpose of facilitating the movement of traffic and regulating the use of the public streets for the parking of vehicles, the traffic engineer is hereby authorized and directed to install parking meters requiring the deposit of coins in each of the parking meter zones established by this article. 
(Code 1966, § 24-139)  
Sec. 18-123. - Meter zones. 
The parking meter zones of the city shall consist of such streets or portions thereof as are designated from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 24-140)  
Sec. 18-124. - Installation; construction; adjustment. 
Parking meters shall be installed by the traffic engineer in each parking meter zone, and they shall be erected upon the curb or street immediately adjacent to the individual parking space. Each parking meter shall be so constructed and adjusted as to show by a signal that the space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time permitted by the insertion of any coin and, when operated, shall indicate by proper signal the duration of the period of legal parking during the immediate period of operation and, on the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
(Code 1966, § 24-141)  
Sec. 18-125. - Designation of parking spaces; vehicles to be parked within lines. 
The traffic engineer shall have lines or appropriate markings painted upon the curb or street adjacent to each parking meter outlining and designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked within such lines or markings. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across or outside any such lines or markings or to park a vehicle in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings. 
(Code 1966, § 24-142)  
Sec. 18-126. - Deposit of coin; overtime parking; parking adjacent to expired meter. 
(a)  During the period when the parking time limit is in effect and the deposit of an appropriate coin in the parking meter is required, the owner or driver of a vehicle shall, upon entering the parking meter space, immediately deposit an appropriate coin of the United States in the parking meter alongside of the parking space, and the parking space may then be used by the vehicle for the period of time shown by the indicator on the dial of the parking meter. 
(b)  If a vehicle is found parked or standing in a parking meter space and the parking meter displays a signal showing the lawful parking period has expired, the vehicle is illegally parked at the parking space. 
(c)  During the period when the time limit is in effect and the deposit of an appropriate coin in the parking meter is required, a person shall not permit a vehicle under his control to remain in any parking space which is alongside of or next to a parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal indicating illegal parking. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin for the purpose of parking a vehicle alongside of a parking meter for a period longer than the parking time limit. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall apply and be effective between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every day except Sundays and legal holidays observed by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 24-143)  
Sec. 18-127. - Suspension of parking meter spaces; fee. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall have the authority to suspend the operation of any parking meter when such suspension is necessary for constructing, reconstructing, maintaining or servicing an abutting structure on a temporary basis. 
(b)  A fee per day as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary shall be charged to the person requiring the temporary suspension of a parking meter for each day such suspended meter would otherwise be in operation. 
(Code 1966, § 24-144)  
Sec. 18-128. - Loading zones in parking meter zones. 
Whenever any curb loading zone is established in a parking meter zone, it shall not be necessary to install a parking meter in such loading zone nor shall it be necessary for the driver of any vehicle using such loading zone for loading or unloading to deposit any coin in a meter located in such loading zone. 
(Code 1966, § 24-145)  
Sec. 18-129. - Deposit of slugs or substitute coins. 
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters by the provisions of this article shall, in every case, be lawful money of the United States of America, and it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any device or substitute coin in any parking meter in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 24-146)  
Sec. 18-130. - Tampering with meters prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the terms of this division. 
(Code 1966, § 24-147)  
Sec. 18-131. - Collection and disposition of meter funds. 
The city manager shall designate a city employee to collect the coins deposited in parking meters. In collecting such coins, such person shall remove the coins from the coin box of the meter in such a manner as to permit the coins to fall directly into the coin collection cart. He shall deliver the coins to the city treasurer. The treasurer shall count the coins so delivered and deposit the coins to the credit of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 24-148)  
Sec. 18-132. - Issuance of citation for illegal parking; information noted by police officer. 
A police officer issuing a citation for illegal parking under this division shall take the number and location of the meter at which a vehicle is illegally parked, the state vehicle license number of such vehicle, the make of the vehicle and the time and date of the illegal parking and shall issue in writing, on a form provided by the city, notice to answer the charge of illegal parking within ten (10) days, during the hours and at the place specified in the notice. Such notice shall be placed in a conspicuous place upon such vehicle. 
(Code 1966, § 24-149)  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING VIOLATIONS DIVISION 
 
Sec. 18-134. - Parking division created. 
There is hereby created a "parking violations division", in and for the City of Denton which shall have original jurisdiction over cases involving violations of city ordinances relating to the parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles as contained in chapter 18 of the Code of the City of Denton. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 18-135. - Hearing officers. 
(a)  The parking violations division shall be composed of one (1) or more hearing officers who shall be appointed by and under the direction of the presiding judge for the City of Denton Municipal Court. 
(b)  Hearing officers shall have the authority to administer oaths and to issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. 
(c)  An order compelling the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents may be enforced by the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 18-136. - Parking citations. 
(a)  Violations of city ordinances relating to parking, stopping, or standing are declared to be civil offenses. The administrative adjudication process for parking, stopping, or standing violations shall be initiated by the issuance of a parking citation which may be issued by a peace officer or other authorized parking enforcement agent. Authorized parking enforcement agents shall include any police officer, parking control officer, or other employee of the city designated by the chief of police, or the city manager to enforce the provisions of this Code in regard to the parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles. 
(b)  If the owner or operator of the vehicle is not present at the time of issuance of the citation, the citation may be issued by affixing the citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
(c)  The citation shall provide that the owner or operator of the vehicle charged with a parking, stopping, or standing offense shall have the right to a hearing to determine the issue of liability for the charged offense. Such right to a hearing shall be requested and initiated by: 
(1)  Filing a written request by U.S. postal service mail, addressed to the Denton Municipal Court Clerk, postmarked not later than the fifteenth (15th) day after the date the citation was issued; or 
(2)  Appearing in person before the Denton Municipal Court Clerk and making written request for an administrative hearing within fifteen (15) days from the date of the citation. 
(d)  The original or any copy of the citation or summons is a record kept in the ordinary course of business in the city and is rebuttable proof of the facts it contains. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 18-137. - Presumption of ownership. 
(a)  In any civil administrative process charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described on the citation was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the owner or operator of the vehicle was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle as described under subsection (b), shall constitute evidence of a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(b)  In the event such vehicle was, at the time of such parking, registered in the name of, or owned by, a corporation, partnership, association, governmental body or any entity other than an individual, proof that the particular vehicle in question was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the owner or operator of the vehicle did, at the time of such parking, have custody or control of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such person having custody or control of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(c)  A Texas State Department of Transportation computer-generated record of the registered vehicle is prima facie evidence of its contents in an administrative adjudication hearing under this article. At the administrative hearing, the hearings officer may consider a computer-generated record of the registered vehicle as evidence. At any appeal of the administrative hearing officer's finding of liability, the municipal court judge may consider a computer-generated record of the registered vehicle as evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 18-138. - Right to an administrative hearing. 
(a)  Upon timely request, an administrative hearing shall be held not later than the thirtieth (30th) day after the date such request is received by the municipal court clerk. 
(b)  At the hearing before the hearing officer, the owner or operator of the vehicle may either admit, admit with explanation, or deny the alleged infraction. 
(c)  The issuing peace officer or other authorized parking enforcement agent shall not be required to attend the hearing. 
(d)  It is not required that the city attorney or other legal representative of the city attend the hearing. Provided, however, that if the owner or operator of the vehicle is represented by legal counsel at the hearing, the hearing officer shall notify the prosecuting attorney who shall have a right to appear on behalf of the city at said hearing. 
(e)  No formal or sworn complaint shall be necessary. The hearing officer shall examine the contents of the citation and the evidence related to ownership of the vehicle in question, and shall hear and review the testimony and evidence presented by the owner or operator of the vehicle. If the hearing officer determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the violation was committed by the owner or operator of the vehicle, he shall find the owner or operator of the vehicle liable therefore. 
(f)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue an order stating whether or not the person charged is liable for violation of the parking, stopping, or standing ordinance and the amount of any civil fines, costs, or fees assessed against him. The order shall be filed with the clerk of the municipal court. All such orders shall be kept in a separate index or file by the municipal court clerk using appropriate data processing techniques. 
(g)  After having made a written request for an administrative hearing as provided herein, failure of a person to appear at that administrative hearing shall constitute an admission of liability for the charged offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 18-139. - Appeal of the administrative hearing. 
(a)  A person determined by the administrative hearing officer to be in violation of a parking, stopping, or standing ordinance may appeal this determination to the Denton Municipal Court. 
(b)  A person who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing or who requests an administrative adjudication hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing is liable for administrative hearing fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). This fee is in addition to the amount of the civil penalty assessed for the violation. A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the civil penalty and costs within ten (10) days of the hearing. 
(c)  The decision of the administrative hearing officer may be appealed by filing a cash bond with the clerk of the municipal court. The amount of the cash bond shall include the fine, plus all late payment fees, the administrative hearing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), as well as an additional municipal court appellate filing fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), not later than the thirtieth day after the filing of the hearing officer's order. 
(d)  After receiving a petition for appeal of the administrative hearing officers decision, along with the cash bond, the municipal clerk shall schedule a hearing before the judge of the Denton Municipal Court and notify all parties of the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(e)  The appeal hearing shall be a trial de novo. The municipal court judge shall examine the evidence presented at the appellate hearing and if the municipal judge determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the violation was committed by the owner or operator of the vehicle, the municipal court judge shall find the owner or operator of the vehicle liable therefore. 
(f)  Notice of appeal under this section does not stay the enforcement and collection of the judgment unless the person who files the appeal posts a cash bond concurrently with the filing of the petition (notice of appeal) with the clerk of the municipal court. Said cash bond shall be in the amount of all fines, costs, and fees assessed by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 18-140. - Enforcement. 
(a)  An order filed by a hearing officer under this article, or a final judgment of the municipal court after appeal, may be enforced by: 
(1)  Impounding the vehicle; 
(2)  Immobilizing by the placing of a device ("boot") that prohibits the movement of a motor vehicle on the vehicle that is the subject of the order filed; 
(3)  An additional fine if not paid within the specified time; 
(4)  Denial of parking permits; or 
(5)  Provisions of section 18-143(g)(2). 
(b)  Provided, however, that no vehicle shall be impounded under subsection (a)(1) or immobilized under subsection (a)(2) of this article unless: 
(1)  The offender has three (3) or more unpaid vehicle parking or stopping offenses; and 
(2)  Written notice is mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle at least ten (10) days before the vehicle is impounded or immobilized, said notice to inform the registered owner of the vehicle's eligibility of immobilization or impoundment. The notice shall state the vehicle is eligible for immobilization or impoundment because the criteria of three (3) or more unpaid vehicle parking or stopping offenses has been met. Said notice shall also inform the owner of his right to submit information to the hearing officer regarding the propriety of the immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2011-113, § 7, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 18-141. - Procedures for immobilization and/or impoundment. 
(a)  When a vehicle is found parked, whether legally or illegally, at any time upon a public street or public property in the city or upon any private property which the public has access to and such vehicle has met the criteria for immobilization or impoundment as provided in section 18-140, any authorized parking enforcement agent of the city may immobilize the vehicle by the installation on or attachment to the vehicle of a device, or boot, designed to prohibit the movement of the vehicle. In the alternative, such vehicle may be towed and impounded, provided that the towing and impoundment is authorized at the direction of a peace officer. 
(b)  At the time of immobilization, the agent shall also conspicuously attach to the vehicle a written notice on a form provided by the city, said notice to contain the following information: 
(1)  Notice that the vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to this article, and that attempted movement may cause damage to the vehicle; 
(2)  That release of the vehicle may be obtained at a designated place; 
(3)  That the owner may request a hearing regarding the immobilization; and 
(4)  That the vehicle may be towed and impounded after a designated period of time. 
(c)  Any vehicle which remains immobilized at 4:00 p.m. may be towed and impounded. 
(d)  In the event that a vehicle is towed and impounded, the owner thereof shall be responsible for payment of applicable fees for towing, impoundment, and storage in addition to the fines, costs, and fees provided for herein. Towed vehicles that are not redeemed within thirty (30) days shall be subject to disposition in the manner provided by state law. 
(e)  This section is to be cumulative of existing law, and nothing herein shall be construed to restrict or limit the right to tow and impound vehicles under other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2008-034, § 1, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 18-142. - Boot removal and payment of towing fees. 
(a)  The registered owner of an immobilized or impounded vehicle, or other authorized person, may secure the release of the vehicle upon payment of fines and fees or the posting of a cash bond in the amount of the fine and late fees, for each delinquent parking citation in addition to the applicable boot fee 
(b)  If, prior to release of the vehicle from impoundment, or prior to removal of the immobilization device, the owner or operator of the vehicle posts a cash bond in the total amount of fine and all late fees for each parking citation and the boot fee, if applicable, the posting of the bond shall constitute a notice of appeal. If after the hours of operation of the municipal court clerk's office, the bond may be posted with the Denton Police Department on a bond form approved by the municipal court. The court clerk, shall within thirty (30) days after the posting of cash bond, provide the owner or operator of the vehicle with notice of the time, date and place of an administrative hearing. 
(c)  If a vehicle has been towed, the owner or authorized person shall be responsible to the towing company for all towing and storage fees. 
(d)  Payment of the fines, late fees, boot fee, and any towing and storage fees, without first posting of a bond, shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest such fines and fees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 18-143. - Fines and fees. 
(a)  The owner of any vehicle found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter related to the parking or stopping of vehicles shall be liable to the City of Denton and shall owe a civil administrative penalty in an amount not less than one dollar ($1.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), unless for an offense related to handicap parking, in which case the penalty cannot exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), in accordance with a schedule of civil administrative parking penalties as promulgated by the Presiding Judge of the Denton Municipal Court. The schedule of civil administrative parking penalties shall be reviewed annually by the Presiding Judge of the Denton Municipal Court, and shall be available to the public upon request at the offices of the municipal court clerk or city secretary. 
(b)  If the owner of a vehicle to which a parking citation has been issued makes a timely request for hearing as set forth in this chapter, the civil administrative hearing officer may, within their reasonable judgment or discretion, or upon proper appeal, the presiding judge of the municipal court or designated assistant municipal judge, may assess a civil administrative fee in an amount greater than or less than that established by the promulgated schedule of civil administrative parking penalties. 
(c)  The owner of any vehicle to whom a parking citation has been issued shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of issuance of said citation in which to either pay the civil penalty assessed or due or file a written notice or request for a civil administrative hearing as to the issue of liability with the Denton Municipal Court Clerk either in person or by mail at 601 E. Hickory, Ste. D, Denton, Texas, 76205. Unless a written notice or request for administrative hearing has been properly filed within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the citation, any citation which remains unpaid, after fifteen (15) days shall be deemed to be delinquent and the owner of the vehicle shall be liable to the City of Denton for all civil administrative penalties and fees as provided under this chapter. 
(d)  Any civil administrative penalty assessed and due under this chapter which remains unpaid on or after the sixteenth (16 th ) day after the date of issuance, shall be increased in an amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) over and above the initial amount of penalty due or assessed, unless a timely written notice or request for an administrative hearing has been filed with the Denton Municipal Court Clerk or Parking Enforcement Division Office as referenced herein. 
(e)  In order to appeal a finding of liability after an administrative hearing before a hearing officer, the owner of a vehicle found to be liable must, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the hearing officer's order as provided in section 18-139, file a written request or notice of appeal with the Denton Municipal Court Clerk. The written request or notice of appeal must be accompanied by payment of a cash bond in the amount of the civil administrative penalty assessed, an administrative hearing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and, a municipal court appellate filing fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(f)  The owner of a vehicle who has contested liability at a timely and properly requested administrative hearing, but who has been found liable by the administrative hearing officer after consideration of testimony or evidence shall be assessed an additional fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which shall also be due at the same time as the civil administrative penalty assessed. 
(g)  The payment of a civil administrative penalty to the parking division shall be deemed an acknowledgement of liability for the parking violation. 
(h)  The boot fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In addition to the boot fee, charges for towing and/or storage of impounded vehicles shall be as provided by the law applicable to abandoned vehicles. 
(i)  If three (3) or more parking citations remain outstanding because of non-payment or failure to request an administrative hearing within fifteen (15) days after date of issuance of the citations, the parking enforcement division shall send to the registered owner of the vehicle to which the citations had been affixed a letter informing the owner that the citations are delinquent and that either or both of the following actions may be taken if the citations have not been answered within ten (10) days of the date of the letter: 
(1)  The vehicle may be impounded in place by means of an immobilization device or, at the option of the city, towed away to a secure area of impoundment. If the vehicle is towed to a secure impoundment, the owner shall be responsible for towing and storage charges. 
(2)  The registered owner of the vehicle on the dates which such parking violations occurred may be summoned to appear in the municipal court by an order of a hearing officer. Failure to response to such order may result in further charges including but not limited to failure to appear or a violation of city ordinance. Such charges shall be considered a class C misdemeanor charge. Each day such violation shall continue or be permitted to continue, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(j)  All fines, costs, and fees shall be deposited in the proper account of the general fund of the city, unless otherwise directed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2011-113, § 8, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 18-144. - Certain conduct unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the city acting in the course and scope of his duties under this article, to remove or attempt to remove or to tamper in any manner with an immobilization device (boot) installed on any vehicle pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except under the direction of a peace officer, to tow or move or to cause to be towed or moved any vehicle on which a boot is then installed pursuant to this article from the place where it was booted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the city acting in the course and scope of his duties or the owner or operator of the vehicle of a booted vehicle, to remove or relocate any notice placed upon a booted vehicle pursuant to this article. 
(d)  If found guilty of an offense under this subsection, the punishment may be a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, § 2, 1-23-07)  
DIVISION 4. - VALET PARKING 
 
Sec. 18-145. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article: 
College or university means an institution of higher learning providing facilities for teaching and research and authorized to grant academic degrees. 
Downtown implementation plan area (DTIP) is identified as the area bounded generally by Carroll Boulevard to the west, Frame and Exposition Streets to the east, Parkway and Withers Streets to the north, and Sycamore Street to the south, and is more particularly described in City of Denton Resolution No. R2010-032, adopted on or about August 17, 2010, as amended. 
Fundraising activity means an activity that seeks financial support for a charity or public cause. 
Special events means a temporary outdoor use on private property that is authorized by a valid permit issued pursuant to Section 35.12.9 of the Denton Development Code, as amendment, and that extends beyond the normal uses and standards allowed by the Denton Development Code. "Special events" include, but are not limited to, outdoor entertainment, education and cultural events, art shows, sidewalk sales, haunted houses, carnivals, fairs, special auto sales, grand openings, festivals, home exhibitions, and church bazaars. 
Valet parking service means accepting possession of a vehicle for the purpose of parking the vehicle for the operator or retrieving a parked vehicle on public or private property and returning it to the operator, regardless of whether a fee is charged, for customers, guests, or invitees of a business. 
( Ord. No. 2016-423 , § 2, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 18-146. - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide valet parking services, whether or not the public right-of-way is used, in the downtown implementation area (DTIP) unless otherwise exempted herein. 
( Ord. No. 2016-423 , § 2, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 18-147. - Exemptions. 
Section 18-146 does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Private residences; 
(2)  College or university functions on campus or immediately adjacent thereto, which are officially sanctioned by the college or university; 
(3)  Fundraising activities; or 
(4)  Special events authorized by a valid permit issued by the city, which specifically allows valet parking services pursuant to an approved plan. Such plan must, at a minimum, establish the hours of operation, fees (if any), the location where vehicles will be parked, and evidence that the owner of the property where the vehicles will be parked has authorized such parking throughout the duration of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-423 , § 2, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 18-148. - Violations. 
(1)  It shall be an offense for any person to provide or engage in a valet parking service within the downtown implementation plan area (DTIP) unless an exemption enumerated within section 18-147 applies. 
(2)  It shall be an offense for any person to fail to obey a lawful order of a police officer enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-423 , § 2, 12-13-16)  
Secs. 18-149, 18-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS AT UNIVERSITY OF NORTH TEXAS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— University of North Texas, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 105.01 et seq.; campus security personnel, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 105.91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-151. - Authority granted to board of university; purposes. 
The governing board of the University of North Texas is hereby granted and delegated jurisdiction and control of the parking lanes within the street portions described in section 18-152, which street portions either: 
(1)  Abut property owned by the state and under the control of the University of North Texas; or 
(2)  Are delegated to the University of North Texas through the Fry Street Small Area Plan; 
For the following purposes: 
(3)  To assign parking spaces and designate parking areas and their use and assess a charge therefor; 
(4)  To prohibit parking as it deems necessary; 
(5)  To remove vehicles parked in violation of its rules and regulations, the laws of the state, or the ordinances of the city, at the expense of the violator; 
(6)  To issue traffic tickets in compliance with the procedure established by the City of Denton Municipal Court; 
(7)  To issue parking tickets in compliance with the procedures established by the University of North Texas Police Department; 
(8)  To enforce traffic laws through its commissioned peace officers jointly with city police officers; 
(9)  To enforce parking regulations through its commissioned peace officers and public safety officers. 
(Code 1966, § 24-171; Ord. No. 2001-226, § 1, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2003-082, § 1, 2-25-03) 
State Law reference— City delegation of parking regulation authority, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 105.93.  
Sec. 18-152. - Streets under university jurisdiction; parking restrictions. 
(a)  The portions of the streets for which the governing board of the University of North Texas has been delegated jurisdiction and control pursuant to section 18-151 are as follows: 
(1)  Avenue A, both sides, from Hickory Street to Mulberry Street; 
(2)  Avenue A, both sides, from Chestnut Street to Prairie Street; 
(3)  Avenue A, both sides, from Highland Street to Eagle Drive; 
(4)  Avenue B, both sides, from Hickory Street to Mulberry Street; 
(5)  Avenue B, both sides, from Maple Street to Eagle Drive; 
(6)  Avenue C, both sides, from Hickory Street to Eagle Drive; 
(7)  Avenue D, east side, from Hickory Street to Sycamore Street; 
(8)  Avenue D, both sides, from Highland Street to Eagle Drive; 
(9)  Avenue D, both sides, from Sycamore Street to Chestnut Street; 
(10)  Central Street, both sides, from Highland Street to Maple Street; 
(11)  Chestnut Street, both sides, from Avenue A to Bernard Street; 
(12)  Chestnut Street, both sides, from Avenue C to Avenue E; 
(13)  Edwards Street, both sides, from Avenue E to Avenue D; 
(14)  Fry Street, both sides, from Oak Street to Hickory Street; 
(15)  Hickory Street, both sides, from Avenue B to Welch Street; 
(16)  Highland Street, both sides, from Avenue E to Bernard Street; 
(17)  Maple Street, both sides, from Avenue D to Bernard Street; 
(18)  Mulberry Street, both sides, from Avenue D to Avenue B; 
(19)  Mulberry Street, both sides, from Avenue A to Bernard Street; 
(20)  Oak Street, both sides, from Avenue B to Welch Street; 
(21)  Prairie Street, both sides, from Avenue A to Bernard Street. 
(22)  Sycamore Street, both sides, from Welch Street to Bernard Street; 
(23)  Sycamore Street, both sides, from Avenue C to Avenue D; 
(24)  Sycamore Street, south side, from Avenue E to Avenue D; 
(25)  Welch Street, both sides, from Mulberry Street to Oak Street. 
(26)  Kendolph Street, both sides, between Eagle Drive and Wilshire Street. 
(b)  However, no parking shall be permitted upon any street portion described in subsection (a) of this section which is contrary to any provision of the Texas Transportation Code, or to any ordinance pertaining to any such street portion. 
(Code 1966, § 24-172; Ord. No. 91-133, § I, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 2001-226, § 1, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2003-082, § 1, 3-25-03)  
Sec. 18-153. - Duty to obey traffic signs, signals and markings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any traffic sign, signal or marking constructed, installed or painted within the area described in section 18-152 of this article, when such signs, signals or markings are authorized by the governing board of the University of North Texas, unless such driver is otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  All such traffic signs, signals or markings shall be deemed authorized by such governing board. 
(Code 1966, § 24-175)  
Secs. 18-154—18-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATIONS AT TEXAS WOMAN'S UNIVERSITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Woman's University, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 107.01 et seq.; campus security personnel, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 107.81 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-171. - Parking on streets running through or immediately adjacent to university property. 
When curbs are painted black in color and signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle unless such vehicle has a valid parking permit issued by Texas Woman's University visibly displayed upon the rear portion of the vehicle on the following public streets running through or immediately adjacent to property owned or occupied and controlled by the university. Such streets are as follows: 
(1)  The west side of Bell Avenue from University Drive to Texas Street; 
(2)  The south side of College Street from Vine Street to Bell Avenue; 
(3)  The north and east sides of Oakland Avenue from North Locust Street to Texas Street; 
(4)  The west side of Oakland Avenue from Sawyer Street to two hundred fifty (250) feet north of the northwest corner of Third Street; and 
(5)  The north side of Texas Street from Bell Avenue to Oakland Avenue. 
(Code 1966, § 24-178.1)  
Sec. 18-172. - Exceptions to parking restrictions. 
The provisions of section 18-171 shall apply at all times to the street and portions of street designated therein, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with a police officer, campus peace officer or official traffic-control device. 
(Code 1966, § 24-178.2)  
Secs. 18-173—18-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - VIEW AND PASSAGE OBSTRUCTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Signs and advertising devices generally, Ch. 33. 
 
Sec. 18-196. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Intersection visibility triangle means a triangle sight area at all intersections which shall include that portion of public right-of-way and any corner lot within a triangle formed by a diagonal line extending through points on the two (2) property lines twenty-five (25) feet from the street corner intersection of the property lines or that point of the intersection of the property lines extended and intersecting the curblines. 
Parkway means any property which the city, by deed, dedication, gift, prescription or easement, owns or holds for public use and lying between the private property lines of property abutting on any street and the curblines or grade lines of the street. 
(Code 1966, § 24-179) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-197. - Prohibited within intersection visibility triangle. 
It shall be unlawful to set out, maintain or permit to be set out or maintained any fence, wall, hedge, shrub, plant, tree, sign or other view obstruction having a height greater than two (2) feet, as measured from the top of the curb of the abutting streets within the intersection visibility triangle, or if no curb exists, two and one-half (2½) feet from the top of the edge of the traveled portion of the roadway within the intersection visibility triangle. This restriction shall not apply to permanent structures authorized by the zoning ordinance or to traffic-control signs and signals or utility facilities placed within such an area by authority of the city council. 
(Code 1966, §§ 5-28, 24-180)  
Sec. 18-198. - Prohibited within parkway areas. 
It shall be unlawful to set out, maintain or permit or cause to be set out or maintained any tree, shrub or plant within any parkway area, other than within the intersection visibility triangle which exceeds two (2) feet in height above curb level. This prohibition shall not apply to trees within the parkway area which are trimmed at all times so that no branch is less than seven (7) feet above curb level or, if no curb exists, seven and one-half (7½) feet above the traveled portion of the roadway and which are planted no less than twenty-five (25) feet apart; provided, however, such trees shall not interfere with the free passage of vehicles on the street or of pedestrians on the sidewalk or obscure the view of motor vehicle operators of any traffic-control device or street sign or otherwise create a traffic hazard. 
(Code 1966, § 24-181)  
Secs. 18-199—18-209. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SCHOOL SAFETY SPEED ZONES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-135, § 1, adopted May 16, 2006, amended article VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VIII, §§ 18-210—18-213, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 2003-343, § 1, 10-21-03. 
 
Sec. 18-210. - Twenty mile-per-hour zone. 
Based upon an engineering and transportation department investigation heretofore made, as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.357, the prima facie speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour for vehicles is hereby determined and declared to be a prima facie reasonable and safe, and such speed limit is hereby fixed for vehicles traveling within the following described school zones: 
(a)  The time periods for the reduced speeds for the school zones described below shall be from 7:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. until 3:30 p.m. on school days. The location of school zones described below shall be as follows to-wit: 
(1)  Borman Elementary School. Both directions of Parvin Street beginning fifty (50) feet east of where Parvin Street intersects the center line of McCormick Street to one hundred (100) feet east of where Parvin Street intersects the center line of Mercedes Street. 
(2)  Newton Rayzor Elementary School. Both directions of Malone Street beginning fifty (50) feet north of where Malone Street intersects the center line of Cordell Street to one hundred (100) feet north of where Malone Street intersects the center line of Emery Street. 
(3)  Ginnings Elementary School. Both directions of Stuart Road beginning two hundred fifty (250) feet north of where Stuart Road intersects the center line of Imperial Drive to one hundred seventy-five (175) feet north of where Stuart Road intersects the center line of Sun Valley Street. 
Both directions of Sun Valley Drive from its intersections with Stuart Road to two hundred (200) feet east of where Sun Valley Drive intersects the center line of Yellowstone Place. 
Both directions of Yellowstone Place beginning three hundred (300) feet north of where Yellowstone Place intersects the center line of Imperial Drive to the intersection of Sun Valley Drive and Yellowstone Place. 
(4)  Woodrow Wilson Elementary School. Both directions of Windsor Drive beginning one hundred fifty (150) feet west of the westerly right-of-way (ROW) line of Longfellow Lane to two hundred seventy-five (275) feet east of where Windsor Drive intersects the center line of Hanover Drive. 
Both directions of Hanover Drive from its intersection with Windsor Drive to four hundred fifty (450) feet northwest of where Hanover Drive intersects the center line of Rockwood Lane. 
Both directions of Emerson Lane beginning one hundred fifty (150) feet east of where Emerson Lane intersects the center line of Glenwood Lane to three hundred fifty (350) feet west of where Emerson Lane intersects the center line of Rockwood Lane. 
Both directions of Glenwood Lane beginning one hundred fifty (150) feet north of the northerly right-of-way (ROW) line of Emerson Lane to one hundred fifty (150) feet south of the southerly right-of-way (ROW) line of Emerson Lane. 
(5)  Hodge Elementary School. Both directions of Grant Parkway beginning three hundred eighty (380) feet northeast of where Grant Parkway intersects the center line of Deerwood Parkway to the intersection of Farris Road and Grant Parkway. 
Both directions of Farris Road from its intersection with Silverdome Road to two hundred (200) feet north of where Farris Road intersects the center line of Grant Parkway. 
(6)  Robert E. Lee Elementary School. Both directions of Paisley Street beginning two hundred (200) feet west of the westerly right-of-way (ROW) line of Mack Drive to one hundred (100) feet east of the easterly property line of Robert E. Lee Elementary school. 
Both directions of Mack Drive from its intersection with Double Oak Street to the intersection of Paisley Street and Mack Drive. 
(7)  McNair Elementary. Both directions of Hickory Creek Road beginning seven hundred sixty-five (765) feet west of where Hickory Creek Road intersects the center line of Montecito Drive to four hundred thirty (430) feet east of where Hickory Creek Road intersects the center line of Montecito Drive. 
Both directions of Montecito Drive from its intersection with Hickory Creek Road south for six hundred eighty-two (682) feet. 
(8)  Evers Elementary. Both directions of Evers Parkway beginning three hundred five (305) feet south of where Evers Parkway intersects the center line of Gardenview Street to fifty (50) feet south of where Evers Parkway intersects the center line of Robbie-O Street. 
Both directions of Cobblestone Row from its intersection with Evers Parkway to one hundred seventy (170) feet east of where Cobblestone Row intersections the center line of Ashcroft Lane. 
(9)  Fred Moore Center. Both directions of Mill Street beginning one hundred fifty (150) feet west of where Mill Street intersects the center line of Cross Timber Street to one hundred (100) feet west of where Mill Street intersects the center line of Wye Street. 
Both directions of Wye Street beginning one hundred fifty (150) feet west of where Wye Street intersects the center line of Cross Timber Street to the intersection of Mill Street and Wye Street. 
Both directions of Cross Timber Street from its intersection with Wye Street to the intersection of Mill Street and Cross Timber Street. 
(10)  Tomas Rivera Elementary. Both directions of Newton Street beginning two hundred (200) feet north of where Newton Street intersects the center line of Morse Street to two hundred twenty-five (225) feet north of where Newton Street intersects with the center line of Wilson Street. 
(11)  Wayne Ryan Elementary School. Both directions on Ryan Road beginning five hundred fifty (550) feet west of the intersection of Creekdale Drive and Ryan Road and continuing east for two thousand nine hundred sixty (2,960) feet to a point five hundred sixty (560) feet east of the intersection of Forrestridge Drive and Ryan Road. 
(12)  Pecan Creek Elementary. Both directions on Pockrus Page Road beginning three hundred ninety-five (395) feet east of where Pockrus Page Road intersects the centerline of Fox Sedge Lane and ending eight hundred thirty-five (835) feet east of where Pockrus Page Road intersects the centerline of Fox Sedge Lane. Both directions on Lakeview Boulevard from its intersection with Black Walnut to three hundred (300) feet south of its intersection with Burr Oak Lane. 
(b)  The time periods for reduced speeds for school zones described below shall be from 7:30 a.m. until 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. until 4:00 p.m. on school days. The location of school zones described below shall be as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Strickland Middle School. Both directions of Windsor Drive beginning five hundred sixty (560) feet east of where Windsor Drive intersects the center line of Locust Street to two hundred twenty-five (225) feet east of where Windsor Drive intersects the center line of Bell Avenue. 
Both directions of Bell Avenue from its intersection with Driftwood Trail to the intersection of Windsor Drive and Bell Avenue. 
(2)  Calhoun Middle School. Both directions of Congress Street from one hundred thirty (130) feet west of where Congress Street intersects with the center line of Mounts Street to two hundred (200) feet east of where Congress Street intersects with the center line of Denton Street. 
Both directions of Denton Street from its intersection with Congress Street to one hundred (100) feet south of where Denton Street intersects with the center line of Pearl Street. 
Both directions of Mounts Street from its intersection with Congress Street to one hundred ninety (190) feet south of where Mounts Street intersects with the center line of Anderson Street. 
(3)  McMath Middle School. Both directions on Londonderry Lane from the intersection with Teasley Lane to one hundred (100) feet east of its intersection with Sam Bass Boulevard. 
(c)  The time periods for reduced speeds for school zones described below shall be from 8:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. until 5:00 p.m. on school days. The location of school zones described below shall be as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Denton High School. Both directions of Crescent Street beginning two hundred fifty (250) feet east of where Crescent Street intersects the center line of Bryan Street to one hundred fifty (150) feet east of where Crescent Street intersects with the center line of Fulton Street. 
Both directions of Bryan Street beginning two hundred fifty (250) feet south of where Bryan Street intersects the center line of Crescent Street to one hundred fifty (150) feet north of where Bryan Street intersects the center line of Linden Street. 
Both directions of Fulton Street beginning one hundred fifty (150) feet north of where Fulton Street intersects the center line of Crescent Street to one hundred and eighty (180) feet south of where Fulton Street intersects the center line of Linden Street. 
(Ord. No. 2006-135, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2015-250, § 1, 8-18-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-003 , § 1, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 2017-066 , § 1, 2-21-17; Ord. No. 2017-299 , § 1, 10-17-17; Ord. No. 2019-1777 , § 2, 8-6-19)  
Sec. 18-211. - Twenty-five mile-per-hour zone. 
Based upon an engineering and transportation department investigation heretofore made, as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 545.357, the prima facie speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour for vehicles is hereby determined and declared to be prima facie reasonable and safe, and such speed limit is hereby fixed for vehicles traveling within the following school zones: 
(a)  The time periods for the reduced speeds for the school zones described below shall be when the school zone lights are flashing on school days. The location of school zones described below shall be as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Sam Houston Elementary. Both directions of Teasley Lane beginning three hundred twenty-five (325) feet east of where Teasley Lane intersects the center line of Pennsylvania Drive to four hundred sixty-five (465) feet west of where Teasley Lane intersects the center line of Lillian Miller. 
(Ord. No. 2006-135, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2015-250, § 1, 8-18-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-066 , § 1, 2-21-17)  
Sec. 18-212. - Thirty mile-per-hour zone. 
Based upon an engineering and transportation department investigation heretofore made, as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 545.357, the prima facie speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour for vehicles is hereby determined and declared to be prima facie reasonable and safe, and such speed limit is hereby fixed for vehicles traveling within the following school zones: 
(a)  The time periods for reduced speeds for school zones described below shall be when the school zone lights are flashing on school days. The location of school zones described below shall be as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Ryan High School. Both directions of McKinney Street/FM 426 beginning five hundred (500) feet west of where McKinney Street/FM 426 intersects with the center line of Ryan High School's driveway to five hundred twenty-five (525) feet east of where McKinney Street intersects with the center line of Ryan High School's driveway. 
(2)  Guyer High School. Both directions of Teasley Lane/FM 2181, beginning at TxDOT milepost 0.908 (approximately 1,100 feet south of the centerline of Leatherwood Road) to TxDOT milepost 1.323 (approximately 1,090 feet north of the centerline of Leatherwood Road). 
(Ord. No. 2006-135, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2015-250, § 1, 8-18-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-162 , § 4, 6-6-17)  
Sec. 18-213. - Thirty-five mile-per-hour zone. 
Based upon an engineering and transportation department investigation heretofore made, as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 545.357, the prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour for vehicles is hereby determined and declared to be prima facie reasonable and safe, and such speed limit is hereby fixed for vehicles traveling within the following described school zones: 
(a)  The time periods for the reduced speeds for the school zones described below shall be when the school zone lights are flashing on school days. The location of school zones described below shall be as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  The Selwyn School. Both directions of West Highway 380 from four hundred fifty (450) feet east of where West Highway 380 intersects the center line of Marshall Drive to one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet west of where West Highway 380 intersects the center line of Mesa Drive. 
(Ord. No. 2006-135, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2015-250, § 1, 8-18-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-162 , § 4, 6-6-17)  
Sec. 18-214. - Penalty. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, an individual adjudged guilty of exceeding the herein defined speed limits shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 2006-135, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2015-250, § 1, 8-18-15 )  
Sec. 18-215. - Use of hand-held mobile telephones prohibited in school zones. 
(a)  For purposes of this section the following definitions apply: 
Engaging in a call shall mean talking into, dialing or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but shall not include holding a mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone. 
Hands-free mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone. 
Hand-held mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least one hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person). 
Mobile telephone shall mean the device used by subscribers and other users of wireless telephone service to access such service and shall include personal digital assistants. 
Personal digital assistant shall mean a device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that provides for data communication other than by voice. 
Wireless telephone service shall mean two-way real time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched telephone network and commonly referred to as cellular service or personal communication service. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided below it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in a school zone as designated in sections 18-210 through 18-213 on official school days during the hours when school zones are in effect and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting hand held mobile telephone use are posted in place while using a hand-held mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send or read messages. 
(c)  An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to or in the immediate proximity of his or her ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section. Immediate proximity shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such operator's ear. 
(d)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to: 
(1)  The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an emergency situation: an emergency response operator, a hospital, a physician's office or health clinic, or the city's police department; 
(2)  Any law enforcement public safety or police officers, emergency services officials, first aid emergency medical technicians and personnel, or any fire safety officials in the performance of duties arising out of and in the course of their employment as such; or 
(3)  The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands free manner. 
(4)  The use of a mobile telephone by the operator of a motor vehicle when the motor vehicle is legally parked and stationary, whether or not the motor is running. 
(Ord. No. 2009-022, § 1, 2-3-09)  
Secs. 18-216—18-219. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-220. - School bus loading zones. 
The location of school bus loading zones for the following schools shall be as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Borman Elementary. 
The southernmost lane of Parvin Street beginning where Parvin Street intersects the east curbline of McCormick Street to where Parvin Street intersects the west curbline of Mercedes Road. 
(2)  Ginnings Elementary. 
The southernmost lane of Sun Valley Drive beginning where Sun Valley Drive intersects the east curbline of Stuart Road to where Sun Valley Drive intersects the west curbline of Yellowstone Place. 
(3)  McNair Elementary. 
The westernmost lane of Montecito Drive beginning two hundred eighty-seven (287) feet south of where Montecito Drive intersects the south curbline of Hickory Creek Road to four hundred seven (407) feet south of where Montecito Drive intersects the south curbline of Hickory Creek Road. 
(4)  Strickland Middle School. 
The southernmost lane of Windsor Drive beginning where Windsor Drive intersects the west curbline of Bell Avenue to nine hundred (900) feet west of where Windsor Drive intersects the west curbline of Bell Avenue. 
(5)  Calhoun Middle School. 
The westernmost lane of Denton Street from one hundred ninety-six (196) feet south of where Denton Street intersects the south curbline of Congress Street to six hundred forty (640) feet south of where Denton Street intersects the south curbline of Congress Street. 
(Ord. No. 2003-343, § 1, 10-21-03)  
Sec. 18-221. - Unlawful for any person to operate or park a motor vehicle in a school bus loading zone. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a motor vehicle other than a school bus in a herein described school bus loading zone during school zone hours or any other specified periods of loading or unloading. An individual adjudged guilty of the provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Unattended vehicles parked in the bus loading zones in violations of section 18-220 are subject to being towed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-343, § 1, 01-21-03; Ord. No. 2009-185, § 1, 8-18-09)  
Secs. 18-222—18-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SIGNAL ENFORCEMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, adopted August 21, 2007, amended article IX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IX, §§ 18-230—18-236, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-389, § 2, 12-7-04. 
 
Sec. 18-230. - Definitions. 
Department shall mean the Police Department of the City of Denton, Texas. 
Intersection shall mean the place or area where two or more streets intersect. 
Owner shall mean the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country. 
Photographic traffic signal enforcement system means a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a camera system and vehicle sensor installed to exclusively work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic control signal; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing at least two recorded images that depict the license plate attached to the front or the rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic control signal. 
Recorded image shall mean a photographic or digital image that depicts the front or the rear of a motor vehicle. 
System location shall mean the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic monitoring system is directed and in operation. 
Traffic control signal shall mean a traffic control device that displays alternating red, amber and green lights that directs traffic when to stop at or proceed through an intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-231. - Imposition of civil penalty for violations. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that a vehicle that proceeds into an intersection when the traffic control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal damages the public by endangering motor vehicle operators and pedestrians alike, by decreasing the efficiency of traffic control and traffic flow efforts, and by increasing the number of serious accidents to which public safety agencies must respond at the expense of the taxpayers. 
(b)  The owner of a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) if the motor vehicle proceeds into an intersection at a system location when the traffic control signal for that motor vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal. 
(c)  An owner who fails to timely pay the civil penalty shall be subject to a late payment penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(d)  The imposition of a civil penalty under this chapter is not a conviction and may not be considered a conviction for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-232. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article. 
(b)  In order to impose a civil penalty under this article, the department shall mail a notice of violation to the owner of the motor vehicle liable for the civil penalty not later than the 30th day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred to: 
(1)  The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(c)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the violation alleged; 
(2)  The location of the intersection where the violation occurred; 
(3)  The date and time of the violation; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(5)  The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(6)  A copy of a recorded image of the violation limited solely to a depiction of the area of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty for which the owner is liable; 
(8)  The number of days the owner has in which to pay or contest the imposition of the civil penalty and a statement that the owner incurs a late payment penalty if the civil penalty is not paid or imposition of the penalty is not contested within that period; 
(9)  A statement that the owner of the vehicle in the notice of violation may elect to pay the civil penalty by mail sent to a specified address instead of appearing at the time and place of the administrative adjudication hearing; and 
(10)  Information that informs the owner of the vehicle named in the notice of violation: 
a.  Of the owner's right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the owner in an administrative adjudication hearing; 
b.  That imposition of the civil penalty may be contested by submitting a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing before the expiration of the period specified under subsection (c)(8); and 
c.  That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner is an admission of liability and a waiver of the owner's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty. 
d.  If the owner of the motor vehicle fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty imposed against the owner: 
1.  An arrest warrant may not be issued for the owner; and 
2.  The imposition of the civil penalty may not be recorded on the owner's driving record. 
(d)  A notice of violation is presumed to have been received on the fifth day after the date the notice is mailed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-233. - Installation and operation of photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(a)  Before installing a photographic traffic signal enforcement system at an intersection approach, the department shall conduct a traffic engineering study of the approach to determine whether, in addition to or as an alternative to the system, a design change to the approach or a change in the signalization of the intersection is likely to reduce the number of red light violations at the intersection. 
(b)  An intersection approach must be selected for the installation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system based on traffic volume, the history of accidents at the approach, the number or frequency of red light violations at the intersection, and similar traffic engineering and safety criteria, without regard to the ethnic or socioeconomic characteristics of the area in which the approach is located. 
(c)  The department shall report results of the traffic engineering study required by subsection (b) to the citizen advisory committee. The committee shall advise the local department on the installation and operation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system established under this article. 
(d)  The department shall install signs along each roadway that leads to an intersection at which a photographic traffic signal enforcement system is in active use. The signs must be at least one hundred (100) feet from the intersection or located according to standards established in the manual adopted by the Texas Transportation Commission under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Section 544.001, be easily readable to any operator approaching the intersection, and clearly indicate the presence of a photographic monitoring system that records violations that may result in the issuance of a notice of violation and the imposition of a monetary penalty. 
(e)  The city or the entity with which the city contracts for the administration and enforcement of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system may not provide information about a civil penalty imposed under this article to a credit bureau, as defined by V.T.C.A. Finance Code, Section 392.001. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-234. - Report of accidents. 
(a)  Before installing a photographic traffic signal enforcement system at an intersection approach, the department shall compile a written report of the number and type of traffic accidents that have occurred at the intersection for a period of at least eighteen (18) months before the date of the report. 
(b)  Not later than six (6) months after the date of the installation of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system at the intersection, the department shall provide the Texas Department of Transportation a copy of the report required by subsection (a). 
(c)  After installing a photographic traffic signal enforcement system at an intersection approach, the department shall monitor and annually report to the Texas Department of Transportation the number and type of traffic accidents at the intersection to determine whether the system results in a reduction in accidents or a reduction in the severity of accidents. 
(d)  The report must be in writing in the form prescribed by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-235. - Minimum change interval. 
At an intersection at which a photographic traffic monitoring system is in use, the minimum change interval for a steady yellow signal must be established in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-236. - Deposit of revenue from certain traffic penalties. 
(a)  Not later than the 60th day after the end of the city's fiscal year, after deducting amounts the city is authorized by subsection (b) to retain, the city shall: 
(1)  Send fifty (50) percent of the revenue derived from civil or administrative penalties collected by the city under this section to the comptroller; and 
(2)  Deposit the remainder of the revenue in a special account in the city's treasury that may be used only to fund traffic safety programs, including pedestrian safety programs, public safety programs, intersection improvements, and traffic enforcement. 
(b)  The city shall retain an amount necessary to cover the costs of: 
(1)  Purchasing or leasing equipment that is part of or used in connection with the photographic traffic signal enforcement system in the city; 
(2)  Installing the photographic traffic signal enforcement system at sites in the city, including the costs of installing cameras, flashes, computer equipment, loop sensors, detectors, utility lines, data lines, poles and mounts, networking equipment, and associated labor costs; 
(3)  Operating the photographic traffic signal enforcement system in the city, including the costs of creating, distributing, and delivering violation notices, review of violations conducted by employees of the city, the processing of fine payments and collections, and the costs associated with administrative adjudications and appeals; and 
(4)  Maintaining the general upkeep and functioning of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-237. - Effect on other enforcement. 
(a)  The implementation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system under this article does not: 
(1)  Preclude the application or enforcement in the City of Texas V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Section 544.007(d) in the manner prescribed by V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Ch. 543; or 
(2)  Prohibit a peace officer from arresting a violator of V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Section 544.007(d) as provided by V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Ch. 543, if the peace officer personally witnesses the violation, or from issuing the violator a citation and notice to appear as provided by that chapter. 
(b)  No civil penalty shall be imposed on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of the vehicle was arrested or issued a citation and notice to appear by a peace officer for the same violation of V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Section 544.007(d) recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-238. - Admission of liability. 
A person who fails to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner or who requests an administrative adjudication hearing to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person and fails to appear at that hearing is considered to: 
(1)  Admit liability for the full amount of the civil penalty stated in the notice of violation mailed to the person; and 
(2)  Waive the person's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-239. - Presumption. 
(a)  It is presumed that the owner of the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation mailed to the person if the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system belongs to the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation, the presumption under subsection (a) is rebutted on the presentation of evidence establishing that the vehicle was at that time: 
(1)  Being test driven by another person; 
(2)  Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person; or 
(3)  Owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding section 18-240, the presentation of evidence under subsection (b) by a person who is in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or did not own the vehicle at the time of the violation must be made by affidavit, through testimony at the administrative adjudication hearing under section 18-240, or by a written declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted by mail to the city or the entity with which the city contracts. 
(d)  If the presumption established by subsection (a) is rebutted under subsection (b), a civil penalty may not be imposed on the owner of the vehicle or the person named in the notice of violation, as applicable. 
(e)  If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image taken by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual, the owner of the motor vehicle shall provide to the city or the entity with which the city contracts the name and address of the individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image and a statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the vehicle. The owner shall provide the information required by this subsection not later than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation is received. If the owner provides the required information, it is presumed that the individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation and the city or contractor may send a notice of violation to that individual at the address provided by the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-240. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice of violation under this article may contest the imposition of the civil penalty specified in the notice of violation by filing a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing. The request for a hearing must be filed on or before the date specified in the notice of violation, which may not be earlier than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation was mailed. 
(b)  On receipt of a timely request for an administrative adjudication hearing, the department shall notify the person of the date and time of the hearing. 
(c)  A hearing officer designated by the city council shall conduct the administrative adjudication hearing. 
(d)  In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(e)  The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the motor vehicle involved in the violation may be attested to by affidavit of an officer or employee of the city or of the entity with which the city contracts who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. 
(f)  An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city or entity that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the applicable recorded image is: 
(1)  Admissible in the administrative adjudication hearing and in an appeal under section 18-242; and 
(2)  Evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit. 
(g)  At the conclusion of the administrative adjudication hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a finding of liability for the civil penalty or a finding of no liability for the civil penalty. A finding under this subsection must be in writing and be signed and dated by the hearing officer. 
(h)  A finding of liability for a civil penalty must specify the amount of the civil penalty for which the person is liable. If the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability, a civil penalty for the violation may not be imposed against the person. 
(i)  A finding of liability or a finding of no liability entered under this section may: 
(1)  Be filed with the clerk or secretary of the city or with a person designated by the governing body of the city; and 
(2)  Be recorded on microfilm or microfiche or using data processing techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-241. - Untimely request for administrative adjudication hearing. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a person who receives a notice of violation under this article and who fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty or fails to timely request an administrative adjudication hearing is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing if: 
(1)  The person submits a written request for the hearing to the designated hearing officer, accompanied by an affidavit that attests to the date on which the person received the notice of violation; and 
(2)  The written request and affidavit are submitted to the hearing officer within the same number of days after the date the person received the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 18-242. - Appeal. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle determined by a hearing officer to be liable for a civil penalty may appeal that determination to the judge of the municipal court by filing an appeal petition with the clerk of the court. 
(b)  The petition must be: 
(1)  Filed before the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of liability for the civil penalty; and 
(2)  Accompanied by payment of the costs required by law for the court. 
(c)  The court clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner of the motor vehicle and the department of the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(d)  An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner of the motor vehicle. The owner shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation to perfect the owner's appeal. 
(e)  An appeal under this section shall be determined by the court by trial de novo. 
(Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Chapter 19 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— City attorney and municipal court, art. VI. 
Cross reference— Offenses generally, Ch. 21; police generally, Ch. 23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Created. 
In accordance with the provisions of the Denton City Charter and applicable state law, there is hereby created a Municipal Court of Record for the City of Denton, Texas, which is hereby designated, "Municipal Court No. 1." Municipal Court No. 1 shall be comprised of as many divisions as the city council deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-1), 12-5-89; Ord. No. 94-014, § III, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 19-2. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Each municipal court division shall have and exercise concurrent jurisdiction with other municipal court divisions, the jurisdiction being that which is conferred on all municipal courts of record by state law. 
(b)  The municipal court divisions may be in concurrent or continuous session, either day or night. 
(c)  Each municipal court division shall have civil jurisdiction the fullest extent allowable by state law. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-2), 12-5-89; Ord. No. 94-014, § IV, 1-18-94; Ord. No. 2012-254, § 2, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 19-3. - Budgetary responsibilities. 
The city judge shall participate in the budget process of the city as it relates to all personnel and property with the judge's office, the courtroom and all appurtenances connected therewith. The budgetary responsibilities and procedures as to all other support personnel of the court and appurtenances thereto shall be as directed by the municipal court clerk, subject to the approval of the executive director of finance and the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-31), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-4. - Collection and disbursement of funds. 
The municipal court clerk shall establish formal procedures for the collection and disbursement of funds so that all fines, fees, costs and monies collected and disbursed may be properly accounted for. All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-32), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-146 , § 5, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed § 19-5, which pertained to authority to issue citations. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 19-6. - Violation of promise to appear. 
(a)  A person lawfully released from custody, whether by posting bond or by signing a written notice to appear, on condition that he subsequently appear in the municipal court, shall appear in accordance with the terms of his release. 
(b)  The requirement for appearance in court is met if counsel appears on behalf of a person required to appear. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "custody" means an arrest or a detention for purposes of issuing a written citation by a police officer or by a person authorized to issue citations under section 19-5 of this chapter. 
(d)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one dollar ($1.00) to two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-34), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-7. - Court fees. 
Municipal court costs or fees are hereby authorized to be imposed and collected in accordance with the provisions of state law, and the maximum fees therein expressed are hereby authorized to be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-35), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-8. - Fees for services of peace officers and other fees. 
(a)  Fees for services performed in a case by a peace officer are hereby authorized to be imposed and collected by the municipal court in accordance with the provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.011, and the maximum fees therein expressed are authorized to be imposed. 
(b)  Warrant fees are hereby authorized and may be imposed and collected by the municipal court in accordance with the provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.203. The maximum fees therein expressed may be imposed. 
(c)  Special expenses for services performed in cases in which the laws of this state require that the case be dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant subsequent to the date of the alleged offense in compliance with the provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.0511 are hereby authorized to be imposed and collected in accordance with the provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.203. 
(d)  The city judge is hereby authorized to assess as an administrative fee an amount not exceeding twenty dollars ($20.00) where state law requires or allows for dismissal due to some act of the defendant. Those instances are correction of an expired motor vehicle registration (Vernon's Tex. Transportation Code Ann. Section 502.407), expired driver's license (Vernon's Tex. Transportation Code Ann. Section 521.021 and 521.026) and expired vehicle inspections certificate (Vernon's Tex. Transportation Code Ann. Section 548.602 and 548.605) when the correction is within twenty (20) days of the issuance of the citation and any other instance as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-275, § 1, 12-4-07)  
Secs. 19-9—19-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 19-36. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court of record shall be presided over by the municipal court judge, who shall be a magistrate and appointed by and removed from office by the city council. The council shall appoint assistant judges as it deems necessary. Such assistant judges shall be appointed and removed in the same manner as the municipal court judges, and shall serve in the absence of and have all the authority of the municipal court judges as provided by state law and the city charter. The municipal court judge and assistant judges may be referred to as the city judge and assistant city judges. 
(b)  The terms of office for the municipal court judge and any assistant judges shall be two (2) years from the date of appointment. The municipal court judge shall be appointed in even-numbered years, and any assistant judges shall be appointed in odd-numbered years. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-11), 12-5-89; Ord. No. 94-014, § V, 1-18-94; Ord. No. 94-144, § II, 8-2-94) 
Charter reference— Qualifications and appointment of city judge, § 6.03(b).  
Sec. 19-37. - Municipal court clerk. 
(a)  In order to release the city judge from all administrative responsibilities relative to personnel performing services supportive to the municipal court of record, the office of municipal court clerk is hereby established as a division of the court. 
(b)  The municipal court clerk shall be appointed by the city manager, and shall have the powers and duties provided by state law and the city charter. Any references to court administrator, clerk of the court or clerk shall be understood to mean municipal court clerk. 
(c)  The municipal court clerk shall appoint deputy court clerks as needed, subject to approval of the city manager, and such deputies shall act in and for the municipal court clerk in the performance of their duties. 
(d)  The municipal court clerk or his deputies shall perform all duties and responsibilities as provided under state law and the city Charter including keeping a record of the court proceedings, administering oaths, issuing process, making certificates and affixing the court seal thereto and generally performing the duties for the court that a county clerk performs for a county court. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-13), 12-5-89; Ord. No. 94-014, §§ VI, VII, 1-18-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-014, § VI, adopted Jan. 18, 1994, repealed former § 19-37, relative to the assistant city judge, and renumbered former §§ 19-38—19-40 as §§ 19-37—19-39. The provisions of former § 19-37 derived from Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-12), adopted Dec. 5, 1989.  
Sec. 19-38. - Prosecutor. 
The city attorney shall appoint a suitable and qualified person to hold the position of assistant city attorney who shall be charged with the duty of prosecuting all cases in the municipal court, and shall be subject to such other assignments as the city attorney may direct. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-14), 12-5-89; Ord. No. 94-014, § VI, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 19-39. - Court bailiffs. 
(a)  The chief of police, upon the request of the city judge, shall furnish one (1) or more police officers to serve as municipal court bailiffs during the convening of the court and when, in the judgment of the judge, a bailiff is necessary to maintain proper decorum during court proceedings. 
(b)  The principal duties of the court bailiff shall be as follows: 
(1)  To preserve order and decorum while court is in session; 
(2)  Provide security to the courts building; 
(3)  Assemble and supervise witnesses and jurors; 
(4)  Attend to the jury and inform the judge about the needs and decisions of the jury; 
(5)  Maintain custody of prisoners in the courtroom and arrange for their transportation to jail when requested by the judge; 
(6)  Transfer messages and perform other tasks assigned by the judge. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-15), 12-5-89; Ord. No. 94-014, § VI, 1-18-94)  
Secs. 19-40—19-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROCEEDINGS 
 
Sec. 19-61. - Criminal complaints and pleadings. 
(a)  All proceedings in the municipal court shall be commenced on a written complaint prepared and filed by or under the direction of the city attorney or an assistant city attorney, except when state law provides that a written complaint is unnecessary. 
(b)  When no written complaint is required, the proceeding shall commence upon the filing of the citation. 
(c)  Complaints and citations shall be filed with the municipal court clerk. 
(d)  Complaints shall begin, "In the name and by authority of the State of Texas …" and shall conclude "… against the peace and dignity of the State." If the offense charged is a violation of a city ordinance, the complaint may also conclude "contrary to the said ordinance …." 
(e)  Complaints may be signed by any credible person on information and belief and sworn to before a notary public, the city attorney, an assistant city attorney, a city judge, municipal court clerk, deputy court clerk or city secretary, each of whom, for that purpose, shall have the authority to administer oaths. 
(f)  All pleas shall either be made in writing and filed with the municipal court clerk or made in open court before a city judge. 
(g)  Any additional pleadings in the court shall be in writing and filed with the municipal court clerk, except when waived by a city judge. 
(h)  The municipal court clerk shall file the original complaint and the original of other papers and proceedings in each case under the direction of the city judge. Such documents constitute the records of the court and a separate record book shall not be required. 
(i)  The records of the court, including dockets, shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years following the disposition of any particular cause, and, thereafter, the records may be disposed of or destroyed upon authorization of the city attorney. The court's permanent minutes may be maintained by computer records or any other method authorized by state law. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-21), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-62. - Jurors. 
All jurors shall be residents of the city and shall possess the same qualifications as jurors in the state courts. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-22), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-63. - Rules governing proceedings. 
All proceedings in the municipal court shall be governed by the laws of the state. In those areas not specifically covered by the state Code of Criminal Procedure and elsewhere in the state laws or by ordinance, the city judge of the municipal court shall establish such court rules as are necessary to establish reasonable and consistent procedures for the operation of the court. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-23), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-64. - Dismissal of complaint. 
No complaint filed in the municipal court shall be dismissed except upon order of a city judge and in accordance with the law. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-24), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-65. - Transcript fee. 
There shall be charged and collected, before preparation of a transcript, a transcript preparation fee. The fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or the maximum amount permitted pursuant to Tex. Gov't. Code section 30.994(d), as amended, whichever amount is greater. 
(Ord. No. 94-144, § III, 8-2-94)  
Secs. 19-66—19-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTION AND ABATEMENT WARRANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of health officer to make inspections and abate nuisances, § 13-18; utility inspections, § 26-2; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28; electrical inspector, § 28-81 et seq.; plumbing inspector, § 28-166 et seq.; plumbing inspector, § 28-166 et seq.; fire prevention code generally, Ch. 29; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicles generally, Ch. 32; subdivision and land development generally, Ch. 34; zoning generally, Ch. 35. 
State Law reference— Inspection warrants, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05. 
 
Sec. 19-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inspection warrant means a written order issued by a magistrate and directed to any inspector commanding him to inspect specific premises to determine the presence of a violation of any city ordinance or other law that provides for such inspections to be conducted by city inspectors and, when the inspector is also a peace officer, this Code, laws of the state and the United States. 
Inspector means any peace officer of the state or any official inspector for any department of the city who is charged with code enforcement, including but not limited to inspectors for the departments of planning, building inspection, housing, fire and health. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-40), 12-5-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-87. - Warrants authorized. 
Except as provided in section 19-86, inspectors are hereby authorized to seek and obtain inspection warrants from a magistrate before making any inspection incidental to the enforcement of any provision of this Code or other law that provides for such inspection; when the inspector is also a peace officer, incidental to the enforcement of this Code, laws of the state and the United States. A magistrate is hereby authorized to issue such warrants subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-41), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-88. - Warrants not required. 
Inspection warrants shall not be required under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When permission to inspect has been granted by someone apparently having charge or control of those premises. For the purpose of this subsection, permission to inspect may be granted either verbally, in writing or by some other action indicating consent; 
(2)  When there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life, limb or property and any delays resulting from the application for an inspection warrant would materially increase the likelihood of loss from such danger or peril; 
(3)  When the inspection can be executed in areas held open to the general public; or 
(4)  When the inspection is of a business recognized by law as being a traditionally licensed and regulated enterprise for which no reasonable expectation of privacy exists. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-42), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-89. - Requirement for issuance of inspection warrant. 
(a)  No inspection warrant shall be issued except upon citation to specific laws requiring or permitting inspections or on the presentation of evidence of probable cause to believe that a violation of this Code or state or federal statutes providing for such inspections to be made by city inspectors are present in the premises sought to be inspected. In determining probable cause, the magistrate is not limited to evidence of specific knowledge, but may consider any of the following: 
(1)  The age and general condition of the premises; 
(2)  Previous violations or hazards found present in the premises; 
(3)  The type of premises; 
(4)  The purposes for which the premises is used; and 
(5)  The presence of hazards or violations in and the general condition of premises near the premises sought to be inspected. 
(b)  A sworn affidavit setting forth substantial facts toward establishing probable cause or the statutory basis for inspection shall be filed in every instance in which an inspection warrant is requested. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-43), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-90. - Inspection warrant formalities. 
An inspection warrant issued pursuant to this chapter shall be sufficient if it contains the following requisites: 
(1)  That it run in the name of "The State of Texas"; 
(2)  That it identify, as near as may be, those premises to be inspected; 
(3)  That it command an inspector to inspect forthwith the premises described; and 
(4)  That it be dated and signed by the magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-44), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-91. - Execution of warrants. 
An inspector to whom an inspection warrant is delivered shall execute it without delay and forthwith return it to the proper magistrate. It may be executed within three (3) days from the time of its issuance and shall be executed within a shorter period if so directed in the warrant. If such persons cannot be found, upon execution of the warrant, a copy of the warrant shall be affixed to the front door of the building or premises inspected. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-45), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-92. - Days allowed for warrant to run. 
The time allowed for the execution of an inspection warrant shall be three (3) whole days, exclusive of the day of its issuance and of the day of its execution. The magistrate issuing a warrant under the provisions of this article shall endorse on such warrant the date and hour of the issuance of the warrant. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-46), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-93. - Return of warrant. 
Upon returning the inspection warrant, the inspector shall state on the back of the warrant or on some paper attached to it the manner in which it has been executed and shall likewise deliver to the magistrate a copy of the report resulting from that inspection. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-47), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-94. - Power of inspector executing warrant. 
The execution of a warrant issued pursuant to this article shall not include any authority to make arrests or to seize tangible goods of a violation, except where the inspector is a peace officer or the items are to be seized by a peace officer and are within the items listed in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.02(1)—(9) and (11). 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-48), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-95. - Records to be kept. 
The magistrate shall keep a record of all proceedings had before him in the cases of inspection warrants as part of the official records of his court. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-49), 12-5-89)  
Sec. 19-96. - Conflicts. 
No provision of this article is intended to conflict with any state or federal law, and the powers and rights granted in this article are intended to be in addition to any rights granted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 89-177, § I(8-50), 12-5-89)  
Chapter 21 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 4; municipal court generally, Ch. 19; police generally, Ch. 23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Air rifles and air pistols. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air rifle or air pistol or other instrument, by whatever name known, which by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or by any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets or any solid object at a velocity in excess of three hundred (300) feet per second within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 14-1)  
Sec. 21-2. - Barbed wire fences. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, build, construct or erect any fence composed wholly or in part of what is commonly known as barbed wire on or along the line of any street, alley, avenue, sidewalk or land in the city, other than in an area zoned for agricultural use pursuant to the authority of Chapter 35 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the placing of barbed wire along the tops of fences when such fences are over five (5) feet high. 
(Code 1966, § 14-2; Ord. No. 94-221, § I, 12-6-94)  
Sec. 21-3. - Blasting without permit. 
Blasting or demolition with dynamite or any other explosive within the city is unlawful, except upon express permission of the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 14-3)  
Sec. 21-4. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  When prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge a firearm, rifle, shotgun, automatic rifle, revolver, pistol or other weapon designed for the purpose of firing or discharging a shell or cartridge, whether the shell or cartridge is blank or live ammunition, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Exceptions. Exceptions to subsection (a) of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  When the firing is done by a law enforcement peace officer acting in the performance of his official duties; 
(2)  When the firing is done at a shooting or firing range operated by an agency of the United States Government, the state, the county or the city or which is privately operated if approved by the chief of police; 
(3)  When the firing is done using blank cartridges for a show or theatrical production or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports or by a military organization; 
(4)  When the firing is done in a shooting gallery or gunsmith's establishment and when such shooting gallery or gunsmith's establishment is properly fitted and arranged for the purpose so that no danger arises therefrom; provided, however, that no shotgun of any character nor any pistol or rifle larger than .22 caliber shall be used in a shooting gallery and that no shooting gallery shall be lawful in a gunsmith's establishment except in connection with the necessary repair of the firearm used; 
(5)  When the firing is done in the necessary and lawful protection of person, premises or property or a justifiable or excusable homicide situation; 
(6)  When the city council has granted permission to a person under the authority vested in chapter 6 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 14-4)  
Sec. 21-5. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause to be thrown, placed or deposited or suffer or permit any other person in his family to throw or deposit in any street, alley, gutter, ditch, lot or other place in this city the carcass of any dead animal or fowl or any meat, fish, hides, skins, bones, offal, manure, fruit, vegetables, melon rinds, fruit peelings, slop, tires, bottles, cans, loose paper, rags, scraps of leather, shavings, dishwater, chips or other trash or other unsound or offensive matter or matter liable to become offensive or injurious to the health of those who reside in the vicinity or allow any such substance to remain in or about or upon any premises owned or controlled by him. 
(Code 1966, § 14-6; Ord. No. 89-048, § I, 4-4-89) 
Cross reference— Litter accumulations at drive-in restaurants, § 13-30; solid waste generally, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 21-6. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit another in a public place at the times, locations and in the manner specified below: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) feet of any automated teller machine not enclosed within a building. 
(Ord. No. 2004-105, § 1, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 21-7. - Day labor site regulations. 
The following restrictions shall apply to the use of the day labor site: 
(1)  The day labor site shall be open from the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person to be at the day labor site between 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at the day labor site. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to solicit employment or to remain on any portion of the property located at 221 W. Collins which is not designated as part of the day labor site. The day labor site shall not include any area within fifty (50) feet of the intersection of the day labor site driveway entrance and West Collins Street. Nor shall the day labor site include any area within twenty (20) feet of any curb-line of the city streets adjacent to the property at 221 W. Collins Street. Additionally, if any fencing, shrubbery, or other physical barrier is added to the property at 221 W. Collins Street, then the day labor site shall only include the area of the property inside of the physical barrier. 
(Ord. No. 2004-288, § 1, 9-21-04)  
Sec. 21-8. - Dumping. 
It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to dump, or permit to be dumped upon any sidewalk, alley, street, into or adjacent to water, or any other public or private property, any unwholesome water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, filth, carrion, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever kind. 
(Ord. No. 2009-060, § 3, 3-3-09)  
Secs. 21-9—21-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PICKETING 
 
Sec. 21-31. - Findings. 
(a)  The protection and preservation of the home is the keystone of democratic government. 
(b)  The public health and welfare and the good order of the community require that members of the community enjoy in their homes and dwellings a feeling of well-being, tranquility and privacy and, when absent from their homes and dwellings, carry with them the sense of security inherent in the assurance that they may return to the enjoyment of their homes and dwellings. 
(c)  The practice of picketing before or about residences and dwellings causes emotional disturbance and distress to the occupants and obstructs and interferes with the free use of public sidewalks and public ways of travel. 
(d)  Such practice has as its object the harassing of such occupants; and without resort to such practice full opportunity exists for the exercise of freedom of speech and other constitutional rights. 
(e)  The provisions enacted in this article are necessary for the public interest to avoid the detrimental results set forth in this section and are enacted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-124, § I, 7-19-88)  
Sec. 21-32. - Picketing residence or dwelling unlawful. 
(a)  No person shall engage in picketing before or about a residence or dwelling in the city. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the residence or dwelling described in subsection (a) of this section also serves as a place of business that serves as the purpose of the picketing. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense that a person is picketing at the invitation of the individual residing at the residence or dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 88-124, § II, 7-19-88)  
Secs. 21-33—21-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GRAFFITI[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Graffiti, § 17-120 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Designee(s). City employee or employees designated by the city manager to perform activities related to notification and abatement of graffiti. 
Graffiti. Visual blight or any unauthorized form of painting, scratching, writing, or inscription including initials, slogans, symbols or drawings, regardless of the content or nature of the material that has been applied to any wall, building, fence, window, sign or other structure or surface and is visible from any public property or right-of-way or is visible from the private property of another person. "Graffiti" does not include any of the foregoing used for advertising purposes placed on any property in compliance with any applicable city ordinance, state or federal law. 
Graffiti implement. An aerosol paint container, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or man-made surface. 
Minor. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
Owner. Any owner of record or other person who has contractual responsibility for the property. 
Parent. A person who is a natural parent or adoptive parent of a minor. As used herein, "parent" shall also include a court-appointed guardian or other person twenty-one (21) years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of the minor. 
Unauthorized. Means without the consent of the owner or without authority of law, regulation or ordinance. Unless the owner proves otherwise, lack of consent will be presumed under circumstances tending to show (1) the absence of evidence of specific authorization by the owner, (2) that the visual blight is inconsistent with the design and the use of the subject property, or (3) that the person causing the visual blight was unknown to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2005-149, § 1, 5-24-05)  
Sec. 21-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-062, § 4, adopted March 3, 2009, repealed § 21-51, which pertained to declaration of public nuisance and derived from Ord. No. 2005-149, § 1, 5-24-05.  
Sec. 21-52. - Sale of pressurized paint containers to minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, exchange, give, loan, or cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, given, or loaned, any pressurized devices containing paint to any minor person. 
(Ord. No. 2005-149, § 1, 5-24-05)  
Sec. 21-53. - Possession by minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implements. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section that at the time of possession: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied or supervised by a parent, guardian, or teacher in connection with a bona fide school project; or a supervisor during the minor's regular employment; 
(2)  The minor possessed the graffiti implement on the property on which he or she lives. 
(3)  The possession occurred as part of an organized event sponsored by a school, church or some other officially recognized entity and supervised by an adult representative of the organization; or 
(4)  The possession occurred during employment while the minor was supervised by his or her employer. 
(Ord. No. 2005-149, § 1, 5-24-05)  
Sec. 21-54. - Other prohibited acts. 
(a)  Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface of any city-owned property or without the permission of the owner or occupant on any non-city owned property. 
(b)  Possession of graffiti implements. It shall be unlawful for any person: 
To possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, transportation vehicle, park, playground, swimming pool, recreation facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the city or while in or within fifty (50) feet from an underpass bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar type of infrastructure, unless authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-149, § 1, 5-24-05)  
Sec. 21-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-062, § 4, adopted March 3, 2009, repealed § 21-55, which pertained to owner responsibility and derived from Ord. No. 2005-149, § 1, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 2007-193, § 13, 9-18-07.  
Sec. 21-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-062, § 4, adopted March 3, 2009, repealed § 21-56, which pertained to imposition of civil penalty for applying, permitting, or allowing graffiti and derived from Ord. No. 2005-149, § 1, 5-24-05.  
Secs. 21-57—21-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDERS' RESIDENCY 
 
Sec. 21-60. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, words, phrases and the derivations thereof shall have the meanings given herein: 
Daycare center. A facility providing care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for thirteen (13) or more children for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
Minor shall mean a person younger than seventeen (17) years of age. 
Permanent residence shall mean a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
Premise where children commonly gather shall mean a public park, private or public school, day care center, any public or non-profit recreational facility, or video arcade facility. For the purposes of this article, planted street medians are not public parks. 
Temporary residence shall mean a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2011-168, § 1, 9-20-11)  
Sec. 21-61. - Offenses. 
For each person required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the "database") because of a violation involving a victim who was a minor as defined herein, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any "premise where children commonly gather." 
(Ord. No. 2011-168, § 1, 9-20-11)  
Sec. 21-62. - Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(a)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was a minor as defined herein. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described hereinabove. 
(c)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the City of Denton. The city shall review the map at least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the City of Denton Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-168, § 1, 9-20-11)  
Sec. 21-63. - Culpable mental estate not required. 
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-168, § 1, 9-20-11)  
Sec. 21-64. - Affirmative defenses. 
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The person required to register on the database has previously established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this article. 
(2)  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration, and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person required to register on the database is a minor. 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
(5)  The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
(Ord. No. 2011-168, § 1, 9-20-11)  
Sec. 21-65. - Penalty. 
An offense under this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. After thirty (30) days has passed from the issuance of the first citation for a violation of this article, then each day this article is violated shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-168, § 1, 9-20-11)  
Chapter 22 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Parks and recreation, art. XI. 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 6; recreation areas in mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, § 32-85. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Board appointed. 
There is hereby created a park and recreation board which shall consist of seven (7) residents of the City of Denton, Texas. The members of the park and recreation board shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years. Board members shall be eligible for reappointment in accordance with section 2-65 of the Code. The board shall elect its chairperson from among its members, and he or she shall serve for two (2) years, or until his or her successor is elected and qualified. All members of the board shall serve without pay, and the board shall adopt such rules of procedure and other rules as may be necessary for the regulation of its business and affairs. The board shall be referred to as the parks, recreation, and beautification board and any reference to parks and recreation board, in this Code, shall be construed as referring to the parks, recreation, and beautification board. 
(Code 1966, § 15-2; Ord. No. 99-219, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2000-436, § 1, 11-28-00) 
Charter reference— Park and recreation board, § 11.02; boards and commissions, § 14.16. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 22-2. - Attendance. 
All members of the board shall comply with the provisions pertaining to all boards and commissions set forth in sections 2-61 through 2-65 and 2-81 through 2-84 of this Code. Section 2-83(c) states that the unexcused absence of any board member for more than three (3) regularly called and scheduled meetings of the board in any one (1) year or lack of attendance of more than fifty (50) percent of the number of regular meetings in a year, unless such absence is the result of a personal or family illness or death, shall be considered "cause," as that term is used in section 14.16 of the Charter, for removal of the member by the city council from such board. Board members shall be subject to removal in accordance with this section and other applicable provisions of this Code, the City Charter, and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 99-219, § 1, 6-15-99)  
Sec. 22-3. - Advisory board. 
The board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council and the director of parks and recreation. The board and the director of parks and recreation shall meet bi-monthly and at such other times as the board may, by resolution, determine. The board shall submit to the city council an annual report of its operations, together with its recommendations for the improvement of the park and recreation program as it may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 99-219, § 1, 6-15-99)  
Sec. 22-4. - Duties. 
The board shall endeavor to stimulate public interest in the development and maintenance of parks and playgrounds and a well-rounded community-wide program, it shall endeavor to interpret the work of the park and recreation department and promote close cooperation between the city and all private citizens, institutions, and agencies, to the end that all park and recreational facilities and resources within, or controlled by, the city may make their maximum contribution to the public welfare. 
The board shall also be responsible for making recommendations to the city council and the parks and recreation director regarding issues and ordinances related to community appearance, beautification and the environment of the city and the entrances into the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-219, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2000-436, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2006-105, § 1, 4-18-06; Ord. No. 2013-207, § 1, 8-20-13)  
Sec. 22-5. - Temporary additions to the board. 
The parks and recreation board shall be enlarged by two members for a temporary period of time. The two temporary members shall be appointed and have the same qualifications and requirements as all other members of the board but must in addition have some experience and knowledge about the issues affecting the appearance and environment of the city. The two temporary members shall have the same duties, standing, power and responsibility as any other member of the board during the time of their temporary appointment. All rules and procedures of the board shall be adapted to reflect the addition of the two temporary members during the temporary term. The term of the two temporary members shall expire on July 1, 2001 and the temporary appointments shall cease on that date. 
(Ord. No. 2000-436, § 3, 11-28-01)  
Sec. 22-6. - Public art committee. 
The city council shall establish and appoint a public art committee that will serve in an advisory capacity to the city council. The public art committee will make recommendations on the: 
• Commissioning, placing, and the installing of public art. 
• Implementation of funding mechanism(s) for public art. 
• Effective and efficient management of public art. 
• Ongoing maintenance of public art. 
• Accessioning, deaccessioning and resiting of public art. 
• Oversight of cultural districts. 
The public art committee will provide as appropriate an annual report detailing its goals and accomplishments related to the implementation of the public art policy. 
The public art committee will develop detailed guidelines outlining all aspects involved with the implementation of the public art policy. 
The public art committee will be a nine-member advisory committee, appointed by the city council. The city council will appoint two members representing the Greater Denton Arts Council. The Greater Denton Arts Council will nominate these two (2) members. The Greater Denton Arts Council Executive Director, the economic development department director, and the parks and recreation department director will serve as ex-officio members on the public art committee. 
The appointed members' terms, attendance and meeting structure will follow those established for all City of Denton boards and commissions in sections 2-61 through 2-83 in the Code and in the council-approved City of Denton Handbook for Boards, Commissions, and Council Committees. 
(Ord. No. 2006-105, § 2, 4-18-06; Ord. No. 2013-207, § 2, 8-20-13; Ord. No. 2019-1156 , § 1, 6-4-19)  
Secs. 22-7—22-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK RULES 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Use of public parks; concessions; unauthorized athletic field usage; posting of signs. 
(a)  Public use. All parks and playgrounds acquired and maintained by the city shall be open to the use of the public under such reasonable rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe upon the recommendation of the park and recreation board. 
(b)  Concessions. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer anything for barter or sale, exhibit anything for pay, conduct any place of amusement for which an admission fee is charged or render personal service or transportation of any character for hire in any public park in the city without first obtaining the privilege of doing so by contract with the city under such terms and conditions as may be provided by the city council after receiving the recommendation of the park and recreation board on each such contract. 
(c)  Unauthorized use. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(i)  Enter upon a City of Denton athletic field that has a sign posted "Closed due to Maintenance/Field Conditions" unless such person is a city employee or contractor performing athletic field maintenance, or 
(ii)  Enter upon a City of Denton athletic field that has a sign posted "Field use with permit only" without having a City of Denton reservation permit that states the dates and times of usage, unless such person is a city employee or contractor performing athletic field maintenance. 
The city manager, or his designee, is authorized and directed to post the signs provided for above on or adjacent to City of Denton athletic fields. 
(Code 1966, § 15-3; Ord. No. 2003-070, § 2, 3-4-03)  
Sec. 22-27. - Hours of operation. 
The city parks shall be closed to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be found in city parks between such hours, except for events approved or scheduled by the parks and recreation department or city council. 
(Code 1966, § 15-8)  
Sec. 22-28. - Facility and program fees. 
(a)  The department of parks and recreation shall charge and collect the fees for the use of buildings and facilities and for recreational programs, services, and merchandise offered by the department in the amounts established in a "Schedule of Fees"* adopted from time to time by ordinance of the city council. 
(b)  The director of the department may set, charge and collect fees for classes, trips, equipment, merchandise, police or supervisory services, and other programs, services, events and merchandise provided or offered by the department where no fee is established in the "Schedule of Fees"*. The fee or charge shall be based on the costs of providing the event, service, equipment or goods. 
(Code 1966 § 15-3.1; Ord. No. 91-055, § I, 4-2-91; Ord. No. 93-206, § I, 11-2-93; Ord. No. 99-311, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2003-267, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2004-262, § 1, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2005-015, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 2009-224, § 1, 9-22-09) 
*Note—Said "Schedule of Fees" is not setout herein but is available for inspection in the offices of the city.  
Sec. 22-29. - Signs and other advertising devices on city-owned park property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any structure, sign, bulletin board, post, pole or advertising device of any kind in any park or playground or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rope or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or other structure in any park or playground in the city without specific permission from the city council. 
(b)  The city manager, or his designee, is authorized to make, execute, and deliver, for and on behalf of the City of Denton, Facility Utilization Agreements for Youth Sports Associations, substantially in a form to be approved by city council, within the parameters set forth herein: 
(1)  The Facility Utilization Agreement cannot be for a duration of longer than one (1) year. 
(2)  The Facility Utilization Agreement may allow for the placement of advertisements on city property only as permitted under chapter 33 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  No sign placed on city property under this delegation may advertise for any of the following: Political campaigns, alcoholic beverages, establishments or businesses where the majority of gross income is obtained from the sale of alcoholic beverages, tobacco products of any type, sexually oriented businesses, and/or products or services sold by sexually oriented businesses. 
(Code 1966, § 15-4; Ord. No. 2018-246 , § 3, 2-6-18) 
Cross reference— Signs and advertising devices generally, Ch. 33; see § 33-2 Definition of "Sign", exception "u".  
Sec. 22-30. - Vehicles and animals. 
(a)  Commercial vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any heavily laden vehicle or any vehicle engaged in business or commercial transportation or activity of any kind over any street, drive, parkway or boulevard in any public park in the city, except under authority expressly granted by the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  Vehicles and animals limited to certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle or to lead, drive or ride any animal over or through any park, except along and upon park streets, drives, parkways or boulevards. 
(c)  Hitching, tethering or pasturing animals prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to tether or pasture any animal in or upon any park or playground or to hitch any horse or other animal to any tree, shrub, fence, railing or other structure in any park or playground. 
(d)  Parking restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a park, except in places designated by the city for such purposes, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to remain parked any vehicle owned by or under such person's control on park property after 10:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m., unless participating in an activity which is scheduled by or with the approval of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 15-5) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic generally, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 22-31. - Prohibited acts. 
In addition to the prohibitions set forth in section 14-87 of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent; monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
(2)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters; 
(3)  Bring in the park to dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rock, rubbish, waste, wood, garbage, refuse or other household or commercial trash, containers, equipment or appliances. All refuse, trash or other material created through the use of the parks shall not be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where provided, and if not provided all such rubbish, trash or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly deposed of elsewhere; 
(4)  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this chapter or may be hereafter adopted; 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any noxious, hazardous or flammable materials or substances, either solid or liquid, on park property; 
(6)  Start or maintain a fire in a park except in a fireplace or grill at a site designated by the parks and recreation department; to leave the park without extinguishing a fire started or maintained by that person; to burn wood found in the park or to deposit hot coals in trash receptacles; 
(7)  Camp in a park other than in an area designated by and with the written permission of the parks and recreation department; 
(8)  Possess, bring into to discharge in a park any firearm, air- or gas-operated gun, bow, crossbow or other missile throwing device; 
(9)  Move or carry away any sod, sand, earth, tree, wood, shrub, flower or other landscaping in a park or to trample, injure or destroy plant material and park fixtures or facilities, except as required by article IV of chapter 6 of this Code; 
(10)  Hit a golf ball in a park except in areas designated by the parks and recreation department; 
(11)  Take any fish or other aquatic life from park water areas by any means except a hook and line using natural or artificial baits. All nets and seines are prohibited; 
(12)  Operate or cause to be operated on any body of water in any park any vessel or vehicle equipped with an internal combustion engine designed or altered to propel such vessel or vehicle in water. 
(Code 1966, § 15-6; Ord. No. 89-013, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 2003-091, § 2, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 2018-1045 , § 2, 6-26-18; Ord. No. 2018-1123 , § 7, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 22-31.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-1123 , § 8, adopted November 6, 2018, repealed § 22-31.1, which pertained to smoking or other use of tobacco products prohibited. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 22-32. - Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage while on the premises of any: 
(1)  City park; 
(2)  Public Improvement located within a city park; or 
(3)  Vehicle parking area of any city park. 
(b)  The prohibition contained in section 22-32(a) shall not apply to the possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in Quakertown Park, and Civic Center Building and North Lakes Park, excluding North Lakes Recreation Center and the North Lakes Annex building, during an activity, event or rental of space approved by the city in advance. The approval contemplated by this subsection may be granted by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "alcoholic beverage" is as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-081, § 2, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 2009-251, § 2, 10-6-09; Ord. No. 2011-236, § 2, 12-6-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-081, § 2, adopted Mar. 23, 2004, repealed § 22-32, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 22-32 pertained to consumption of alcoholic beverages and derived from Code 1966, § 15-7; Ord. No. 89-081, § I, adopted June 20, 1989; and Ord. No. 95-153, § I, adopted Aug. 15, 1995. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 5.  
ARTICLE III. - PARK DEDICATION 
 
Sec. 22-33. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article is adopted to provide recreational areas in the form of neighborhood parks as a function of subdivision development of the City of Denton. This article is enacted in accordance with the home rule powers of the city granted under the Texas Constitution, and the statutes of the State of Texas, including, but not by way of limitation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.071 et seq. (provisions applicable to home-rule municipality) and § 212.001 et seq. (municipal regulation of subdivisions and property development). It is hereby declared by the city council that recreational areas in the form of neighborhood parks are necessary and in the public welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to provide for same is by integrating such a requirement into the procedure for planning and developing property or subdivisions in the city, whether such development consists of new residential construction on vacant land or the addition of new dwelling units on existing residential land. 
(b)  Neighborhood parks are those parks providing for a variety of outdoors recreational opportunities and within convenient distances from a majority of the residences to be served thereby. The primary cost of neighborhood parks should be borne by the ultimate residential property owners who, by reason of the proximity of their property to such parks, shall be the primary beneficiaries of such facilities. Therefore, the following requirements are adopted to effect the purposes stated. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-34. - Definition of terms. 
For purposes of this policy, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Developer/owner means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
Residential subdivision means the division or redivision of land into five (5) or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of developing residential dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit means a building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping. 
Neighborhood park means open space area encompassing five (5) to twenty (20) acres. Neighborhood parks should provide recreational land for residents within an approximate one-half (½) mile service radius. 
Park dedication requirements means collectively, dedication and/or construction of park facilities, in lieu dedication fee and park development fee. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-35. - Applicability. 
The park dedication requirements of this article shall apply to every residential subdivision and every building permit for construction of a dwelling unit approved after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter expressly provided to the contrary. 
(1)  Land dedication requirements set forth in section 22-37 shall not apply to an application for approval of a preliminary or final plat for a residential subdivision that was initially filed before the effective date of this ordinance, and which plat has not expired. For all plat applications for a residential subdivision filed after the effective date of this ordinance, land dedication and/or construction requirements for park facilities shall be imposed at the time of preliminary plat approval. 
(2)  Requirements for payment of fees in lieu of park land dedication set forth in section 22-38 shall not apply to any final plat for a residential subdivision that was approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor to any application for a building permit within such subdivision thereafter filed, provided that no replat is necessary. Fees in lieu of park land dedication for all other residential subdivisions shall be paid at the time of release of the final plat for any portion of the subdivision by the city for filing in the county plat records. 
(3)  Requirements for park development fees set forth in section 22-39 shall not apply to any application for a building permit in a residential subdivision that was filed prior to the effective date of this ordinance. Park development fees for all other residential building permits shall be paid prior to issuance of such permits. 
(4)  Following initial imposition and satisfaction of park dedication requirements, additional requirements shall apply to revised plat applications for residential subdivisions and to renewed applications for building permits to construct residential dwellings only if such revised or renewed application results in an increase in the number of dwelling units. In such case, park dedication requirements then in effect shall apply only to the additional dwelling units proposed in the application. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-36. - Planning. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to require developer/owners of residential subdivisions and lots to provide for park land and park facilities at the time of development approval in proportion to the need for such improvements created by the developments and in proportion to the benefits received from contribution of such facilities. It is the city's further policy to impose park dedication requirements consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and officially adopted park and recreation plan. 
(b)  The city shall require developers of residential subdivisions or lots to dedicate land for neighborhood parks, make payment of cash in lieu thereof, make payment of cash for park development fees or construct recreational or park improvements in lieu thereof, or require dedication of additional park land, as hereinafter provided, for park purposes to meet the park and recreational needs as a condition of the development approval The city shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to require a combination of park land dedication and/or payment of cash in lieu thereof, and/or payment of cash for park development fees and/or construction of recreational and park improvements in lieu thereof in order to meet park dedication requirements. 
(c)  The city shall base park dedication requirements on the number of persons expected to reside in a development. The standard for public park land shall be two and one-half (2.5) acres per one thousand (1,000) population. For each residential subdivision, the following formula shall be used to calculate park land needs: 
2.5 Acres x (No. of Units) x (Persons/Unit)  = Acres to be dedicated 
1,000 population 
The number of persons per unit shall be based on both current U.S. census information and data compiled by the city and shall be periodically reviewed and updated. The following figures represent the average number of persons per unit by current density categories, and shall be used to calculate park land dedications. 
(1)  Single-family detached/duplex 
2.8 persons/unit 
(2)  Multifamily 
1.8 persons/unit 
(d)  Park development fees shall be based upon an assumed cost of typical improvements for five (5) acres neighborhood park of two hundred eight dollars ($208,000). Development costs shall be apportioned among types of dwellings units and park development fees shall be charged in accordance with the following formula: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling: $291.00 
(2)  Multifamily dwelling: $187.00 
(e)  Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a proposed residential subdivision and such area is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit may be given to the developer/owner, not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the total acreage requirements for land dedication if the city finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met: 
(1)  That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and subdivision rules and regulations ordinances shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; 
(2)  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded agreement, covenants or restrictions; 
(3)  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreation purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor or future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the written consent of the city or its successors; 
(4)  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location; 
(5)  That facilities proposed for the private open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the comprehensive plan, parks and recreation plan and other adopted plans of city; and 
(6)  That the private open space for which credit is given is a minimum of two (2) acres and provides a minimum of four (4) of the local park elements listed below, or a combination of such and other recreational improvements that will meet the specific recreation park needs of the future residents of the area: 
Criteria List 	Credit Acres 
Children's play apparatus area 	 .50 -  .75 
Landscape park-like and quiet areas 	 .50 - 1.00 
Family picnic area 	 .25 -  .75 
Game court area 	 .25 -  .50 
Turf playfield 	1.00 - 3.00 
Swimming pool (42' × 75') [with adjacent deck and lawn areas] 	 .25 -  .50 
Recreation center building 	 .15 -  .25 
Recreation community gardening 	 .15 -  .25 
 
Before credit is given, the city shall make written findings that the above standards are met. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-37. - Land dedication. 
(a)  Dedication of park land shall be proportional to the number and type of dwelling units proposed for a residential subdivision. The number of acres of land to be dedicated shall be determined using the formula in section 22-36(c). 
(b)  Where a proposed residential subdivision contains multifamily dwelling units and information is not provided concerning the number of such units, the city shall assume the highest density allowed for the property to determine the projected population for the development. 
(c)  The land required to be dedicated or conveyed may be located inside or outside the subdivision development so long as the land is located within one-half (½) to one (1) mile of the periphery of the development so as to serve or benefit the residents of such subdivision. 
(d)  The parks and recreation department, based upon review of the preliminary plat, initially shall determine the feasibility of park land dedication for a residential subdivision and the amount of land to be dedicated to the city for neighborhood park purposes, utilizing site selection criteria contained in section 22-41. The department's determination shall be forwarded to the Denton Department of Planning and Development for processing with the preliminary plat. 
(e)  In residential subdivisions which are to be platted in two (2) or more phases, the required park land dedication, pursuant to this article, must be provided in each phase of the subdivision with one (1) exception. In its sole discretion, the city may authorize the developer to reserve park land for dedication in subsequent phases of the subdivision by paying into a city escrow fund a dollar amount equal to the fees in lieu of dedication otherwise due for the phase under section 22-38. The form and provisions of the escrow agreement shall be approved by the city attorney and city engineer. The escrow funds must be paid to the city prior to the filing of the first phase final plat and shall be maintained in the escrow fund pending the platting of the project phase that contains the park land to be dedicated. Escrow funds will be returned to the developer, without interest, upon the filing of the final plat for the subsequent phase that dedicates the required park land. In addition, the developer shall dedicate a reversionary public access easement on the final plat of the initial phase(s) where necessary to provide effective public access, maintenance and use of any park land to be dedicated. 
(f)  If a replat is filed, the dedication requirements shall be controlled by the regulations in effect at the time of original platting, except that land dedication (or fee in lieu of) requirements then in effect shall be applied to any additional dwelling units proposed for the replat. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-38. - Payment of fees in lieu of park land dedication. 
(a)  If the calculation for required park land within the proposed subdivision development results in less than five (5) acres or does not meet criteria as per section 22-41, the parks and recreation department shall determine the amount of a fee in lieu of park land dedication in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The amount of the fee in lieu of park land dedication shall be calculated as follows. The Department first shall determine the total amount of land required to be dedicated in accordance with section 22-37. The value of the land shall be calculated as the average estimated fair market value per acre of the land being subdivided at the time of preliminary plat approval, reduced by the value of any land actually to be dedicated for park purposes. The net value of the land otherwise to be dedicated shall be apportioned among the total number of dwelling units proposed for the residential subdivision and by dwelling unit type. 
(c)  If the developer/owner objects to the fair market value determination, the developer/owner, at his own expense, may obtain an appraisal of the property by a state certified real estate appraiser, mutually agreed upon by the city and the developer/owner, which appraisal will be considered by the city in determining fair market value. All costs required to obtain such appraisal shall be borne by the developer/owner. 
(d)  Park dedication fees shall be imposed at the time of preliminary plat approval. Fees shall be paid prior to release by the city of any final plat for filing in the deed records of Denton County. Park dedication fees established for the preliminary plat shall apply to subsequent approved final plats for a period of two (2) years from the date of preliminary plat approval by the planning and zoning commission. Thereafter, park dedication fees shall be redetermined and applied to final plats in accordance with subsection (b), using current appraised value of land in the subdivision at time of final plat submittal. 
(e)  All fees collected shall be used for the acquisition of land for a neighborhood park, or development or construction of improvements to existing park land, within one-half (½) mile of the periphery of the proposed subdivision development. However, if [1] such acquisition opportunities are not available, or [2] existing park land is already developed or improved, within one-half (½) mile of the proposed subdivision development, then areas within one (1) mile of the periphery of the proposed subdivision development may be considered for the acquisition, of neighborhood park land and/or construction of improvements to existing park land within such periphery. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-39. - Payment of park development fees. 
(a)  Park development fees shall be established for the purpose of funding neighborhood park improvements. Fees shall be proportional to the cost of neighborhood park facilities, the demand for which is generated by each new dwelling unit. Fees shall be established separately for single-family and multi-family dwelling units. Current park improvement costs and park development fees are set forth in section 22-36(e). 
(b)  Park development fees shall be imposed at the time of building permit application and shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits for the number of dwelling units designated in the application. 
(c)  Park development fees shall be expended on park improvements located in a neighborhood park that benefits the dwelling unit paying the fee, typically within one-half (½) to one (1) mile of the subdivision in which the dwelling unit is located. The criteria for selection of the park site for improvements shall be the same as set forth in section 22-41. 
(d)  The standard costs for development of a neighborhood park as set forth in section 22-36(d) may be updated from time to time on the basis of current development costs, and park development fees shall be adjusted to reflect such updated development costs. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-40. - Special fund; right to refund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a special fund for the deposit of all fees in lieu of park land dedication. collected under this article, which fund shall be known as the park land dedication fund. Within the fund, fees paid shall be earmarked for acquisition of new neighborhood parks or for improvements in existing parks generally located within one-half (½) to one (1) mile of the residential subdivision upon which the fee is imposed. 
(b)  There is hereby established a special fund for the deposit of all park development fees collected under this article, which fund shall be known as the park development fund. Within the fund, park development fees paid shall be earmarked for expenditure on park improvements in a neighborhood park generally located within one-half (½) to one (1) mile of the subdivision in which the dwelling unit for which the fee is paid is located. 
(c)  All fees in lieu of park land dedication and all park development fees paid must be expended within ten (10) years from the date of receipt for park facilities benefiting the residential subdivision or dwelling unit for which the fees are paid. Fees shall be considered expended if they are spent for acquisition or development, respectively, of neighborhood parks located within one-half (½) to one (1) mile of the subdivision for which the fees were paid within the ten-year period. If fees are not expended within such period, the developer/owner shall be entitled to a refund of the principal deposited by the developer/owner in such fund, together with accrued interest. The developer/owner must request such refund in writing within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of entitlement or such right shall be waived. 
(d)  Interest accruing to the park land dedication fund and to the park development fund shall be expended on neighborhood park land acquisition and for neighborhood park improvements, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-41. - Site selection/characteristics of park. 
(a)  In selecting a site for a park, the city shall avoid an accumulation of unrelated parcels of land or an accumulation of land unsuitable for park purposes. 
(b)  Parks shall be selected on the basis of obtaining natural, park-like settings where available and shall consist of diverse topography and open space suitable for the development of recreational facilities. 
(c)  Neighborhood park size should be a minimum of five (5) acres and obtained as one (1) complete parcel. If a development parcel cannot provide the minimum five (5) acre parcel or a smaller parcel which can potentially be contiguous to existing or future park parcels, then a fee in lieu of park land or a combination of fee and park land dedication shall be required in accordance with section 22-37. 
(d)  Park sites shall be located, whenever possible, adjacent to and contiguous with school sites and other public or nonprofit agency sites in order to make maximum use of common facilities and grounds. 
(e)  Careful consideration shall be given to the need for development of parks around natural drainage and wooded areas, which provide potential recreational uses. Criteria for floodplain areas (based upon 100-year storm) usage is as follows: 
(1)  Floodplain and natural drainage areas shall generally not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total park site. 
(2)  At least fifty (50) percent of required dedicated park land shall have slopes in range of two (2) to five (5) percent, well drained, and suitable for active use development. 
(3)  Floodplain acreage may be dedicated at a ratio of three to one (3:1) in acres in lieu of nonfloodplain property. Any consideration of additional floodplain acreage shall be as agreed upon between the parks and recreation department and the developer/owner. 
(f)  Proposed park land boundaries shall provide street frontage for readily accessible entry into the park area by the public and water, sanitary sewer and electric improvements shall be readily available to the park from an adjacent street right-of-way or public utility easement. If the developer/owner requests delay in the construction of said improvements because of phasing of subdivision development, the developer/owner shall escrow sufficient funds in behalf of the city, the form and provisions of such escrow agreement shall be approved by the city attorney and the city engineer, to cover the cost of such construction as determined by the city engineer. 
(g)  Prior to dedication of land, the developer/owner shall make full disclosure of the presence of any hazardous substances and/or underground storage tanks (U.S.T.'s) of which the developer/owner has knowledge. The city, at its discretion, may proceed to conduct such initial environmental tests and surveys on the land, as it may deem appropriate, and the developer/owner shall grant to the city and its agents and employees such reasonable access to the land as is necessary to conduct such surveys and tests. 
(h)  If the results of such surveys and tests indicate a reasonable possibility of environmental contamination or the presence of U.S.T.s, the city may require further survey and tests to be performed at the developer/owner's expense as the city may deem necessary prior to its acceptance of the dedication, or in the alternative, the developer/owner may be required to identify alternative property or pay the fees in lieu of such park land dedication. 
(i)  The park site shall be free of trash and debris and if the dedicated park land's natural condition is disturbed during construction of subdivision improvements then developer/owner shall be responsible for returning the dedicated land to its natural condition prior to or at the time of final plat filing and the public improvements to be constructed per the applicable subdivision plat will not be accepted by the city until such time that the above conditions have been met. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Sec. 22-42. - Decision making; appeals. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, an action by the city in determining compliance with the terms of this article refers to a determination by the parks and recreation department. The developer/owner of land subject to park dedication requirements may appeal any determination by the parks and recreation department under this article to the city council for a final decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission, which shall make its recommendation to the city council. The city council will not review the appeal of any determination by the parks and recreation department without first obtaining the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. No final plat shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission which varies the terms of this article or which does not comply with the parks and recreation department's determination without final resolution of the appeal by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-039, § I, 2-17-98)  
Chapter 23 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 4; emergency management generally, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 18; municipal court, Ch. 19; offenses generally, Ch. 21. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Authority of police officers. 
All peace officers who are members of the City of Denton Police Department are invested with all the power and authority given to them as peace officers under the laws of the State of Texas, and they have the power and authority to enforce all City of Denton ordinances and regulations within the corporate limits of the city. This section does not exclude enforcement of city ordinances or regulations by other city departments as directed by the city manager or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-084, § 5, 3-18-14)  
Secs. 23-2—23-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE 
 
Sec. 23-26. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a trained group of volunteer personnel who will be available to supplement the regular police force as deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(Code 1966, § 18-16)  
Sec. 23-27. - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 141.007 and 142.003, there is hereby created and established a police reserve force of the city to be organized, trained and utilized in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 18-17)  
Sec. 23-28. - Minimum qualifications. 
Members of the police reserve force shall meet the minimum qualifications and standards of training for police reserve officers established by the commission on law enforcement officer standards and education and be licensed pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 415.001 et seq. 
(Code 1966, § 18-18)  
Sec. 23-29. - Appointment. 
Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed at the discretion of the chief of police and, subject to the provisions of section 23-30, shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Code 1966, § 18-19)  
Sec. 23-30. - Powers; limitations. 
After appointment, police reserve officers may carry a weapon only when authorized by the chief of police and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer. Police reserve officers, when appointed pursuant to this article and when acting during the actual discharge of official duties, shall have the powers and authority of a peace officer, including the power of arrest; provided, however, the power of arrest may be limited or restricted by the chief of police as deemed necessary through rules and regulations of the police reserve force. 
(Code 1966, § 18-20)  
Sec. 23-31. - Uniform and insignia. 
The members of the police reserve force shall wear such uniforms as the chief of police may authorize. Identification cards and appropriate insignia may be issued by the chief of police and shall be returned upon termination of membership in the police reserve force. 
(Code 1966, § 18-21)  
Sec. 23-32. - Compensation. 
Members of the police reserve force shall serve without compensation except during scheduled special events declared by the chief of police to be a threat to the peace and general safety of the citizens of the community when the regular police force is not sufficient in number to control the event. During such events, members of the police reserve force shall be paid uniform compensation based solely upon the time served while in the performance of official duties. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the police reserve force from accepting contributions or donations for services rendered to organizations or groups pursuant to section 23-34 of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 18-22)  
Sec. 23-33. - Reimbursement for training. 
Members of the police reserve force assigned to police training may be reimbursed for tuition costs and travel expenses in accordance with written regulations promulgated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1966, § 18-23)  
Sec. 23-34. - Authority to receive funds. 
The police reserve force is hereby authorized to receive funds from any source, and the chief of police shall issue appropriate regulations for the receipt and disbursement of any such funds. 
(Code 1966, § 18-25)  
Sec. 23-35. - Death benefits. 
Reserve officers shall be eligible for death benefits as provided by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6228f. 
(Code 1966, § 18-24)  
Secs. 23-36—23-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROLLERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking generally, § 18-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-56. - Creation of position. 
There is hereby established in the police department of the city the position of traffic and parking controller to be under the control of a police officer as directed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1966, § 18-34)  
Sec. 23-57. - Authority, duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  Persons employed by the police department as traffic and parking controllers are authorized to issue municipal court citations for any parking violations within the city in the same manner as regular officers of the police department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of traffic and parking controllers to direct and guide motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic in the city as directed by the chief of police and to escort funeral processions as needed. 
(c)  Traffic and parking controllers are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency to expedite traffic or to protect pedestrians, traffic and parking controllers may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1966, § 18-35)  
Sec. 23-58. - Governmental function; employee status. 
(a)  Traffic and parking controllers, while in the performance of their duties, shall be deemed to be engaged in the performance of a governmental function. 
(b)  Traffic and parking controllers shall not be considered regular members of the police department within the meaning of state laws governing regular police personnel. Controllers, however, shall be deemed to be regular employees of the city and subject to the same rules, regulations and policies thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 18-36)  
Sec. 23-59. - Limitations on power of arrest and carrying firearms. 
Traffic and parking controllers shall have no power of arrest beyond that of a citizen. Controllers shall not bear firearms. 
(Code 1966, § 18-37)  
Secs. 23-60—23-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE-INITIATED TOWING SERVICES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-174, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 20, 2006, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 23-81—23-87, 23-96—23-102, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 27-21—27-33 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 91-030, §§ I—IV, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 99-310, § 2, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2004-074, § 2, 3-23-04. 
Cross reference— Automotive wrecking and salvage yards, § 16-126 et seq.; vehicles for hire generally, Ch. 27. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accident means any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled, as defined in this section. 
Annual permit means permission granted by the city to a person to have their tow truck(s) placed on the police-initiated tow list for a period of one (1) year, renewable under the provisions of this article. 
Conviction means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. 
Department means the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article. 
Director means the chief of police or his designee assigned by the city manager to enforce and administer this article and includes representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director. 
Disabled means the status of any vehicle which had been rendered unsafe to be driven upon the streets as the result of some occurrence other than a wreck, including, but not limited to mechanical failures or breakdowns, fire, the elements, or vandalism, so as to reasonably necessitate that such vehicle be removed by a wrecker. 
Driver means an individual who drives or operates a vehicle. 
Emergency lights means alternately flashing blue and/or yellow lights that emit a light visible at a distance of five hundred (500) feet in normal sunlight and are mounted as high and as widely spaced laterally as practicable. 
Heavy-duty tow truck means any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for removing wrecked or disabled vehicles in excess of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) upon any street. 
Hook-up means the application and first connection of the tow service truck to the towed vehicle. 
Legal resident means a citizen of the United States or a person residing in the United States in accordance with federal immigration laws. 
Licensed vehicle storage facility means a facility licensed by the State of Texas for the storage of vehicles under the Vehicle Storage Facility Act, as amended (V.T.C.A. Occupations Code, chapter 2303). 
Operate means to drive or to be in control of a tow truck. 
Operator means the driver of a tow truck; the owner of a tow truck; or the holder of a tow truck permit. 
Owner means the person to whom state license plates for a vehicle were issued. 
Person means an individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, partnership, or two (2) or more persons having a joint or common economic interest. 
Police rotation list. See section 23-82. 
Tilt bed/roll back car carrier means a motor vehicle designed and equipped as to be capable of lifting another vehicle upon itself for the purpose of transporting a motor vehicle that cannot be safely transported by a wrecker. 
Tow service means a person engaged in the business of a wrecker or towing service whereby vehicles are towed or otherwise removed at the direction of officers of the city police department by the use of a wrecker or motor vehicle designed for that purpose. 
Tow truck means any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for removing wrecked or disabled vehicles upon any street. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Vehicle storage facility means the site to which a permit holder tows and stores vehicles, which meets the requirements as required by Texas Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-82. - Police rotation list and administrative authority established. 
The director is hereby authorized to establish a rotation list of tow services desiring to provide towing services upon request by the police department. The tow services which desire to be placed upon and remain on a rotation list shall comply with the requirements of this article, rules and regulations of the director, provisions of the annual permit, regulations of the Texas Department of Transportation, and other applicable law. The director is hereby authorized to establish rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-83. - Exclusions. 
Except for V.T.C.A. Transportation Code §§ 643.205(a) and (b), this article shall not apply to wrecker services which are not listed on the police rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-84. - Duties and responsibilities of services. 
(a)  Tow services shall maintain towing equipment which is adequate to perform such towing service in a reasonably workmanlike manner and proper equipment to tow vehicles in such a manner as to minimize any damage to towed vehicles, as well as appropriate equipment to properly remove any glass or other injurious substance off the roadway resulting from the vehicle being towed or the accident in which the vehicle was involved. All equipment, including any tilt bed/roll back car carriers, shall be equipment originally designed for towing or transporting vehicles and shall be in good working order. Additionally, this equipment shall be available for inspection upon request of any police department employee. Failure to allow inspection or have the proper working equipment shall result in an immediate suspension of the permit for thirty (30) days or until compliance is shown whichever is later. Refusing to respond to a police-initiated tow or declining to tow a vehicle after arriving on the scene shall result in an immediate suspension of the permit for a period of up to thirty (30) days as determined by the director. If the tow service has refused a tow or declined a tow on the scene three (3) or more times within a twelve-month period, then the suspension process in section 23-102 applies. 
(b)  The tow service will provide on-call service for the police department twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, including holidays. 
(c)  The tow service will arrive at the location of the vehicle to be towed within thirty (30) minutes after receiving a request for towing. Heavy-duty tow trucks will arrive at the location of the vehicle to be towed within one (1) hour. 
(d)  The tow service will tow the vehicle from the scene within a reasonable time. 
(e)  The person operating any tow service shall make every reasonable effort to minimize damage to towed vehicles. Where appropriate, such reasonable effort shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Use of a dolly or carriage for towing; 
(2)  Disconnection of the drive shaft; 
(3)  Release of brakes; and 
(4)  Towing at a reasonable speed. 
(f)  Any tow service operating under this article must keep and maintain for three (3) years from the date of towing the following records: 
(1)  Make and model of the vehicle; 
(2)  License number of the vehicle; 
(3)  Date of the tow; 
(4)  Location of hook-up; 
(5)  Itemized list of fees; and 
(6)  Disposition of vehicle and name and address of the person who receives the vehicle, if not claimed by owner or lien holder. 
(g)  The tow service shall transport the vehicle to and store the vehicle in a Texas Department of Transportation licensed vehicle storage facility located within the City of Denton. The vehicle storage facility must comply with applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations, and must have a capacity to hold every vehicle requested to be towed by the police department. If the tow service has to be removed from the police rotation list more than three (3) times during a twelve-month period, the tow service will be removed from the police rotation list until capacity is increased. The facility must be completely enclosed with adequate fencing, locks and other security devices as necessary to maintain security of stored vehicles. 
(h)  The operator of any tow truck responding to a police-initiated tow will not be under the influence of, or consume an alcoholic beverage, drug, or other substance that could adversely affect the driver's ability to drive a motor vehicle. 
(i)  The operator of a tow service will provide to the director, one (1) phone number which will be monitored by the tow service twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
(j)  The operator will be responsible for the disposal of unclaimed vehicles and will comply with the Vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A. Occupations Code Ch. 2303, the Texas Department of Transportation's Motor Carrier Division regulations, any other statutes that affect the title transfer of a stored vehicle, and any other applicable city ordinances or state and federal laws. 
(k)  Before releasing any vehicle, the operator of a tow service shall verify proof of financial responsibility for any vehicle driven from the tow service. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-85. - Selection of service. 
In all police-initiated towing of vehicles, the police department employee ordering the tow shall request that the towing service be performed by the tow service then first on the rotation list maintained in the police communications center. The police department employee may allow the driver or owner of a vehicle, which is disabled, including vehicles involved in an accident, to request a tow service other than the next wrecker on the rotation list or a tow service not on the police rotation list. The driver or owner's choice of tow service must respond within the same time constraints as tow trucks on the police rotation list. 
When emergency circumstances exist which require the immediate removal of a vehicle from the roadway, the police department employee may request towing service from the tow service nearest to the scene of the emergency. A police department employee may also request towing service from any company operating large cranes or other heavy equipment if such equipment is necessary to remove traffic obstructions involving large trucks or heavy equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-86. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any tow service to arrive at the scene of a police investigation as a result of monitoring or intercepting police calls by radio or other device. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any towed vehicle to be dismantled, have parts removed or tires deflated, except as necessary for towing. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any tow service to fail to verify financial responsibility for any vehicle released from the tow service and driven from the tow service. Verification shall include obtaining a photocopy of the insurance policy and a photocopy of the driver's license of the person to whom the vehicle is being released. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-87. - Fees charged; bills. 
Once a towing company's application has been approved consistent with Ordinance 2006-174 and City of Denton Police Department practice, the one time application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall serve as the permit fee for the first year. Subsequent years will require ad additional payment of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for each towing company. All other applicable fees which may be charged by the towing company are set forth in section 18-104. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 2006-272, § 2, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 23-88. - Qualification for police-initiated towing permit. 
(a)  To qualify for a towing permit, an applicant, including operators, must: 
(1)  Be at least 19 years of age; 
(2)  Be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States; 
(3)  Hold a valid driver's license issued by the State of Texas; 
(4)  Be able to communicate in the English language; 
(5)  Not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability that is likely to prevent the applicant from exercising ordinary and reasonable control over a tow truck, or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public health or safety; 
(6)  Not have been convicted of more than four (4) moving traffic violations arising out of separate transactions, or involved in more than two (2) automobile accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant was at fault, within any twelve-month period during the preceding thirty-six (36) months; 
(7)  Not have been convicted or placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Criminal homicide as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 19; 
2.  Kidnapping as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 20; 
3.  A sexual offense as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 21; 
4.  An assaultive offense as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 22, other than a class C misdemeanor; 
5.  Robbery as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 29; 
6.  Burglary as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 30; 
7.  Theft as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 31, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony; 
8.  Fraud as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 32; 
9.  Tampering with a governmental record as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 37; 
10.  Public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 43; 
11.  The transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in violation of V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 46, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony; 
12.  A violation of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Ch. 483 "Dangerous Drugs," that is punishable as a felony; 
13.  A violation of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Ch. 481 "Controlled Substances Act," that is punishable as a felony; 
14.  Criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in subsection (7)(a)1 through 13 of this subsection; 
15.  Driving while intoxicated described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 49; 
16.  Driving while intoxicated with child passenger as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 49; 
17.  Intoxication assault as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 49; or 
18.  Intoxication manslaughter as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code Ch. 49. 
b.  For which: 
1.  If the applicant was convicted for a misdemeanor offense, other than a class C misdemeanor offense, less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date; 
2.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a misdemeanor offense, less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
3.  If the applicant was convicted for a felony offense, less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction or the date of release from parole, whichever is the later date; 
4.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a felony offense, less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
5.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any twenty-four-month period, the applicant has two (2) or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses; 
6.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication for the last offense, whichever is the later date, if, within any twenty-four-month period, the applicant has been placed on probation or deferred adjudication two (2) or more times for any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses; 
7.  Not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or deferred adjudication for, driving while intoxicated: 
(a)  Within the preceding twelve (12) months; or 
(b)  More than one time within the preceding ten (10) years; 
8.  Not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics; and 
9.  Be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest. 
(b)  An applicant who has been sentenced for an offense listed in subsection (a)(7), for which the required time period provided by this ordinance has elapsed, may qualify for a towing permit only if the director determines that the applicant is presently fit to engage in the occupation of a tow truck operator. In determining present fitness under this section, the director shall consider the following: 
(1)  The extent and nature of the applicant's past criminal activity; 
(2)  The age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the crime; 
(3)  The amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant's last criminal activity; 
(4)  The conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and following the criminal activity; 
(5)  Evidence of the applicant's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and 
(6)  Other evidence of the applicant's present fitness, including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present fitness under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Secs. 23-89—23-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 23-96. - Annual permit required. 
(a)  No tow service shall engage in the business of towing vehicles at the direction of a city police department employee without first obtaining a police rotation list privilege permit from the city. The annual permit fee shall be established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  Before an annual permit is granted, the application for the annual permit must be approved by the director. The granting of an annual permit is in the discretion of the director, but will not be granted unless: 
(1)  The proposed towing service is required by the public convenience and necessity; and 
(2)  The applicant qualifies for operating authority under sections 23-97 and 23-88 of this article and is otherwise fit, willing, and able to operate the towing service in accordance with the requirements of this article, rules and regulations of the director, provisions of the annual permit, and other applicable law. 
(c)  No permit shall be transferred or assigned from any person to another. When any change of ownership or change of controlling interest occurs, the prior permit shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-97. - Application. 
(a)  To obtain an annual permit, a person shall make application to the director in the manner prescribed by this section. The applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed towing service. An application for a police rotation list privilege permit required in this division shall be notarized and shall be made on forms prepared and made available by the police department. An applicant shall file with the director a written, verified application statement, to be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), containing the following: 
(1)  The name, home address and business address of each owner, part owner or partner, silent or active; 
(2)  The business address, telephone number, and the location and telephone number of any storage area; 
(3)  A description of the size and capacity of all tow trucks used by the tow service. 
(4)  A copy of a certificate of garage liability or automobile liability insurance covering the tow service owner and his employees for liability for death, bodily injury or property damage to third parties in the amount of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any one (1) person, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for one (1) occurrence, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage; 
(5)  A copy of a certificate of garage keeper's liability insurance covering the tow service and naming the City of Denton as an additional insured for liability and for property damage to any vehicle, or contents thereof, in its care, custody and control as a result of providing towing and/or storage services in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
(6)  Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to be used in connection with the operation of the vehicle storage facility; 
(7)  The applicant must own or have exclusive use of a vehicle storage facility. See section 23-84(g); 
(8)  The application shall be signed by each owner, part owner, or partner, active, or silent; and 
(9)  Such additional information as the director considers necessary to assist or promote the implementation or enforcement of this article or the protection of the public safety. 
(b)  A permit holder shall notify the director in writing of any change of address or change in ownership or management of the towing service not less than ten (10) days prior to the change. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-98. - Insurance required. 
The insurance enumerated in section 23-97 shall be required for all tow services, and must be kept in effect during the period for which the permit is issued. 
Insurance required by this ordinance must include: 
(a)  A cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the director in writing not fewer than thirty (30) days before canceling or making a material change to the insurance policy; 
(b)  A provision to cover all vehicles, whether owned or not owned by the holder, operated under the holder's operating authority; and 
(c)  A provision requiring the insurance company to pay every claim on a first dollar basis. 
A permit will not be granted or renewed unless the applicant or holder furnishes the director with such proof of insurance as the director considers necessary to determine whether the applicant or holder is adequately insured under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-99. - Investigation by chief of police. 
Upon receipt of an application for an annual permit the director shall conduct an investigation and make findings of fact concerning public convenience and necessity and other relevant factors, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  All applicants, owners, and partners meet the minimum qualifications for a police-initiated towing permit; 
(b)  The tow service will use only tow trucks equipped with adequate emergency lights in compliance with all city, state and federal laws; 
(c)  The requirements of all governing laws and ordinances will be met; and 
(d)  The applicant operates, or has available by contract, a licensed vehicle storage facility located within the City of Denton available exclusively for the storage of vehicles towed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-100. - Issuance. 
The police department shall issue a permit required under this division and add a tow service to the rotation list when: 
(a)  The police investigation confirms the requirements of sections 23-88 and 23-97 have been met; 
(b)  The insurance policies as required by this division have been produced; and 
(c)  The permit fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-101. - Term; renewals. 
Renewal applications shall be on a form furnished by the police department. Each permit shall expire at 12:00 midnight on September 30 of each year, and will be renewable only upon compliance with this article and any other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time of the renewal application. Any person seeking a renewal of a permit for the next fiscal year may apply for renewal between August 15 and September 15. Renewed permits shall become effective October 1 of each year. 
(a)  An annual permit will be denied if: 
(1)  The holder is not in compliance with the permit or applicable provisions of this Code, department regulations, or other law; or 
(2)  The holder does not qualify for operating authority under section 23-88 of this article, or is otherwise not fit, willing, or able to continue to operate the tow service in accordance with the permit and applicable provisions of this Code, department regulations, and other law; or 
(3)  Public convenience and necessity do not require the continued operation of the tow service. 
(b)  Minor changes may be made in a permit by the director. 
(c)  If the director determines that a denial of a permit renewal or material change in the terms or conditions of the permit is required by public convenience and necessity, then he may deny renewal of the permit or make changes in the terms or conditions of the permit. A holder may request a change in the terms or conditions of his permit and the director may grant the change if the change is required by public convenience and necessity. 
(d)  If the permit expires at no fault of the holder before a ruling on the approval or denial of the renewal, the holder may continue to operate the tow service pending a final decision. The holder shall cease operation of the tow service immediately upon denial of the request for renewal by the director. 
(e)  A holder may file an appeal of the director's decision not to renew a permit in accordance with section 23-103 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-102. - Revocation; suspension. 
(a)  If the director determines that a tow service has failed to comply with this article or a regulation established under this article, the director may suspend the tow service. 
(b)  If at any time the director determines that a licensee is not qualified under section 23-88 of this article, or is under indictment or has charges pending for any offense involving driving while intoxicated or any offense involving a crime described in section 23-88 of this article, or criminal attempt to commit any of those offenses, the director shall suspend the tow service permit until such time as the director determines that the licensee is qualified or that the charges against the licensee have been finally adjudicated. 
(c)  A licensee whose tow service permit is suspended shall not drive a tow truck for any police-initiated tows. 
(d)  The director shall notify the licensee and the holder in writing of a suspension under this section and include in the notice the reason for the suspension, the date the director orders the suspension to begin, the duration of suspension, and a statement informing the licensee of a right of appeal. The period of suspension begins on the date specified by the director or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal hearing officer. 
(e)  The director may revoke a tow service permit if the director determines that the licensee: 
(1)  Operated a tow truck on a police-initiated tow during a period in which the tow service permit was suspended; 
(2)  Made a false statement of a material fact in an application for a tow service permit; 
(3)  Engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension under subsection (a), and received either a suspension in excess of three (3) days or a conviction for violation of this article, two (2) times within the twelve-month period preceding the occurrence of the conduct or three (3) times within the twenty-four-month period preceding the occurrence of the conduct; 
(4)  Engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be detrimental to the public safety; or 
(5)  Was convicted of any felony offense while holding a tow service permit. 
Cancellation of insurance without replacement shall result in the immediate suspension of any permit issued under this division and removal from the list of tow services until such time that insurance coverage is re-established. Disciplinary action may be taken for repeated lapses in insurance coverage. 
(f)  A person whose tow service permit is revoked shall not: 
(1)  Apply for another tow service permit before the expiration of twenty-four (24) months from the date the director revokes the permit or, in the case of an appeal, the date the appeal hearing officer affirms the revocation; or 
(2)  Drive a tow truck on a police-initiated tow. 
(g)  After receipt of notice of suspension, revocation, or denial of license renewal, the licensee shall, on the date specified in the notice, discontinue operating a tow truck on police-initiated tows. 
(h)  Notwithstanding subsections (c) and (h), if the licensee appeals the suspension or revocation under this section, the licensee may continue to drive a tow truck on police-initiated tows pending the appeal unless: 
(1)  The tow service permit of the licensee is suspended pursuant to subsection (b) or revoked pursuant to subsection (e)(6) of this section; or 
(2)  The director determines that continued operation by the licensee would impose an immediate threat to public safety. 
(i)  After suspension of a permit, a holder may file an appeal in accordance with section 23-103 of this article. The director shall inspect the operation of the suspended holder to determine if the deficiency causing the suspension has been corrected by the holder. After inspection, the director shall submit his recommendation together with supporting facts to the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 23-103. - Appeal. 
(a)  A person may appeal the following decisions of the director if he requests an appeal in writing and delivers it to the city manager not more than ten (10) business days after receiving notice of the director's action: 
(1)  A suspension or revocation of a permit; 
(2)  A denial of renewal of annual permit; or 
(3)  Denial of a tow service permit application. 
(b)  The city manager or his designated representative shall act as the appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make argument on his behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this section, and the hearing officer shall make his ruling on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is final. 
(Ord. No. 2006-174, § 2, 6-20-06)  
Secs. 23-104—23-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NON-CONSENT TOWING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-110. - Definitions. 
Consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term does not include the tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle. 
Department means the City of Denton Police Department. 
Driver's license has the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 521.001. 
Fully prepared for transport means a vehicle that is attached to a tow truck, is lifted, with tow lights and safety chains attached, and, if required, is placed on a dolly in a raised position. 
Non-consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow. 
Parking facility means public or private property used, wholly or partly, for restricted or paid vehicle parking. The term includes: 
(a)  A restricted space on a portion of an otherwise unrestricted parking facility; and 
(b)  A commercial parking lot, a parking garage, and a parking area serving or adjacent to a business, church, school, apartment complex, property governed by a property owners' association, or government-owned property leased to a private person, including: 
(1)  A portion of the right-of-way of a public roadway that is leased by a governmental entity to the parking facility owner; and 
(2)  The area between the facility's property line abutting a county or municipal public roadway and the center line of the roadway's drainage way or the curb of the roadway, whichever is farther from the facility's property line. 
Parking facility owner means: 
(a)  An individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, association, trust, or other legal entity owning or operating a parking facility; 
(b)  A property owners' association having control under a dedicatory instrument, as that term is defined in Section V.T.C.A., Property Code § 202.001, over assigned or unassigned parking areas; or 
(c)  A property owner having an exclusive right under a dedicatory instrument, as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Property Code § 202.001, to use a parking space. 
Private property tow means any tow of a vehicle authorized by a parking facility owner without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
Property owners' association has the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Property Code § 202.001. 
Public roadway means a public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or other public way, including paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way. 
Restricted space means a parking space that is properly marked in a parking facility that is properly signed according to state law. 
Tow truck means any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for removing wrecked or disabled vehicles upon any street. 
Tow truck operator means an individual operating a tow truck. 
Tow truck operator's license means a license issued under this article. 
Towing company means individual, association, corporation, or other legal entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation of one or more tow trucks over a public roadway in this state, but does not include a political subdivision of the state. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Vehicle storage facility means the site to which a permit holder tows and stores vehicles, which meets the requirements as required by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
Vehicle owner means a person: 
(a)  Named as the purchaser or transferee in the certificate of title issued for the vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code Ch. 501; 
(b)  In whose name the vehicle is registered under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code Ch. 502, or a member of the person's immediate family; 
(c)  Who holds the vehicle through a lease agreement; 
(d)  Who is an unrecorded lienholder entitled to possess the vehicle under the terms of a chattel mortgage; or 
(e)  Who is a lienholder holding an affidavit of repossession and entitled to repossess the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-111. - Administration. 
(a)  The police chief shall administer and enforce this article. 
(b)  The police chief shall adopt rules for the administration and enforcement of this article. The rules must be reasonably designed to promote health and safety and ensure that: 
(1)  Towing companies and tow truck drivers are able to perform their responsibilities under this article and carry adequate liability insurance; 
(2)  The police chief is able to determine the correct identity and qualifications of individuals licensed under this article; and 
(3)  Tow trucks are operated in a safe and efficient manner. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-112. - Authority and duties of the department. 
The department shall implement and enforce this article. In addition to the powers and duties elsewhere prescribed in this article, the department is authorized to: 
(a)  Conduct random periodic investigations of towing companies and vehicle storage facilities licensed by the city concerning their compliance with this article and state law. 
(b)  Inspect tow trucks for compliance with vehicle and equipment safety standards established by this article. 
(c)  Conduct random inspections of tow truck records for compliance with state laws and public safety. Inspections should be performed in a reasonable manner so as to comply with the laws of the state. 
(d)  Conduct random inspections of vehicle storage facility records for compliance with state law and public safety. Inspections should be performed in a reasonable manner so as to comply with the laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-113. - Compliance with state and local ordinances. 
(a)  All towing companies, tow truck drivers, vehicle storage facilities, and property owners under this article shall comply with all applicable state laws, City of Denton ordinances, and rules issued by the state department of licensing and regulation applicable to a tow truck, towing company, tow truck operator, or vehicle storage facility. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Performs an act prohibited by this article; 
(2)  Fails to perform an act required by this article; or 
(3)  Violates a rule adopted under this article. 
(c)  A violation of this article is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(d)  Proof of a mental state is not required for the prosecution of a violation of this article. 
(e)  An exception to an offense under this article may be used as an affirmative defense. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-114. - Governmental entities excluded. 
This article does not apply to towing that is performed by a governmental entity. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-115. - Exemptions. 
Except as specifically noted, this article does not apply to: 
(a)  A person towing a vehicle with the express consent of the vehicle owner; 
(b)  A person towing a vehicle from public streets and ways or private property under the direction of the department; or 
(c)  A person who engages in towing a vehicle in connection with a bona fide repossession of same when written authorization has been received from the lienholder. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-116. - Fees. 
The city council shall establish a fee required or authorized under this article by separate ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-117. - Prohibited charges for non-consent tows. 
A person may not charge or attempt to charge a fee related to a non-consent tow under this article: 
(a)  In excess of the fee established by ordinance; 
(b)  For a service not performed or equipment not used; 
(c)  That is not authorized by ordinance; or 
(d)  If individual parking spaces in the parking facility are not designated by visible markings. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-118. - Photograph required. 
A towing company that tows a vehicle is required to maintain a digital photo of the entire vehicle being towed before the vehicle is towed from the parking facility. The towing company must maintain photos of towed vehicles for a period of not less than sixty (60) days from the date the vehicle is towed. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Secs. 23-119—23-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATOR'S LICENSE FOR NON-CONSENT TOWS 
 
Sec. 23-130. - License required for non-consent tows. 
(a)  Except as provided by section 23-131 "Operation while first application pending," a person may not perform non-consent tows in the city without a tow truck operator's license issued under this article. 
(b)  A tow truck operator licensed under this article must wear the tow truck operator's license while performing a non-consent tow. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-131. - Operation while first application pending. 
(a)  An applicant whose first application for a tow truck operator's license under this article is pending may: 
(1)  Perform non-consent tows in the city if the applicant has a valid tow truck operator's license issued by another city; or 
(2)  Accompany and assist a tow truck operator licensed under this article. 
(b)  A person whose application is denied may not continue to perform non-consent tows or provide assistance under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-132. - Application for license. 
(a)  An applicant for a tow truck operator's license must file an application with the department on a form prescribed by the police chief and signed by the applicant and sponsoring towing company. 
(b)  An application must include all information required by rule adopted under this article. 
(c)  An applicant must submit the prescribed fee with the application. The fee is non-refundable. 
(d)  An applicant must meet the qualifications of section 23-88 for a police-initiated towing permit to qualify for a tow truck operator's license under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-133. - License term and renewal. 
(a)  Unless revoked or suspended, a tow truck operator's license expires two years after the date of issuance. 
(b)  To obtain a renewal license, a license holder must complete a new application and pay the prescribed non-refundable fee. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-134. - Duplicate license. 
A license holder may obtain a duplicate tow truck operator's license to replace a lost or destroyed license. The license holder must pay the required fee. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-135. - Change in application information or employment status. 
A license holder shall notify the department not later than the 30 th day after a material change in the license holder's application information or a change in the license holder's employment by a particular towing company ends. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-136. - Application after revocation or denial. 
A person whose tow truck operator's license is revoked, or whose application for a license is denied, may not reapply for a license for at least six months after the date of revocation or denial. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Secs. 23-137—23-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TOW TRUCK REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 23-141. - Registration required. 
(a)  Any tow truck that is used to perform any non-consent tow, or any part thereof, shall be registered as a tow truck under this article and applicable provisions of state law, including, without limitation, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 2308. 
(b)  Except as provided by subsection (c) of this section, a person may not operate or permit another person to operate a tow truck on a public roadway in the city unless the person obtains a registration certificate for the tow truck under this article. 
(c)  Any tow truck that is used to perform any non-consent tow on private property in the city must be registered with the department, regardless of whether the owner of the tow truck has a place of business in the city. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-142. - Application for registration certificate. 
(a)  An applicant for a tow truck registration must: 
(1)  File an application with the department on a form prescribed by the police chief; 
(2)  Submit the required, non-refundable fee; 
(3)  Provide verification that the tow truck is equipped to tow light-duty or heavy-duty motor vehicles according to the manufacturer's guidelines; and 
(4)  Provide proof of insurance that meets the requirements of V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 16, § 86-400. 
(b)  Upon application, the department will inspect the tow truck to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. If the tow truck is found in compliance, the department shall issue proof of registration to the applicant. The proof of registration shall be attached to the tow truck for which it is issued, at the place on the tow truck designated by the police chief. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a tow truck without the proof of registration being attached. 
(c)  Requirements for registration: 
(1)  Each tow truck operator must meet the signage, safety equipment, safety clothing, and identification requirements of V.T.C.A. Tit. 16, §§ 86.701, 86.1000, and 86.1001. 
(2)  Each tow truck shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Except for heavy-duty tow trucks, the tow truck's chassis cab shall be rated at no less than one ton by the manufacturer and will be equipped by the manufacturer with dual wheels and tires at each end of the rear axle; 
b.  At all times the tow truck must carry tow lights with appropriate cable (unless wireless) and cushions to protect a vehicle's finish; and 
c.  At all times the tow truck must be equipped with safety (mud) flaps with the bottom edge of the safety flap no more than eight inches from the surface of a public roadway. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-143. - Registration certificate term and reapplication. 
(a)  A tow truck registration certificate remains in effect for one year from the date of issuance, unless it is revoked. 
(b)  The registration for each tow truck that is used to perform non-consent tows subject to this article shall be renewed annually by payment of the fee stated for this provision on the city fee schedule to the department, which shall verify that the tow truck is still in compliance with this article. 
(c)  If a registration certificate is revoked, an applicant requesting re-registration must file a new application and pay the non-refundable fee. The tow truck must pass a new inspection by the department. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-144. - State licensing of tow truck drivers. 
Tow trucks shall be operated by persons who hold the type of state driver's license that is required for their tow truck, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-145. - Equipment and markings required. 
(a)  A towing company shall maintain a tow truck and its required equipment in a safe, operating condition at all times that the tow truck is operating on a public roadway. 
(b)  Tow trucks operating in the city shall display the markings required by law, and by the rules adopted under this article. 
(c)  A peace officer may stop and inspect a tow truck to determine whether the tow truck is equipped as required by this article, and whether the equipment is in working order. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Secs. 23-146—23-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TOWING SERVICE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 23-151. - Notification of vehicle removal. 
(a)  A towing company that removes a vehicle in accordance with V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 2308 or in executing a repossession shall notify the department not later than one hour after the removal from the property or the parking facility. 
(b)  The notification must include: 
(1)  The name of the towing company; 
(2)  The date, time, and location of the removal; 
(3)  The physical description, license plate number, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle removed; 
(4)  The name of the tow truck operator who performed the removal; and 
(5)  The location of the vehicle storage facility where the vehicle is being stored. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-152. - Towing restricted. 
In accordance with Section 86.455(c) of the Texas Administrative Code, a towing company that intends to remove a vehicle from a parking facility as allowed by Chapter 2308 of the Texas Occupations Code may not tow a vehicle when the vehicle owner objects to the tow, tenders the payment of the drop fee authorized in the towing fee schedule established by the city council and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary, and removes the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 2015-384 , § 1, 12-15-15)  
Sec. 23-153. - Service rates. 
The rates hereinafter described are to be utilized by towing companies for non-consent tows originating within the corporate limits of the city pursuant to this article. This section does not apply to a repossession. A towing company may not charge more than one fee under this article for towing a single vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-154. - Towing fee schedule; payment. 
(a)  The towing fee schedule is established by city council and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  No towing fees may be charged other than those fees listed in this article, including charges for dollies, special equipment, or mileage. 
(c)  Weight, for purposes of this article, shall be determined by the gross weight recorded on the vehicle registration. 
(d)  If the owner or operator of a vehicle which is parked in violation of this Code or state law arrives before the vehicle is hooked up, the tow truck operator shall release the vehicle for free. 
(e)  A towing company may charge a fully prepared for transport fee when a vehicle has been fully prepared for transport but has not been removed from the property. 
(f)  A towing company may charge the standard non-consent fee when it removes a vehicle from the property. 
(g)  For payment of any fee under this article, a towing company or vehicle storage facility shall accept payment by cash, electronic check, debit card, and credit card for any charge associated with delivery or storage of a vehicle. However, payment by credit or debit card may be refused if the named cardholder is not present. 
(h)  Release of a vehicle may not be denied based on the inability of the towing company or vehicle storage facility to accept payment by electronic check, debit card, and credit card of any charge associated with delivery or storage of a vehicle, unless the inability to accept such payment is due to factors outside the control of the towing company or vehicle storage facility, such as a power outage or machine malfunction. In such case, payment due shall be frozen until a twelve-hour period of time has elapsed. 
(i)  In no way is this section to be construed to mean that a towing company or vehicle storage facility may not charge less than the fees stated in the towing fee schedule. The fees in the towing fee schedule are the maximum that can be charged for any towing or drop fee of a vehicle in accordance with this article. 
(j)  A towing company or vehicle storage facility must provide a copy of the City of Denton Towing Customer Bill of Rights with each receipt for any non-consent tow performed within the city limits of Denton. This obligation may be satisfied by conspicuously posting a copy of the City of Denton Towing Customer Bill of Rights at the towing company or vehicle storage facility pay window. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 2015-384 , § 2, 12-15-15)  
Sec. 23-155. - Tow fee study. 
(a)  Three or more towing companies performing, either alone or together, fifty (50) percent or more of the non-consent tows during the preceding calendar year may request a tow fee study. Said request must be made in writing to the police chief. The request must identify the specific fees requested to be reviewed and indicate the requestor's willingness to provide any necessary financial documentation that the city may deem necessary to conduct the review. 
(b)  A non-refundable fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in the form of a cashier's check payable to the city must be forwarded to the police chief before the study will be undertaken. This fee is intended to defray the cost of the study. 
(c)  The tow fee study shall be performed at the direction of the police chief. The methodology used to conduct the study will be established by the finance department of the city. The finance department shall determine what financial information is necessary to conduct the study, to include, but not limited to financial information requested from non-consent towing companies in the city. Any and all towing companies joining in the request for a tow fee study must provide all requested financial information. Such information shall be kept confidential to the extent allowed by law. 
(d)  The tow fee study shall be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date the deposit is paid and all requested financial information is received, whichever is later. 
(e)  The findings of the tow fee study shall be presented to the city council. Based upon the results of the tow fee study, the city council may change the non-consent towing fees. The maximum fees must represent the fair market value of the services of a towing company performing non-consent tows in the city. 
(f)  The city is not required to conduct more than one tow fee study within a two-year time period, measured from the date the city council most recently considered a tow fee study. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from undertaking a tow fee study at its own discretion at any time. A consumer price index analysis to adjust towing fees shall be conducted annually, with any adjustment in fees taking effect January 1 of the following year. A new fee ordinance will be adopted in the event of any adjustment in fees. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-156. - Vehicle storage facility required. 
A towing company shall own, lease, or have a contract to use a designated vehicle storage facility to store a vehicle removed in a non-consent tow that is: 
(a)  Licensed by the State of Texas; and 
(b)  Located within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-157. - Removal to a designated facility. 
(a)  Except as provided in subjection (b) of this section, a towing company that performs a non-consent tow of a vehicle from private property: 
(1)  Shall immediately tow the vehicle to the towing company's designated vehicle storage facility; and 
(2)  May not unload the towed vehicle at a place other than the towing company's designated vehicle storage facility. 
(b)  Reserved. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 2015-384 , § 3, 12-15-15)  
Sec. 23-158. - Release of vehicle from storage; impoundment. 
(a)  A vehicle storage facility may not refuse to release a vehicle in its possession to the vehicle owner, or the owner's agent, after the person pays the applicable fees, unless a law enforcement agency directed that vehicle not be released, or release of the vehicle is prohibited by a court order. 
(b)  A person may not remove or attempt to remove a vehicle that is lawfully stored by a vehicle storage facility unless the applicable charges are paid and accepted, or the person removing the vehicle has obtained permission from the vehicle storage facility. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Secs. 23-159—23-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 23-171. - Denial, suspension, and revocation of license. 
The police chief may deny a person's application for a tow truck operator's license and suspend or revoke a tow truck operator's license issued under this article, as prescribed in the rules adopted by the police chief. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-172. - Revocation of tow truck registration certificate. 
The police chief may revoke the registration certificate for a tow truck that fails to meet the requirements of state law regarding non-consent tows or for violations of state law that affect the public safety, this article, or rules adopted under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-173. - Notice required. 
(a)  Before taking adverse action under this article, the police chief shall notify the applicant or holder of the intended action, except that advance notice is not required in actions related to: 
(1)  Safety hazards; 
(2)  Absence of state motor carrier registration; or 
(3)  Absence of ownership or contract with licensed vehicle storage facility. 
(b)  The police chief shall send the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to the mailing address listed on the person's application, certificate, or license, as applicable. 
(c)  The notice is presumed to have been received on the 10 th working day after mailing, unless an earlier date is indicated on the return receipt. 
(d)  Except for actions that are authorized to take effect without advance notice, a denial, suspension, revocation, or removal is effective on the 20 th day after the notice is mailed. 
(e)  If the police chief takes action without advance notice, the police chief shall send a notice that includes the factual basis for the action to the person or towing company affected by the action. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-174. - Hearing. 
(a)  The person to whom a notice of denial, suspension, revocation, or removal is sent may request a hearing. 
(b)  The request must be in writing and received by the police chief not later than the 15 th day after the notice was sent. If the person fails to submit to the police chief a request for hearing not later than the 15 th day after the notice is sent, the denial, suspension, revocation, or removal becomes final on the expiration of the time specified in the notice. 
(c)  The police chief shall hold an informal hearing not later than the 15 th day after the request for a hearing is received. At the hearing, the formal rules of evidence do not apply. The police chief shall decide the appeal on the basis of the preponderance of the evidence presented. 
(d)  The police chief shall make a determination on the hearing not later than the 10 th day after the hearing. The police chief may affirm, reverse, or modify the previous determination. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-175. - Appeal. 
(a)  A person may appeal the police chief's decision in writing to the city manager not later than the 10 th day after the effective date of the decision. This person must include a statement of the grounds for the appeal. 
(b)  The notice of appeal does not stay the police chief's decision. 
(c)  The city manager shall schedule a public hearing not later than the 15 th day after receipt of the notice of appeal. The city manager shall give notice of the time and place set for the hearing to the police chief and the appellant not less than five (5) days before the hearing. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 23-176. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  At an appeal hearing under section 23-175, the police chief and the appellant may present evidence, testimony, and argument. 
(b)  The city manager's decision is final. 
( Ord. No. 2015-335 , § 1, 11-17-15)  
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, adopted September 20, 2005, amended chapter 24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 24, §§ 24-1—24-13, 24-41, 24-42, 24-66—24-71, 24-72—24-74, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from §§ 12-1, 12-2, 12-4—12-6, 12-8, 12-9(b), (c), 12-10, 12-12, 12-14(a)—(d), 12-15, 12-16(b), (c), 12-17(c), 12-17(e), (f), 12-18-(a), (b), 12-19—12-23 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 89-032, § I, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 90-003, § I, 1-2-90; Ord. No 91-066, § I, III, V—VIII, 4-30-91; Ord. No 98-299, § I—IV, 9-15-98; Ord. No 00-042, § 1, 2, 2-1-00; Ord. No 00-045, §§ 1, 3, 2-1-99. 
Cross reference— Disposal of manure, § 6-15; housing generally, Ch. 15; junk dealers and dealers in secondhand merchandise, § 16-26 et seq.; automotive wrecking and salvage yards, § 16-126 et seq.; grass and weeds creating nuisances, § 20-71 et seq.; littering generally, § 21-5; construction and building debris on streets, § 25-8; refuse and garbage handling in mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, § 32-90; insect and rodent control in mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, § 32-91. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Purpose. 
The accumulation of garbage, trash and rubbish on the premises of private residences, businesses, public and private institutions, vacant lots, and in the streets, and alleys and on other property within the city, constitute a public menace and nuisance and greatly increases the danger of the spread of infectious, contagious and epidemic diseases, and the regulations of this chapter are adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare by requiring property owners, tenants, occupants and lessees to secure and maintain containers and receptacles of sufficient size and material for the deposit of garbage, trash, rubbish, and recyclable materials for collection and removal at regular intervals and to maintain their premises free of accumulations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bulky items means any household item that will not fit inside a solid waste container when the lid on the solid waste container is closed. Only items consistent with residential use, such as household furniture and appliances shall be considered bulky items. 
Commercial means any structure or building other than residential, including business structures, hotels, motels, roominghouses or boardinghouses and structures containing four (4) or more dwelling units. 
Commercial tree trimmer means a person who or firm that engages in and solicits the trimming, and/or cutting of trees as a regular part of the business. 
Hazardous waste means any commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish or other solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq., as amended. 
Infectious waste means commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish, or other waste containing pathogens or biologically active material which because of its type, concentration, and quantity is capable of transmitting disease to persons exposed to the waste, including human and animal tissue, bandages and other material used in health care which become contaminated by pathogenic materials. 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) is solid waste resulting from or incidental to residential, municipal, commercial, institutional, and recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, construction and demolition materials, dead animals, and all other solid waste other than special wastes. 
Residential means a structure, house or building occupied as a dwelling only, and which contains no more than three (3) dwelling units. 
Residential garbage consists of all normal household waste, except plant clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, ashes, metal scraps other than cans, large accumulations of boxes, demolition and remodeling debris and other material that cannot be broken down to fit in regular garbage containers. 
Special waste means any commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish, hazardous waste, infectious waste, or other solid waste that because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties is not collectable by the city's solid waste department. 
Unusual accumulations, for residential service for each regular collection, means more than one cubic yard of garbage, trash, and other municipal solid waste permitted under this chapter, and yard waste that exceeds a pile three (3) feet in height, three (3) feet in width and cut to a maximum of four-foot lengths, and heavy, bulky objects and other accumulations unusual for the average household. Unusual accumulations for commercial service means any accumulation of refuse outside of the container. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 24-3. - City to provide solid waste services. 
The city's solid waste department shall be the exclusive provider of municipal solid waste collection and disposal services for all premises within the city and it shall be unlawful for any other person or entity to provide municipal solid waste collection or disposal services to any person or entity for compensation within the city, or to make use of the public streets for that purpose, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-4. - Charges for use of city landfill. 
The charges to be paid by persons for the use of the city's sanitary landfill site shall be in an amount established and as from time-to-time amended by ordinance as adopted by the city council, the ordinances and amendments thereto to be kept on file with the city secretary and to be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-5. - Disposal of garbage, trash or rubbish only in authorized locations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of garbage, trash or rubbish in any place in the city, other than as provided in this chapter or authorized by the city. No person shall place any solid waste, bulky items or any other material in, on or next to the solid waste container of another, unless authorized to do so by the person or persons who pay the charge for the solid waste collection service. 
(b)  Any waste, garbage or other solid or liquid matter, residential, industrial or commercial, that possesses characteristics deemed by the Texas Commission of Environmental Quality (TCEQ), or the Environmental Protection Agency, or the State Department of Health, or any other federal, state or local agency having jurisdiction to be unsuitable or detrimental to the environment or human health when disposed of in the type of sanitary landfill operated by the city is hereby prohibited. Such material or matter shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed by the agency having jurisdiction and at the expense of the party or parties generating such material or matter. In no case shall such material or matter be placed for collection by the city nor shall it be delivered to or disposed of at the city's sanitary landfill. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05) 
State Law reference— Water quality standards, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.124.  
Sec. 24-6. - Receptacles for municipal solid waste. 
(a)  Every owner, manager, agent, occupant, tenant, or lessee of any building, house, or structure within the corporate limits of the city shall provide and maintain suitable containers or receptacles of sufficient size and number to hold the municipal solid waste which accumulates on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place solid waste in, on or near a solid waste container in a manner that does not allow the lid of the solid waste container to completely close with all the solid waste completely within the container. 
It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section if the solid waste placed next to the container is a bulky item as defined in section 24-2, and if the bulky item is placed next to the container less than forty-eight (48) hours before the collection. The defense does not apply if the person placing the bulky item in, on or near the solid waste container was not authorized to use the solid waste container. 
(c)  The contents of municipal solid waste receptacles shall be secured so that neither the wind nor animals can scatter trash or rubbish over the premises or over the streets or alleys or other property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-7. - Weight limitations of containers. 
The total weight of any garbage bag and contents and of any trash and rubbish receptacle and contents shall be fifty (50) pounds or less. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-8. - Removal of unauthorized containers. 
All solid waste and recycling storage containers, not meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be removed and disposed of by the city and the city shall not be liable for the removal and disposal of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-9. - Prohibited materials and regulations. 
(a)  The director of solid waste shall keep a list of special waste that is not acceptable for collection and disposal by the solid waste department. The director of solid waste may also make reasonable rules regarding the collection and disposal by the solid waste department of any municipal solid waste, or other solid waste that requires special preparation or handling to meet the requirements of any state or federal law or regulation or which are otherwise necessary to safely and properly collect, transport, and provide for disposal. The list of special waste and the rules shall be written and kept on file by the director of solid waste and be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  No person shall deposit in any container serviced by the solid waste department any special waste. The solid waste department may refuse to collect, transport or dispose of special or hazardous waste or any other garbage, rubbish, trash, or other solid waste that does not comply with this chapter or the regulations made by the director of solid waste. 
(c)  Each property owner shall be responsible for arranging collections with an authorized private hauler for the collection, removal, and disposal of any special waste or other garbage, trash, rubbish, or other solid waste which the city's solid waste department will not collect. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-10. - Municipal solid waste to be drained. 
All municipal solid waste mixed with water or other liquids shall be drained before being placed in the receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-11. - Preparation of yard waste, tree limbs and cuttings. 
(a)  Tree limbs, shrubs and hedge cuttings shall not exceed four (4) feet in length and shall be stacked neatly with one (1) cut end toward the street at the curb line. No unit or piece shall weigh more than fifty (50) pounds. Yard waste consisting of small pieces, small cuttings and small loose material shall be placed in approved bags. 
(b)  The director of solid waste shall provide for regular collections of yard waste which has been prepared in accordance with this section. If unusual accumulations are present, a reasonable charge shall be made for such service in addition to the regular service charge. 
(c)  Brush, limbs, leaves and cuttings from trees and shrubs which have been trimmed or removed by a commercial tree trimmer shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling the same or upon payment of the actual cost of such removal plus an administrative and overhead charge. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-12. - Heavy or unusual accumulations. 
(a)  Construction and demolition materials and other accumulations as a result of construction, remodeling, repairing or destruction shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  Household furnishings, goods and appliances, including but not limited to stoves, refrigerators, washing or drying machines, water heaters, sofas, chairs, tables, mattresses and box springs, shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling same or, upon request and payment of a fee to recover the cost of providing these additional services, including administrative and overhead costs. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-13. - Theft of service prohibited. 
No person shall knowingly place any solid waste, bulky items, or any other material in, on, or next to the solid waste container of another person or entity in the City of Denton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Secs. 24-14—24-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICE 
 
Sec. 24-41. - Residential solid waste services required. 
(a)  Any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any residential premises in the city shall have their municipal solid waste regularly removed by the city. 
(b)  The charges for such service shall be included on a regularly scheduled bill. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-42. - Charges for residential service. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "individual family unit" shall mean each side of a duplex, each living unit per subdivided lot, each apartment in an apartment house, up to and including three (3) units and any unit or living space in which a single family resides. 
(b)  The charge for collecting municipal solid waste from each individual family unit shall be in an amount established and as from time-to-time amended by ordinance as adopted by the city council; the ordinance and amendments thereto to be kept on file with the city secretary and to be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(c)  Multiple-dwelling units having either water or electricity billed through a single meter will be billed a single solid waste charge along with the single water or electric charge, regardless of the occupancy of such multiple-dwelling unit. 
(d)  Multiple-dwelling units classified as fraternities, sororities, boardinghouses and dormitories shall be charged as a commercial or institutional service. Any multiple-dwelling unit which requires more than the minimum service described in this chapter is subject to having the charges increased by the director of solid waste based upon the additional required service. 
(e)  Mobility or visually impaired customers may receive special collection services. Containers may be placed in locations designated by the city. The resident receiving this special service must be mobility or visually impaired and no member of the household is physically able to place the containers at the curb. Such special services shall require approval by the director of solid waste or designee. The monthly rate for these special collection services will be the same rate as is charged those customers with no impairments. 
(f)  All residential dwelling units shall containerize their waste for collection. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-43. - Residential collection service. 
(a)  All single-family residents within the city shall place their residential refuse and recyclables at the curb as specified by the general manager of solid waste services or designee. 
(b)  Residential refuse and recyclables shall be placed at the curb no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the scheduled collection day. To ensure collection, residential refuse and recyclables should be placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
(c)  Customers whose refuse or recyclables were not collected because: they were not placed at the proper location, they contained unacceptable materials, or they were not placed out for collection by the required time, shall not be collected until the next regularly scheduled collection service. 
(d)  Solid waste and recycling storage containers and any unaccepted waste or recyclables, shall be removed from the curb or other designated collection point by the customer no later than 8:00 a.m. on the day following the scheduled collection day. Upon removal from the curb, shall be stored in as inconspicuous a location as possible, such as: 
(1)  In a garage; 
(2)  In an outdoor storage building; 
(3)  On the side of a structure on the property; or 
(4)  At the back of a structure on the property. 
At no point shall a solid waste or recycling storage container or unaccepted waste or recyclables be stored in public view or remain in public view in the front yard, on the front porch, or in front of the main structure on the property, except as follows: 
(1)  A townhome with five (5) or more units per building. 
(e)  All solid waste and recycling storage containers shall securely contain all contents, and shall be capable of being handled without spillage. Refuse and recyclables determined by the city to not be properly contained shall not be collected. 
(f)  The general manager of solid waste services or designee may make reasonable exceptions to the foregoing location requirements, as needed, upon request of the customer, to accommodate unique circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2007-193, § 14, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 2009-081, § 2, 4-7-09)  
Sec. 24-44. - Residential containerized collection service. 
(a)  Carts shall be placed at or near the curb line, a minimum of four (4) feet from any mailbox, vehicle, obstacle, or other container. The cart shall be placed in the street with its wheels against the curb. The director of solid waste or designee may make reasonable exceptions to the foregoing location requirements, as needed, upon request of the customer, to meet unique circumstances. 
(b)  Only authorized refuse and recycling container(s) (carts) provided by the city will be serviced. No other containers, boxes, or bags placed at the collection site will be collected, unless special refuse collection services have been requested. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Secs. 24-45—24-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL COLLECTION SERVICE 
 
Sec. 24-66. - Commercial solid waste services required. 
Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any business, commercial, industrial, or institutional property, or other property not entitled to receive residential solid waste collection services shall arrange, by contract with the city, for commercial solid waste collection and disposal services from the city's solid waste department, except as otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-67. - Charges for commercial, industrial, or institutional service. 
(a)  The charge for collection and removal of municipal solid waste from premises used for business, industrial, or institutional purposes shall be based upon the size, type and number of containers in use at such establishments and the frequency with which such containers are scheduled to be serviced by city collection personnel. Such charge shall be in an amount established and as from time to time amended by ordinance as adopted by the city council; the ordinance and amendments thereto to be kept on file with the city secretary and to be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  The service charge for other commercial waste disposal and collection services not otherwise provided for pursuant to this section may be provided upon approval of the director of solid waste at a cost not to exceed the actual cost plus administrative and overhead costs. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-68. - Containers furnished by city for commercial and industrial facilities. 
(a)  The director of solid waste may locate and place containers for use by commercial, industrial, and institutional facilities in accordance with the waste storage needs of the individual facility. All facilities for which containers are so provided by the city shall place all refuse and waste materials in such containers and shall not place waste in any containers except those designated by the director of solid waste. It shall be unlawful for any person using such containers to leave the lid open after placing refuse material therein. 
(b)  Where more than one (1) commercial establishment uses the same container, the charges shall be prorated according to use, but in no case shall be less than an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-69. - Annual permit required for special waste and recyclables haulers. 
(a)  No person shall collect or remove for compensation from any property within the city any special waste or recyclables without first obtaining a special waste hauler's permit from the city. 
(b)  The person applying for a special waste hauler's permit shall make application to the city on forms provided for that purpose, and pay the required fee. The application shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name and business address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the property and the address where the special waste and recyclables will be collected. 
(3)  A description of the special waste and recyclables to be collected. 
(4)  The location where the special waste and recyclables will be disposed, including proof, when required by the director of solid waste, that the applicant is legally authorized to dispose at the specified location. 
(5)  A description and the license number of the motor vehicles to be used in collecting and transporting the special waste and recyclables within the city. 
(6)  Any other information which is reasonably necessary to administer this section. 
(c)  The director of solid waste shall issue the special waste and recyclables hauler's permit to the applicant if: 
(1)  Proper application has been made and the fee paid. 
(2)  The applicant will only be collecting special waste or recyclables as defined in this chapter. 
(3)  The applicant is authorized to use the specified disposal site and the manner and place of disposal does not appear to violate any state or federal law or regulation or city ordinance. 
(d)  The special waste and recyclables hauler's permit shall be valid for one year. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Secs. 24-70—24-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLING AND PROCESSING SERVICES 
 
Sec. 24-90. - Recyclable materials. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from collecting, gathering, or transporting recyclable materials collected from property within the city. 
(b)  Any person who transports recyclable materials collected from any property inside the city to a point outside the city, more than three times per year shall register with the city on forms provided for that purpose. 
(c)  As used in this section, "recyclable materials" means glass, tin, aluminum, paper, newspaper or other discarded materials, which are not special waste and have been separated from other municipal solid waste at the point of collection for delivery to another location for processing for reuse. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-91. - Disposing of recyclable materials. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to place any non-recyclable solid waste in any recycling receptacle or to leave any non-recyclable solid waste on a recycling site in the City of Denton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Secs. 24-92—24-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - POSSESSION OF OPEN GLASS CONTAINERS IN FRY STREET DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 24-100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fry Street District refers to the area as described in Zoning Ordinance No. 2000-045 as the Fry Street District. The Fry Street District is generally bounded by Welch Street to the east, Oak Street to the North, Ave. B to the northwest, Ave. A to the southwest, Mulberry Street to the southeast, and Hickory Street to the southwest, which is depicted in Exhibit A* attached to Ordinance No. 2005-256 and made a part hereof by reference. 
Glass container means any glass bottle or receptacle, closed or capable of being closed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05) 
Note— *A copy of Exhibit A can be found in the city offices.  
Sec. 24-101. - Prohibition of open glass containers. 
(a)  Prohibitions. No person shall possess within the Fry Street District upon or immediately adjacent to any right-of-way, street, sidewalk, pedestrian way, or parking area, any glass container which is open or has been previously opened except for use on the premises where the glass containers are acquired. 
(b)  Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, nothing in this section shall prohibit the possession of the following glass containers in the Fry Street District: 
(1)  Baby bottles containing products for consumption by babies; 
(2)  Glass drug containers containing prescription drugs; 
(3)  Glass containers that are being transported in a trash bag directly to a trash or recycling container for disposal or recycling purposes; 
(4)  Glass lined vacuum picnic containers or thermos bottles, and 
(5)  Any container as permitted by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code Ann. 28.10(b). 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 24-102. - Discretion of police officer. 
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection 24-101(a), he may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of public peace and safety, order that person to leave that place and surrender the open glass container. Any person who shall refuse to leave or surrender an open glass container after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-256, § 1, 9-20-05)  
Chapter 25 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Liability for personal injury or property damage resulting from defects in streets, etc., § 1.06(e); assessments for improvements of streets, alleys and public places, § 9.08; franchises for use of streets and public property, § 13.02. 
Cross reference— Requests for abandonment of public easements or rights-of-way, § 2-127; cable television franchise, Ch. 8; fire lanes; fire apparatus access roads, § 11-101 et seq.; soliciting on city property, § 16-76; motor vehicles and traffic generally, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Mixing concrete on paved street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mix or cause the mixing of concrete on any paved street in the city, except on a platform or in a box or other receptacle so constructed as to prevent such concrete from falling on the pavement. 
(Code 1966, § 21-31) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28.  
Sec. 25-2. - Cleaning vehicles or equipment containing concrete on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to clean any truck or other vehicle or any other equipment containing cement, concrete or other building material upon any public street in the city or to cast water containing any such materials into or upon any street, curb, sewer, culvert, gutter or drain or other public property in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 21-4) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28.  
Sec. 25-3. - Construction of permanent drains discharging water over sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any building or premises in the city to construct or maintain any downspout or other permanent drain so as to discharge water over the surface of any sidewalk. 
(b)  Whenever the city engineer shall discover any downspout or other permanent drain on any premises in the city which discharges water over the surface of any sidewalk, it shall be his duty to notify the owner or person in control of any such premises, in writing, to correct the condition within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1966, § 21-5)  
Sec. 25-4. - Painting or marking on public property; permit for painting address numbers for pay. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to draw, mark or paint any sign, picture or character upon any sidewalk, pavement, curbstone, utility pole, public bridge, public building, public right-of-way or other public property, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  The prohibition of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to city employees, surveyors or public utility employees or their authorized agents marking public property in performance of their duties or permitted construction work or to persons marking or painting upon a public sidewalk by making use of chalk or other similar water-soluble materials. 
(c)  The prohibition of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to persons desiring to paint house numbers upon curbs for payment by the owner at that address, in accordance with a permit issued by the city secretary. The application form for the permit shall contain the name and address of the person making application, minimum standards for the application of the numbering and other information as may be deemed necessary. House numbers shall be placed only on the curb in front of the dwelling on the driveway return portion of the curb. In no event shall numbering be placed upon a curb without first obtaining payment or approval of payment from the owner of the property. All persons soliciting owners of property to provide house numbering services shall include the name, address and permit number for the person soliciting on any written solicitation materials delivered to the property owner. 
(Code 1966, § 21-9; Ord. No. 89-021, § I, 2-7-89)  
Sec. 25-5. - Use of thoroughfares for soliciting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon any street or roadway or to be or go upon the shoulder or median or any street or roadway for the purpose of soliciting charitable contributions of any kind on or along the side of the public streets in the city without having obtained a permit to solicit charitable contributions from the chief of police pursuant to section 25-5.1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 88-061, § I(21-10(a)), 3-15-88; Ord. No. 95-159, § I, 8-15-95) 
Cross reference— Solicitors and itinerant merchants generally, § 16-71 et seq.  
Sec. 25-5.1. - Issuance of permits for use of roadways to solicit charitable contributions. 
(a)  A charitable organization desiring to solicit for charitable contributions upon the public streets of the city, shall file, not less than five (5) days prior to the solicitation drive with the chief of police, an application for a permit, containing the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the person(s) requesting the permit; 
(2)  The name and locations of the street(s) upon which the solicitation is to occur; 
(3)  The date and time for the solicitation; 
(4)  The name of the charitable organization sponsoring the solicitation and evidence of such organization's charitable status; 
(5)  An executed copy of a hold harmless and indemnification agreement prepared by the office of the city attorney. 
(b)  Within three (3) days of receipt of a proper application for a permit as required by this section, the chief of police shall approve and issue a permit to stand along the roadway to solicit charitable contributions for the period requested unless the chief of police determines that: 
(1)  One or more of the statements made in the application is false; or 
(2)  The applicant has failed to fully complete all the information required on the application. 
(c)  The chief of police shall immediately notify the applicant in writing, either personally or by mail, postage pre-paid to the address listed on the application, of the denial of a permit. Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police in the denial of an application for permit under this section shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city secretary, within ten (10) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal within ten (10) days, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the application, at least five (5) days prior to such hearing. Any decision and order of the council on such appeal which denies a permit requested shall be appealable by the city to a court of competent jurisdiction. The city shall file this appeal within five (5) days of the denial with a request for an expedited hearing at which the city shall bear the burden of justifying the denial of the requested permit. 
(d)  All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for not more than three (3) consecutive days. An applicant shall be allowed no more than two (2) such permits per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 95-159, § I, 8-15-95)  
Sec. 25-5.2. - Regulation of charitable solicitations. 
Notwithstanding any provisions contained in section 25-5 or section 25-5.1 of this Code, no person shall engage in following: 
(1)  No solicitation shall be permitted along primary arterial roadways Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(2)  Solicitation shall be prohibited prior to thirty (30) minutes after sunrise and after thirty (30) minutes prior to sunset of any day, Monday through Saturday, and shall be prohibited at any time on Sunday. 
(3)  No one under the age of fourteen (14) years of age shall solicit along primary arterial roadways. 
(4)  No person shall solicit without wearing a traffic safety vest and displaying a valid permit upon their person. 
(5)  No person shall be exempted from observing all traffic regulations and pedestrian duties. 
(Ord. No. 95-159, § I, 8-15-95; Ord. No. 96-142, § I, 6-18-96)  
Sec. 25-6. - Permit for selling or vending on streets or sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any wares, goods or merchandise from any stand or place located within or upon any public street or sidewalk or to otherwise obstruct any public street or sidewalk except by permit. 
(b)  In accordance with subsection (a) of this section, the city secretary is hereby authorized to issue permits for certain sales or vending from and upon public streets according to the general procedure established for solicitors and pursuant to the following conditions and provisions: 
(1)  The city secretary shall obtain the name and address of the owner of the business being conducted, its local agents and of each driver and salesman connected therewith. 
(2)  Each owner and employee or agent shall be investigated through the police department. 
(3)  Each applicant shall provide copies or proof of the following: 
a.  Food handler's permit; 
b.  Health card; 
c.  Driver's license; 
d.  Vehicle ownership; 
e.  Certificate of liability insurance, with limits of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage and personal injury; 
f.  Bond payable to the city to ensure compliance with terms of the permit, to protect the buying public, with limits of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
g.  Sales tax permit; 
h.  Name and location of warehouse or source of food supply. 
(4)  Each permit shall clearly define the sales route or area. Permits must be based on ability to adequately serve the area and shall be limited to residential areas. No sales may be made from any street or sidewalk which abuts a park or area containing a licensed concessionaire or business establishment or within one thousand (1,000) feet from such concession or establishment. 
(5)  No permit shall exceed one (1) year and shall provide for automatic termination upon abandonment or upon any violation of ordinance or statute. The chief of police may suspend any permit for any violation of an ordinance or statute and for the creation of a nuisance or traffic hazard. The permit holder may appeal such suspension to the city council for final determination, if such appeal is filed with the city secretary within ten (10) days of the suspension. 
(6)  All vehicles involved, including trucks, scooters, pushcarts, wagons, bicycles, etc., shall be described in the permit and be subject to inspection by the health department and police department and be approved by such departments prior to use. 
(7)  A permit fee as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary shall be collected prior to issuance, and a street use franchise fee of three (3) percent of all gross receipts from such sales shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days after the expiration of each quarter year beginning on the date the permit first issues. The permit holder shall be responsible for keeping accurate records of all such sales, and the city shall have the right to audit such records at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1966, §§ 21-10, 21-10.1; Ord. No. 88-061, § I, 3-15-88) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 25-7. - Defacing or destroying survey reference markers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, destroy or remove any permanent survey reference marker or any benchmark or control point marker belonging to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 21-12)  
Sec. 25-8. - Construction and building debris. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons, contractors or subcontractors performing any hauling, excavation, alteration, demolition, construction or reconstruction or work related or incidental thereto on any site within the city and to any person, contractor or subcontractor making use of any public street, alley or way owned or maintained by the city as a result of such activity. 
(b)  Depositing on public streets. No person shall deposit, track or scatter any dirt, stone, gravel, brick, cement, concrete, sand, mud, wood, trash, garbage, rubbish or other similar material or debris upon any public street, alley or other public way. 
(c)  Vehicles leaving construction sites. No person, contractor or subcontractor performing all or part of the work described in subsection (a) of this section shall allow any vehicle to leave such job site and enter or travel upon a public street, alley or way unless such vehicle is properly covered and all equipment of the vehicle, including the tires thereof, are properly cleaned so as to prevent a violation of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Abatement of violation. 
(1)  Should any person, contractor or subcontractor performing all or part of the work described in subsection (a) of this section violate the provisions of subsection (b) or (c) of this section, the city may issue an order, in writing, to any person, contractor or subcontractor on the job site where such violation originated to cease specified activity on such site relating to the violation of this section, including but not limited to hauling, excavation, construction, demolition or reconstruction at the job site or removal of any material from the job site. 
(2)  No person, contractor or subcontractor issued an order as specified in this subsection shall continue or cause or allow the activity covered by the order to continue after the issuance of the order until written permission to resume the activity covered by the order has been given. No written permission to resume the activity covered by the order shall be given until the city, in its sole discretion, is satisfied that all steps necessary to prevent future violations of this section have been taken. 
(e)  Removal; costs of removal by city. 
(1)  Should any person, contractor or subcontractor violate subsection (b) of this section, the person, contractor or subcontractor responsible for such violation shall remove such litter from the public street, alley or other public way within two (2) hours of notification by the city of the violation. 
(2)  If any person, contractor or subcontractor responsible for such violation shall fail to timely abate the violation after notification to do so, the city may remove or arrange to have removed the litter, and the costs of such removal, along with an administrative fee in an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, shall be charged to the person, contractor or subcontractor responsible for the violation. 
(3)  If the person, contractor or subcontractor responsible for such violation shall fail to pay such costs within twenty-four (24) hours of written notice of the costs incurred, the city may issue an order, in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, requiring the person, contractor or subcontractor to cease work at such job site until all costs are paid. 
(f)  Appeal of order; assessment. Any person who is aggrieved by an order or assessment made pursuant to this section may appeal, in writing, such order or assessment within ten (10) days of the notification of the order or assessment to the city manager. The city manager, within ten (10) days of the filing of the appeal, shall hold a hearing to consider the validity of the action appealed from and render a decision thereon. 
(Code 1966, § 21-14) 
Cross reference— Solid waste generally, Ch. 24; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28.  
Sec. 25-9. - House numbering. 
House numbers shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the city, with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council. It shall be the duty of the engineering division to assign the proper numbers for houses upon application. 
(Ord. No. 88-016, § II(21-15), 1-19-88) 
Cross reference— Housing generally, Ch. 15; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28.  
Sec. 25-10. - Owner or occupant to place house numbers. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of every house and building in the city shall place the street number assigned by the engineering division in some conspicuous place on or near such house or building so that the number may be plainly seen from the street. 
(b)  The house numbers shall conform to the requirements of section 17-153(b). 
(Ord. No. 88-016, § II(21-16), 1-19-88; Ord. No. 2010-133, § 1, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 25-11. - Baselines for numbering of buildings. 
(a)  Hickory Street and its continuation by imaginary line through the city from east to west and Locust Street and its continuation by imaginary line through the city from north to south are hereby established as the base lines from which all houses and buildings in the city are to be numbered. 
(b)  The letters N., E., S. and W., indicating the four (4) cardinal points of the compass, shall be added as a prefix to the names of all streets, avenues and thoroughfares in the city crossing the baselines. 
(c)  All houses and buildings shall be numbered from the baseline of the street on which they are located, out such street to the corporate limits of the city or to the terminus of the street, in regular order, with the even numbers on the right side and the odd numbers on the left of such street. 
(Ord. No. 88-016, § IV, 1-19-88)  
Sec. 25-12. - Blocks. 
(a)  Three hundred (300) feet is hereby designated as a block, and one hundred (100) numbers shall, if practicable, be placed in each block. 
(b)  As the blocks progress in distance from the baseline, the beginning number shall be raised one hundred (100) with each block. 
(c)  The one-hundred block of North Locust Street shall begin at the north side of the intersection of Locust and Hickory Streets. The one-hundred block of South Locust Street shall begin at the south side of the intersection of Locust and Hickory Streets. 
(d)  The one-hundred block of East Hickory Street shall begin at the east side of the intersection of Hickory and Locust Streets. The one-hundred block of West Hickory Street shall begin at the west side of the intersection of Hickory and Locust Streets. 
(Ord. No. 88-016, § V(21-18), 1-19-88)  
Sec. 25-13. - Identification of apartment buildings. 
(a)  When more than one (1) apartment building is located on a lot or tract of land, each building shall be identified by a permanent number as specified in sections 25-11 and 25-12, attached to the exterior wall. The size and location of such numbers shall be such that they are clearly visible and readable from the street or driveway serving the building. 
(b)  New apartment complexes of two (2) or more buildings and existing apartment complexes of two (2) or more buildings which are not presently numbered shall have numbers at least ten (10) inches tall. Such numbers shall be of a contrasting color to that of the surface on which they are mounted. 
(c)  Existing apartment buildings which already have identifying numbers may be allowed to continue to use those numbers if they are judged by the chiefs of the police and fire departments to be clearly visible and readable from the street or driveway serving the buildings. 
(d)  The owner or manager of apartment buildings with identifying numbers shall request an inspection of the buildings by notifying the city building inspection division to determine if the numbers are visible and readable from the street and driveways serving the buildings. 
(Ord. No. 88-016, § VI(21-19), 1-19-88)  
Secs. 25-14—25-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 25-41—25-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Housing generally, Ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 25-51. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk, curb or gutter in the city without first obtaining a permit from the engineering department of the city for such work. 
(Code 1966, § 21-24)  
Sec. 25-52. - Bond required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk, curb or gutter in the city without having first executed and delivered to the building inspection division a current approved corporate surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and such bond shall be conditioned as follows: 
(1)  That all work done by the principal in the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk or curb and gutter shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in faithful and strict compliance with all ordinances, rules and regulations approved by the city council governing the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks or curbs and gutters; 
(2)  That the principal shall fully indemnify and hold the city whole and harmless from any and all cost, expense or damage, whether real or asserted, because of any injury done to any person or property in the prosecution of the work or that may arise out of or be occasioned by the performance of such work; 
(3)  That the principal shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the work was done, maintain all sidewalks or curbs and gutters constructed, reconstructed or repaired by the principal for a period of one (1) year from the date of such work and within ten (10) days after notice from the engineering department of the city that maintenance is necessary, and that the opinion of the city engineer as to the necessity for maintenance at any time within the one-year period shall be conclusive; 
(4)  That such bond shall be in force for a continuous period of one (1) year after any sidewalk or curb and gutter is constructed, reconstructed or repaired by the principal, and that one (1) recovery shall not exhaust such bond, but such bond shall be a continuing obligation against the sureties thereon until the entire amount therein provided for shall have been exhausted; 
(5)  That the principal shall upon notice from the city engineering department post an additional bond in the amount of any decrease in the original bond by reason of recovery thereunder; 
(6)  That the city may for itself or for the use and benefit of any person injured or damaged by reason of any defective construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk or curb and gutter by the principal, maintain suit on the bond in any court of competent jurisdiction or that any such injured or damaged person may sue and recover thereunder in his own behalf. 
(b)  The city council may increase the amount of the bond of any person at any time such action is deemed necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
(c)  Any owner of real estate repairing or engaging another to repair his own sidewalk shall not be required to give such bond. 
(Code 1966, § 21-25)  
Sec. 25-53. - Construction to comply to standard specifications. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk or curb and gutter in the city, except in strict compliance with the Standards Specifications for Public Works Construction, as adopted by the city council, and amended from time to time. 
(Code 1966, § 21-26)  
Sec. 25-54. - Removal and replacement of curbs and gutters. 
(a)  All curbs and gutters to be replaced shall be removed to the next expansion joint on both sides of the area, or, with the approval of the city, the curb and gutter may be sawed with a concrete saw to produce a smooth joint. 
(b)  All curbs and gutters shall be replaced within forty-eight (48) hours of removal unless an extension is granted by the city. 
(c)  Where curbs and gutters are removed for driveways, construction work or other purposes, the complete curb and gutter shall be removed. Any asphalt removed shall be replaced after the curb and gutter have been replaced. The profile of the flowline of the gutter section shall be maintained throughout so that existing drainage is unobstructed. 
(Code 1966, § 21-27)  
Sec. 25-55. - Form of resolution ordering construction. 
(a)  The city council may by resolution passed by a majority vote, order the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks or curbs and gutters along any section or part thereof in the city or in front of any property abutting upon the sidewalk, curb or gutter. 
(b)  The resolution shall, in general terms, describe such sidewalks or curbs and gutters and the street, avenue, alley or place or section or part thereof along which such sidewalks or curbs and gutters are to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired. The council shall have the power to assess the whole cost of any such sidewalk and/or curb and gutter or any part thereof against the property abutting or fronting thereon and against the owner thereof, except the cost of excavation and grading which shall be borne by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 21-32)  
Sec. 25-56. - Abutting property owners to pay certain costs. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of property abutting on any street, avenue, alley, place or square or section or part thereof where sidewalks or curbs and gutters have been ordered by the city council to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired as provided in this division, within thirty (30) days from the date of the publication of notice and the giving of personal notice, to construct, reconstruct or repair such sidewalk or curb and gutter in accordance with the specifications mentioned in such notices and pay all cost and expense of the construction, reconstruction or repair, except the cost of excavating and grading which shall be borne by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 21-35)  
Sec. 25-57. - Authority to use other methods. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as a limitation upon the power of the city council to use another authority or method for the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks or curbs and gutters and for the assessment of the costs of construction, reconstruction or repair against the abutting property owners. 
(Code 1966, § 21-36)  
Sec. 25-58. - Repair or replacement—City to bear costs; exception. 
The superintendent of streets is hereby authorized to repair or replace sidewalks or curbs and gutters that meet the criteria of section 25-51, with the city bearing the total cost of excavation and removal and the total cost of labor in repairing and replacing such sidewalks, curbs and gutters if the abutting property owner, prior to the commencement of such work, pays to the city the cost of materials for the project as determined by the superintendent of streets. 
(Code 1966, § 21-37)  
Sec. 25-59. - Same—Criteria. 
Criteria for sidewalk repair or replacement as provided in section 25-58 shall be as follows: 
(1)  The sidewalk location must be in the city right-of-way. 
(2)  A minimum of fifteen (15) linear feet per residence must meet these repair or replacement criteria. 
(3)  Sections to be replaced must be shattered or cracked or structurally unsound, based on the following: 
a.  Sections that have holes in them two (2) inches or more in diameter or that are cracked or broken with missing or loose pieces; 
b.  Sections that are upheaved or depressed, thereby causing an abrupt change in grade of forty (40) percent or more (two-inch vertical in ten (10) inches horizontal) or creates an unsafe condition as designated by the superintendent of streets; 
c.  Sections having surface spalling only will not be considered criteria for replacement. These areas will only be considered if the superintendent of streets determines they create an extremely unsafe condition. 
(Code 1966, § 21-38)  
Sec. 25-60. - Same—Limitations. 
The provisions of sections 25-58 and 25-59 shall be limited to replacement and repair of existing sidewalks abutting residential areas. It shall not apply to new construction or sidewalks abutting nonresidential property. The procedures in sections 25-58 and 25-59 may not be utilized if the city council has, by resolution, ordered the construction or repair of sidewalks. 
(Code 1966, § 21-39)  
Secs. 25-61—25-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, adopted November 19, 2019, repealed the former Div. 3, §§ 25-71—25-79, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 21-41—21-49 of the 1966 Code. 
 
Sec. 25-71. - Construction; governing law; venue. 
This division shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas and the city's Charter, Code of Ordinances, and Development Code ("city laws") to the extent that the city laws are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. All obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in Denton County, Texas. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-72. - Purpose; objectives; applicability. 
(a)  Purpose. This division provides principles and procedures for the placement of structures and facilities, construction, excavation, and/or occupation of a work area within or upon any right-of-way and to protect the integrity of the street and city utility system. To achieve these purposes, it is necessary to require permits of all users of the rights-of-way, except as prohibited by law, and to establish permit procedures, rules, and regulations for work done within or upon the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Objectives. Public and private uses of rights-of-way for location of facilities employed in the provision of public services should, in the interests of the general welfare, be accommodated; however, the city must insure that the primary purpose of the rights-of-way, safe passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, is maintained to the greatest extent possible. In addition, the value of other public and private installations, streets, the city utility system, facilities and properties should be protected, competing uses must be reconciled, and the public safety preserved. The use of the rights-of-way by a right-of-way user is secondary to these public objectives and the movement of traffic. This division is intended to strike a balance between the public need for efficient, safe transportation routes and the use of public rights-of-way for location of facilities by public and private entities. Thus, the division has several objectives: 
(1)  To ensure that the public safety is maintained, and that public inconvenience is minimized. 
(2)  To protect the city's infrastructure investment by establishing repair standards for the pavement, facilities, and property in the rights-of-way when work is accomplished. 
(3)  To facilitate work within the rights-of-way through the standardization of regulations. 
(4)  To maintain an efficient and effective permit process. 
(5)  To conserve and fairly apportion the limited physical capacity of the rights-of-way held in public trust by the city. 
(6)  To establish a public policy for enabling the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the evolving federal and/or state law and regulations, industry competition, and technological development. 
(7)  To assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The requirements of this division apply to all right-of-way users that place structures and facilities or that conduct construction, excavation, and occupation of a work area within or upon any right-of-way except where: 
a.  Use of the right-of-way is established by an agreement, license or other permit with the city which includes provisions in lieu of this division. 
b.  Federal and/or state law conflicts with all, or part, of this division, in which case only the portions of this division that are preempted will either: 
1.  Not be enforced; or 
2.  Will be replaced with the appropriate federal and/or state law requirements which preempted all, or part, of this division. 
(2)  Any permit issued prior to January 1, 2020 will remain subject to the terms and conditions of city laws in effect at the time of issuance of the permit and is not affected by this division, except that, upon expiration or conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be obtained in accordance with this division. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-73. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply only to this division: 
Arterial means any major street as shown on the City of Denton Mobility Plan, as amended. 
Applicant means a person or authorized agent of a person, who applies for a permit under this division. 
Backfill means the placement or return of soil, fill, or other material for restoring an excavated area 
Certificated telecommunications provider (CTP) means the same as the term is defined in V.T.C.A. Local Government § 283.002(2), as amended. 
City means the City of Denton, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city. 
City construction standards means specifications, details, and general requirements adopted by city for the purposes of performing construction in the right-of way. 
City attorney means the city attorney of the city. 
City engineer means the city engineer of the city, or designee, or any other person designated by the city manager to administer this division. 
City inspector means an inspector as designated by the city engineer. 
City manager means the city manager of the city. 
City risk manager means the risk manager of the city. 
City secretary means the city secretary for the city. 
City utility system means the water, wastewater, drainage, stormwater, fiber and electric facilities owned and operated by the city. 
Closure means a complete or partial closing of one or more lanes of traffic of an arterial and the complete closure of any other type street or sidewalk. 
Construction means any of the following activities performed by any right-of-way user within a right-of-way: 
(1)  Installation, excavation, laying, boring, jacking, placement, repair, upgrade, maintenance, or relocation of facilities or other improvements, whether temporary or permanent; 
(2)  Modification or alteration to any surface, subsurface, or aerial space within the right-of-way; 
(3)  Performance, restoration, or repair of pavement cuts or excavations; and/or 
(4)  Other similar construction work. 
Division means division 3, of division II, chapter 25, of the City of Denton Code of Ordinances. 
Emergency activity means an activity to respond to any event that may threaten public health or safety, including, but not limited to, unexpected or unplanned outage, cut, rupture, leak or any other failure of a utility facility that prevents or significantly jeopardizes the ability of a utility to provide service to customers; or could result in danger to the public or a material delay or hindrance to the provision of service to the public if the outage, cut, rupture, leak or any other such failure of utility facilities is not immediately repaired, controlled, stabilized or rectified; or any unforeseen occurrence involving a utility facility that a reasonable person could conclude under the circumstances that immediate action by the utility is necessary and warranted in order to protect public safety and welfare. Upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood improvement projects expressly do not qualify as emergency operations. 
Excavate or excavation means to dig into or in any way remove or penetrate any part of a right-of-way and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity removes or disturbs the paved portion of the right-of-way. 
Facilities means the plant, equipment, and property, including, but not limited to, lines, transport service, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, ducts, cables and wires located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the right-of-way and valves, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of utility services, wireless or network services, or communications services to the public. 
Franchise utility shall mean any utility that has an agreement with the city that outlines certain requirements for the utility to use the city's right-of-way for purpose of providing utility service such as electric, gas, cable to any person or area of the city. As used throughout, franchise utility also includes contractors and subcontractors to do construction on its behalf. 
High-risk main means any city water or city wastewater main pipeline with a diameter of twelve (12) inches or larger, a wastewater force main of any size, or any other city-owned main otherwise expressly established by the city engineer as qualifying for significant preservation measures to protect public health, safety, and welfare. 
Network provider means the same as the term is defined in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 284.002(13), as amended. 
Pavement cut means a cut made into the paved surface of a public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or public easement. 
Permit means a permit issued under this division authorizing construction in the right-of-way. 
Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity who owns or controls facilities. 
Public infrastructure contractor means a person hired or retained to do construction of facilities that will be maintained by the city. "Public infrastructure contractor" includes all sub-contractors. 
Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a street, highway, sidewalk, alley, waterway, utility easement in which the city has an interest, or other way and that is open for public use, and that is owned by the city in full or in part, and that is managed and controlled by the city. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement of an entity external to the city; 
(2)  Public utility easement; or 
(3)  Private property. 
Right-of-way user means a person, its successors and assigns, that uses the right-of-way for purposes of construction, excavation, provision of services, or installing, constructing, maintaining, or repairing facilities thereon, including, but not limited to, landowners, utilities, certified telecommunication providers, network providers, public infrastructure contractors, and the city. 
Utility means any privately or publicly owned entity that uses right-of-way to furnish the public any general public service, including, without limitation, wastewater, gas, electricity, water, telephone, petroleum products, telegraph, heat, steam or chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances belonging to such entity and located within and near the right-of-way. 
Vision clearance area means a triangle sight area at an intersection of two (2) streets or driveways as shown in the city's Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
Work area means the full extent of the geographical space impacted by the act or result of excavation, material storage, equipment use, or similar occupation by a right-of-way undertaking any work within or adjacent to right-of-way. The work area for all pavement patches shall extend a minimum of three (3) feet beyond the patch. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-74. - Police powers. 
A right-of-way user's rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the city which includes the power to adopt and enforce city laws, including amendments to this division, necessary for the safety, health, and welfare of the public. The right-of-way user shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances enacted, or hereafter enacted, by the city or any other legally constituted governmental unit having lawful jurisdiction over the subject matter hereof with the exception when in conflict with federal and/or state, rules, or regulations. The city reserves the right to exercise its police powers, notwithstanding anything in this division or a permit to the contrary. Any conflict between the provisions of this division or a permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the city's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-75. - Authority of the city engineer; enforcement; violations. 
(a)  City engineer, or designee(s), is authorized to: 
(1)  Administer and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Enter a construction site for which a permit is granted under this division for purposes of inspection to determine compliance with the permit and this division. 
(b)  Violations. A right-of-way user commits an offense if: 
(1)  Performance, authorization, direction, or supervision of construction without a permit issued under this division; 
(2)  Any provision of this division is violated; 
(3)  There is a failure to comply with restrictions or requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this division; and/or 
(4)  There is a failure to comply with an order or regulation of the city engineer issued pursuant to this division. 
(c)  This division may be enforced by civil court action in accordance with federal and/or state law, in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, the city has for violation of this division. 
(d)  Prior to initiation of civil enforcement litigation, a right-of-way user who has violated a provision of this division must be given the opportunity to correct the violation within the timeframe specified by the city engineer. This section does not prohibit the city engineer or the city from taking enforcement action as to past or present violations of this division, notwithstanding their correction. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-76. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the following provisions or terms of this division by any person and/or right-of-way user shall be a misdemeanor offense subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), unless the violation relates to fire safety or public health and sanitation, including dumping and refuse, in which the fine shall not exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each continuing day's violation under this division shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this division shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-77. - Permit required for use of right-of-way. 
(a)  Permit required. Any right-of-way user seeking to place facilities on, in or over a right-of-way or to engage in construction, excavation, and occupy a work area within or upon any right-of-way shall first file an application for a right-of-way permit with the city and shall abide by the terms and provisions of the right-of-way permit and this division pertaining to the use of the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  No application, permit or fee is required of a right-of-way user for: 
a.  Routine maintenance of existing facilities that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in streets of a right-of-way; 
b.  A network provider replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a right-of-way; 
1.  Substantially similar shall mean the replacement or upgrade does not include replacement of an existing pole; and 
2.  The determination of whether a replacement or upgrade is substantially similar may include the location, size, material, quantity, capacity, or other similar characteristic of the existing facilities as approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Permits generally. 
(1)  Permits will be issued in the name of the right-of-way user that will own the facilities. Permits for public infrastructure will be issued in the name of the public infrastructure contractor. 
(2)  Any right-of-way user with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement, or other authorization from the city (grant) to use the rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this division takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant, unless prohibited by law, until the grant expires or until it is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the right-of-way user or as otherwise provided for by law. 
(3)  Construction, excavation, or work area. No right-of-way user shall perform construction, excavation, or occupy a work area larger or at a location different, or for a longer period than that specified in the permit or permit application. If, after construction, excavation, or occupying the work area is commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform construction, excavation, or occupy a work area larger or different area than originally requested under the application or for a longer period of time, the right-of-way user shall notify the city engineer immediately and, within twenty-four (24) hours, shall file a supplementary application for the additional construction, excavation, or occupation of a work area. 
(4)  Permit transferability or assignability. The right-of-way user may subcontract the work to be performed under a permit if the right-of-way user is responsible for the performance of the work under the permit and all insurance and financial security as required in this division. Permits are transferable and assignable upon written notice to the city engineer that the transferee or assignee has posted all required security pursuant to this division. Any transferee or assignee shall be bound by all requirements of the permit and this division. 
(5)  The construction of public infrastructure, excluding franchise utility infrastructure, in new developments is the responsibility of the developer of the land. Ownership of that infrastructure remains with the developer of the land until accepted by the city. 
(6)  Any franchise utility, utility, or public infrastructure contractor performing work on infrastructure that is within a right-of-way, but prior to infrastructure acceptance by the city, shall obtain a permit from the city and permission from the owner of all the infrastructure in the right-of-way. The agency or public infrastructure contractor shall be financially responsible to the owner of the infrastructure to carry out all remedial work necessary to receive acceptance by the city of that infrastructure. This financial obligation shall apply only to the work in the right-of-way done by the franchise utility, utility, or public infrastructure contractor. The city will not accept for dedication public infrastructure if the work performed on that infrastructure is not in accordance with applicable city construction standards. 
(7)  Any right-of-way user found to be conducting any excavation activity within the right-of-way without having first obtained the required permit(s) shall immediately cease all activity (exclusive of actions required to stabilize the area) and be required to obtain a permit before work may be restarted. 
(8)  The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any right-of-way user from knowingly using the rights-of-way unless the agency or public infrastructure contractor has complied with the terms of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-78. - Right-of-way permit application; permit contents. 
(a)  General to all right-of-way permits. 
(1)  Application submissions. Each application for a permit shall be submitted using the required form furnished by the city. Applicant must determine what type of permit is sought and complete the correct application. The city is not responsible for determining that the correct application was completed by the applicant and approval of a permit contrary to the provisions of this division does not create a vested right. 
a.  Drawings. The applicant shall provide detailed drawings when major work such as pole placement, excavations, and installation of facilities of the construction plans in accordance with city requirements. 
b.  Format. The applicant requesting a permit shall provide the city with documentation in the format published by the city prior to the date the permit is submitted. 
c.  Completeness. The application is not complete unless it contains all information required by this division, requested on the application form, and required by any supplemental list of required documentation provided by the city with the application form. 
(2)  No person or right-of-way user shall install facilities or otherwise encroach upon the right-of-way or make a pavement cut or excavate in a right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer, except for an emergency activity or activities exempt from permitting under this division. 
(3)  If construction crosses a Texas Department of Transportation or Railroad Right-of-Way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit or requisite permission from the state, federal government or other appropriate agency at the time of application. 
(4)  The city shall state on the permit the activity for which the permit is issued and any additional restrictions or requirements that have been placed upon the permit besides those incorporated into the permit by this division, city laws, or other law or regulation, as applicable. 
(5)  All construction in the rights-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit issued for the facilities. The city engineer shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as the city engineer may reasonably require ensuring compliance with the permit. 
(6)  A copy of the permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the city engineer always during construction 
(7)  The right-of-way user shall update any new information on permit applications within two (2) business days after any change occurs. 
(8)  Franchise utilities or public infrastructure contractors may apply jointly, in advance, for permits to work in rights-of-way at the same time and place. 
(9)  All permit holders must contact the city engineer at least forty-eight (48) hours before work begins under the permit. 
(10)  An extension to a permit expiration date may be granted by the city engineer for a period reasonable to complete all outstanding work, if requested by the right-of-way user in writing at least five (5) business days prior to the current permit expiration date. Additional extensions of the permit for unforeseen circumstances may be granted at the city engineers discretion. The city engineer may require the immediate backfill and restoration of any excavation within the work area which is outstanding after the extended period, when doing so would safely restore the work area for public use. 
(b)  Types of permits: 
(1)  Construction-related permits. 
a.  A permit is required whenever there is construction within the right-of-way. 
b.  A right-of-way user who undertakes any work adjacent to the right-of-way that will store materials or equipment, cut, break, or otherwise damage the right-of-way shall also obtain a right-of-way permit. 
(2)  Emergency activity. Construction in the right-of-way may commence prior to obtaining a permit if the city engineer or right-of-way user determines a valid need to perform emergency activity. Immediate verbal or written notice, including the reasons for the emergency activity, must be given to the city engineer and city inspector if the emergency activity requires excavation of a right-of-way, impacts vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or would otherwise require a permit to be issued in advance if a similar scope of work were performed under non-emergency circumstances. No later than the second business day following commencement of the emergency activity the right-of-way user shall apply for permitting to the city engineer. 
(c)  Denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit. 
(1)  Denial of a permit. A permit may be denied for any one of the following reasons: 
a.  The proposed construction will substantially interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic and no procedures, or procedures which are inconsistent with this division, have been implemented to minimize the interference. 
b.  The proposed construction will substantially interfere with another activity for which a permit has been issued or will conflict or interfere with existing facilities already in the right-of-way. 
c.  The proposed barricading, channelizing, signing, warning or other traffic control procedures or equipment do not comply with the requirements of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
d.  The construction or the way construction is to be performed will violate city laws or federal and/or state law. 
e.  The right-of-way user requests to cross a city-maintained street by open cut or trench, where in the city engineer's determination, the public interest would be upheld with a less invasive method such as jacking, boring, or tunneling. Such determination may consider, but will not be limited to: 
1.  Prevention of excessive damage to public streets; 
2.  Limiting risk of damage to existing utilities; and 
3.  Maintaining maximum use of the right-of-way for traffic. 
f.  There is a lack of available space as evidenced by the inability to meet safety or distance requirements. 
g.  The right-of-way user: 
1.  Does not have liability insurance as required by this division; 
2.  Has consistently failed to perform in accordance with the requirements of this division; 
3.  Has consistently failed to perform in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit; 
4.  Has failed to furnish all the information required by this division or, except for good cause shown, to file the applications within the time prescribed by this division; 
5.  Has misrepresented or falsified any information in the applications; 
6.  Has failed to comply with the bonds as required in this division; 
7.  Is not in compliance with applicable requirements of an existing permit issued under this division; 
8.  Does not have the appropriate federal and/or state license or other required license for the activity being performed in the rights-of-way; or 
9.  Has not compensated the city, unless the right-of-way user is not legally obligated to compensate the city by contract, by agreement, or by law for using public property. 
(2)  Suspension or revocation of a permit. The city engineer may suspend by stop work order or revoke any or all permits granted to allow work in the rights-of-way on the same grounds on which a permit may be denied or for the following reasons, and subject to the procedural guidelines herein: 
a.  Failing to comply with an order of the city engineer; 
b.  The recognition that a permit was issued in error; 
c.  Failing to comply with restrictions or requirements placed on the permit by the city engineer; 
d.  The city engineer reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of equipment: 
1.  Is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or city property; 
2.  Equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property; and/or 
3.  There is imminent danger to the public; or 
e.  Violating any provision of this division. 
(3)  The city engineer shall provide written notice of a denial, suspension or revocation to the right-of-way user. Construction that is suspended may not resume until the city engineer determines that the right-of-way user has corrected the violation, noncompliance, or hazard that caused the suspension. 
(4)  A permit that was revoked due to failure to comply with an order of the city engineer, failure to comply with the restrictions or requirements placed upon the permit by the city engineer, a violation of this division, or for public health, safety or welfare reasons may be reinstated by the city engineer if the city engineer determines that: 
a.  The right-of-way user has corrected the violation, noncompliance, or hazard that caused the revocation or denial; and 
b.  The health, safety and welfare of the public is not jeopardized by reinstating or issuing the permit. 
(5)  A right-of-way user may appeal a permit denial, suspension, or revocation in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-79. - Fees. 
(a)  Each applicant shall pay to the city fees based upon the city's costs in issuing, processing and verifying applications and inspections of the work area and restoration work. The types of fees are outlined below; however, the amount of the fees will be established by separate ordinance: 
(1)  Permit application fee. Permits shall be issued, or comments provided, within ten (10) business days from the city's receipt of the application. Such fees shall be paid by each applicant with the application. 
(2)  Expedited permit application fee. An expedited permit review, in which the permit is either issued or comments received within two (2) business days, may be requested upon showing of reasonable cause. Expedited permits will not be issued for variance requests. Such fees shall be paid by each applicant with the application. 
(3)  Right-of-way inspection fee. This will be for all construction in the right-of-way. The fee will be accessed based upon the dates indicated on the permit. Such fees shall be paid by the right-of-way user upon issuance of the permit. 
(4)  Overtime fee. Should a right-of-way user request inspection outside of regular business hours (Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.), an overtime fee shall be paid to the city with a minimum charge of four (4) hours. There shall be no right-of-way inspections conducted on city holidays. Overtime work shall be requested no later than noon on Wednesday for Saturday work and a minimum forty-eight (48) hours prior to work Monday through Friday after 5:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m. Payment must be submitted with request for overtime work. No overtime inspections will occur without the city engineer's prior approval. Emergency activities are excluded from the overtime rate. 
(5)  Permit expiration fee. This fee will be charged for any permit that has not been extended before its expiration date or where all construction and restoration of the work area has not been completed prior to the expiration date. 
(6)  Barricade deposit fee. A deposit will be charged for installation of barricades or similar traffic control devices placed in the traveled portion of city streets between curbs on sidewalks and/or alleys to prevent access. Barricade removal shall be completed within three (3) business days from completion of the project to receive the full deposit. If barricades are not removed within three (3) business days, the city will remove the barricades and the deposit will be forfeited. 
(b)  The fees paid for a permit, which is subsequently cancelled, suspended, or revoked by the city engineer or designee, are not refundable. 
(c)  The fees in this section shall apply to all right-of-way users, unless fees are established by federal and/or state law or other agreement. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-80. - Facility size and locations. 
(a)  These provisions apply to all facilities, including those of franchise utilities, unless otherwise addressed in a separate agreement. 
(b)  The city engineer reserves the right, in the permit or otherwise, to restrict or determine the route (pathway) and/or spatial location, whether horizontal, vertical, or depth, of any facility and/or structure or improvement in the right-of-way. The city engineer reserves the right to reserve space for future utilities or public improvement projects. 
(c)  All underground right-of-way user facilities are required to maintain a minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches below top of curb, or thirty (30) inches below the lowest point of the grade of the street surface where there is no curb. If a right-of-way user may encounter a hardship due to this requirement, the right-of-way user may request an exception to the minimum depth requirement in writing and in advance with the application for permit. Any exception granted will be subject to the city engineer's approval or denial with the application, and only applicable to a single issued permit or instance. The city will not be responsible for any damage it may cause to facilities located in the rights-of-way that are not maintained in accordance with these requirements. 
(d)  Any right-of-way user with existing facilities which are less than thirty (30) inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the person performing excavation to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation. 
(e)  All right-of-way user facilities are required to maintain a minimum separation of twenty-four (24) inches from all city utility system facilities. If a right-of-way user may encounter a hardship due to this requirement, the right-of-way user may request a variance to the minimum separation requirement in writing and in advance with the permit application. Any exception granted will be subject to the city engineer's approval or denial with the permit application, and only applicable to a single issued permit. 
(f)  The right-of-way user shall ensure all overhead lines are constructed and maintained so that the minimum clearances follow the National Electrical Safety Code as amended. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from the providers actions or omissions. 
(g)  Preserve sight visibility and access. No facilities shall be located within the vision clearance area. Accessibility to property may not be compromised by facilities except during construction. 
(h)  Temporary utilities. Temporary utilities may be in non-standard locations at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(i)  General construction and maintenance requirements. Facilities and poles shall be constructed and maintained in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a right-of-way by other right-of-way users; 
(3)  Violate applicable codes, statutes, historic preservation laws, or other law; 
(4)  Interfere with the city's public safety infrastructure; 
(5)  Violate or conflict with this division; or 
(6)  Violate the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act and state accessibility standards. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-81. - Variance. 
(a)  A right-of-way user may request a variance from any of the requirements of this division by filing a written request with the city engineer stating the requirement and the basis for the variance. The city engineer may reject incomplete variance requests. The applicant shall bear its own expenses of the application process. 
(b)  Any request for a variance from any right-of-way restoration requirement shall be made in writing, in advance of any contemplated work and shall be accompanied by digitally formatted detailed plans of the substituted reconstruction and/or repair of the work area, if applicable. 
(c)  Any request for a variance from any penalty and/or fee, other than as provided in this division, shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a written detailed request stating the reasons therefore. 
(d)  Any request for a variance from any permit, or any other requirement of this division shall be made in writing, stating in detail all reasons for the requested variance. 
(e)  The city engineer shall grant or deny an application for a variance within ten (10) days of receipt of the application for variance. 
(f)  Denial of the variance may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-82. - Appeals. 
(a)  A right-of-way user that: (i) has been denied registration; (ii) has been denied a permit; (iii) has had a permit revoked; or (iv) believes that fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request as follows: 
(1)  If an applicant desires to appeal a decision, the applicant may file a written notice of appeal with the city engineer, or his designee, within five (5) business days of the date the decision was rendered. The notice must state the alternatives available and routes explored, hardship encountered, cost comparison of other alternatives and a statement of any other significant factors. The city engineer, or his designee, shall provide a written decision within five (5) business days. Failure to render a decision within five (5) business days shall constitute a denial. 
(2)  If a further denial is given, the appellant may thereafter file a written notice of appeal to the city manager within five (5) business days of receipt of the city engineer's written decision. The city manager shall provide a written decision within five (5) business days of receipt of an appeal in accordance with this section. Failure to render a decision within five (5) business days shall constitute a denial. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-83. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Franchise utility or utility applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of the each of the following types of insurance and coverage limits. These insurance policies shall be underwritten by insurance companies with an A.M. Best Rating of A VI or better. 
(1)  Commercial general liability on an occurrence form with minimum limits of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence and ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) aggregate. This coverage shall include the following: 
a.  Products/completed operations to be maintained for one (1) year. 
b.  Personal and advertising injury. 
c.  Owners and contractor's protective liability. 
d.  Explosion, collapse, or underground (XCU) hazards. 
e.  Contractual liability. 
(2)  Automobile liability coverage with a minimum policy limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit. This coverage shall include all owned, hired and non-owned automobiles. 
(3)  Workers compensation and employer's liability coverage. Statutory coverage limits for Coverage A and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) Coverage B employers' liability is required. 
(4)  Pollution liability insurance which provides coverage for sudden and accidental environmental contamination with minimum limits of liability of five million dollars ($5,000,000). 
(b)  Right-of-way users, other than franchise utilities or utilities, applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of insurance for the same types of insurance coverages outlined in subsection (a) above; however, the policy limits under the general liability insurance shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate. All other coverage provisions outlined in subsection (a) above shall apply. 
(c)  The method for proof of insurance is a certified copy of the insurance policy. The franchise utility and utility shall obtain and maintain insurance throughout the time it has facilities in the right-of-way. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city manager determines that changes in law or the claims history of the industry, require adjustment of the coverage. 
(d)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A. Utilities Code § 53.064 and for purposes of this subsection, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the franchise utility or utility in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. The city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the franchise utility or utility in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, certificates of self-insurance must be approved in advance by the city risk manager. 
(e)  The right-of-way user shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section to the city. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, the right-of-way user shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and accomplish the change. 
(f)  The right-of-way user shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city engineer. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval, through the city risk manager. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A right-of-way user shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop which may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify the city. 
(1)  Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect during the period for which a permit shall be issued or the space occupied. Insurance coverage must be available on a "per project" basis. An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the agency or public infrastructure contractor and include the city as an additional insured. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(g)  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city. 
(h)  The right-of-way user shall pay premiums and assessments. A company that issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a right-of-way user must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(i)  Each policy must include a provision that requires the insurance company to notify the city in writing at least thirty (30) calendar days before canceling or failing to renew the policy or before reducing policy limits or coverages. 
(j)  Each franchise utility must comply with the insurance requirements in this section, unless the franchise utility's current franchise or license agreement with the city specifically addresses insurance requirements, in which case the franchise or license agreement shall control. 
(k)  The insurance requirements may be met by a franchise utility with a current franchise license, a franchise ordinance issued by the city, or license if their current franchise or license adequately provides for insurance and bonds and provides an indemnity in favor of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-84. - Liability of right-of-way user. 
To the extent allowed by law, the right-of-way user shall be liable to the city for any damage or loss occasioned by any act and/or omission occurring in connection with its construction, and subject to state law, the right-of-way user shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers may be subjected for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act and/or omission. The city shall promptly notify a right-of-way user, at the address set forth in the permit, or last known address, of any claim, suit or demand served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the right-of-way user in connection with its construction. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-85. - Indemnification. 
(a)  To the extent authorized by law, each right-of-way user placing facilities in the rights-of-way shall indemnify, and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless from and against all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought that is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused solely by the negligent act, error, or omission of the right-of-way user or its any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor, while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in a right-of-way. 
(b)  The indemnity provided by this subsection does not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, contractors, or subcontractors. If a right-of-way user and the city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of state without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law and without waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. 
(c)  This section is solely for the benefit of the city and the right-of-way user and does not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-86. - Bonds. 
(a)  The franchise utility, utility, or public infrastructure contractor, shall, provide performance, payment, and maintenance bonds for the construction anticipated to be performed in the right-of-way with the permit. Each bond shall be in the amount of the estimated costs to restore the right-of-way for the construction anticipated to be done with the permit. The performance bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the work in the rights-of-way. The payment bond shall be conditioned upon payment of all persons supplying labor or furnishing materials for said work. The maintenance bond shall guarantee the construction for two (2) years from the date of its completion. Each bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas and acceptable to the city. 
(b)  Each year, the franchise utility, utility, or public infrastructure contractor shall, provide performance, payment, and maintenance bonds for the construction anticipated to be performed in the right-of-way in the upcoming year. Each bond shall be in the amount of the estimated costs to restore the rights-of-way for the construction anticipated to be done in that year. The performance bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the work in the rights-of-way. The payment bond shall be conditioned upon payment of all persons supplying labor or furnishing materials for said work. The maintenance bond shall guarantee the construction for two (2) years from the date of its completion. Each bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas and acceptable to the city. 
(c)  The right-of-way user by acceptance of the permit, expressly guarantees complete performance of the work affecting the city's right-of-way in a good and workmanlike manner acceptable to the city and warrants and guarantees all such work done for a period of two (2) years after the date of acceptance and agrees to maintain upon demand and to make all necessary repairs during the two-year period. This maintenance bond shall include all repairs and actions needed because of: 
(1)  Defects in workmanship; 
(2)  Settling of backfill or excavations; 
(3)  Any unauthorized deviations from the approved plans and specifications; 
(4)  Failure to barricade; 
(5)  Failure to clean up during and after performance of the work; 
(6)  Restoration of improvements including, but not limited to, landscaping and irrigation; or 
(7)  Any other violation of this division or the ordinances of the city. 
(d)  The two-year maintenance period shall run from the date of the city's acceptance of the construction which shall be the date of the letter of acceptance issued by the city to the right-of-way user. If repairs are required during the two-year warranty period, those repairs need only be warranted until the end of the initial two-year period starting with the date of acceptance. It is not necessary that a new two-year warranty be provided for subsequent repairs after acceptance. 
(e)  At any time prior to completion of the two-year warranty period, the city may notify the right-of-way user of any needed repairs. Such repairs shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours if the defects are determined by the city to be an imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. Non-emergency repairs shall be completed within fifteen (15) calendar days after notice. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-87. - Registration. 
(a)  All right-of-way users must register with the city and shall report any changes in registration information within thirty (30) days of such change, and prior to applying for a right-of-way permit after any change in registration information. No right-of-way user shall be authorized to utilize the right-of-way in any capacity or manner without registering and obtaining the necessary permit from the city. Registration shall be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The registration must be on a form furnished by the city. The form must be filled out completely and accurately. Any omissions or inaccuracies on the form may be cause for denial of the registration at the city's discretion; 
(2)  The name of the right-of-way user that owns the facilities, including any business name, assumed name, or trade name; 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number, and email address of officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration information; 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number, and email address of the local representative of the right-of-way user who shall always be available to act on behalf of the right-of-way user in the event of an emergency; 
(5)  If applicable, certification number(s) issued by public utilities commission, license number(s) issued by Federal Communications Commission, municipal ordinance, or similar governing entity granting formal accreditation regarding a right-of-way users capacity to operate in public rights-of-way; 
(6)  General description of activities to be provided; 
(7)  Insurance and bonding information as required; 
(8)  Applicable registration fees. 
(b)  No right-of-way user shall be authorized to use the right-of-way without registering with the city and obtaining any necessary permit(s). A right-of-way user shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city due to the failure to provide any information to the city required for registration. 
(c)  A right-of-way user must remain in good standing with the registration requirements and city laws to continue to apply for permits and work within the rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-88. - Plans of record. 
(a)  Any franchise utility, utility, certificated telecommunications provider, or network provider with facilities in the rights-of-way shall submit plans of record in accordance with the requirements outlined in section 26-247, chapter 26, of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  On or before January 31 of each calendar year following the initial submittal of its plans of record, an agency or network provider shall provide to the city engineer plans of record that show all installations of new facilities, and all changes, additions, abandonments, and relocations relating to existing facilities completed in the previous calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-89. - General rights-of-way use and construction. 
(a)  Responsibility for employees, courtesy and drug policy. Right-of-way users shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of their employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, and subcontractors in connection with the installations of facilities in the right-of-way, as if such acts or omissions were right-of-way users acts or omissions. Work in the rights-of-way shall be done in a manner that causes the least interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and residents. Citizen satisfaction must be a priority in using the rights-of-way. Right-of-way users shall train their employees to be customer service-oriented and to positively and politely interact with citizens when dealing with issues pertaining to its facilities in the right-of-way. Employees shall be clean, courteous, efficient, and neat in appearance and committed to offering the highest quality of interaction with the public. If, in the opinion of the city manager, the employee is not interacting in a positive and polite manner with citizens, he or she shall request that the right-of-way user take all remedial steps to conform to these standards. It is the policy of the city to achieve a drug-free workforce and workplace. The manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, sale, or use of illegal drugs or alcohol by right-of-way users employees, contractors, subcontractors, or vendors while on rights-of-way is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  Minimal interference. Right-of-way user's facilities shall be constructed or maintained in such a manner as not to interfere with sewers, water pipes, or any other property of the city, or with any other pipes, wires, conduits, pedestals, structures, or other facilities that may have been laid in the rights-of-way by, or under, the city's authority. The right-of-way user's facilities shall be located, erected, and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with improvements the city may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the rights-of-way or other public property or unjustly interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public during the construction, repair, operation, or removal thereof, and shall endeavor to not obstruct or impede traffic. The right-of-way user shall not cause any interference with city's public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other safety communications components. 
(c)  Responsibilities under permit; location of facilities. 
(1)  A permit does not relieve a right-of-way user of the responsibility to coordinate with other utilities and property owners, and to protect existing facilities. A right-of-way user working in the right-of-way is responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the right-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of a remote records system such as geographic information systems or the plans of record does not satisfy this requirement. 
(2)  In performing location of facilities in the rights-of-way in preparation for construction under a permit, a right-of-way user shall compile all information obtained regarding its or any other facilities in the rights-of-way related to a particular permit and shall make that information available to the city in a written and verified format acceptable to the city engineer. 
a.  Protection of utilities. Before beginning excavation in any right-of-way, a right-of-way user shall contact the Texas One-Call System or any other company operating under the One-Call Statute and, to the extent required by V.T.C.A. Utilities Code Ch. 251, make inquiries of all ditch companies, utility companies, districts, local government departments, and all other agencies that might have facilities in the work area to determine possible conflicts. Field locations shall be marked prior to commencing work. The right-of-way user shall support and protect all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus that may be affected by the work from damage during construction or settlement of trenches after construction. 
b.  A person shall only use a water-based paint in the right-of-way to mark the location of existing underground utilities. 
(d)  Underground construction; use by city. Should the city desire to place its own facilities in trenches or bores opened by the right-of-way user, the right-of-way user shall cooperate with the city in any construction by the right-of-way user that involves trenching or boring, provided that the city has first notified the right-of-way user in some manner that it is interested in sharing the trenches or bores in the area in which the right-of-way user's construction is occurring. The right-of-way user shall allow the city to place its facilities in the right-of-way user's trenches and bores, provided the city incurs any incremental increase in cost of the trenching and boring. The city shall be responsible for maintaining its respective facilities buried in the right-of-way user's trenches and bores under this paragraph. 
(e)  Joint trenching. The rights-of-way have a limited capacity for containing facilities. The city engineer may require a right-of-way user to share trench space to minimize the disruption of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(1)  All facilities shall meet any applicable local, state, and federal clearance and other safety requirements, be adequately grounded and anchored, and meet the provisions of any contracts executed between right-of-way user and the other joint user. Right-of-way user, as owner of the structure for collocation, may, at its option, correct any attachment deficiencies and charge the joint user for its costs. 
(2)  Joint trenching with the city's electric utility shall adhere to its guidelines for gas, communications and electric trench requirements. 
(f)  Excavation safety. The excavation safety plan shall be designed in conformance with federal and/or state law and Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards and regulations. 
(g)  Erosion control. The right-of-way user shall be responsible for storm water management erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines. The SWPPP shall be in accordance with city's standard construction specification documents. 
(h)  Electrical supply. Right-of-way users are responsible for obtaining any required electrical power services to their facilities. The city shall not be liable for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the facilities, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the facilities or the act or omission of any other tenant of the structure or user of the right-of-way, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city. Fixed generators and back-up generators are prohibited in the right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-90. - Protection of high-risk mains. 
The integrity of the city's public infrastructure system for treatment and delivery and potable water must be preserved and protected by all right-of-way users. Public health, safety, and welfare is at risk when damages to water and sewer mains occur; particularly to high-risk mains. Any longitudinal installation of facilities within four (4) feet of a high-risk main in rights-of-way may be required by the city engineer to be installed by open excavation, instead of by bore, to assure the protection of the city's water and sewer system. The city has available mapping that identifies high-risk mains for quick reference, before they are field located. The right-of-way user is responsible for obtaining, field verifying, and using this information in the design of its new facilities. When boring within four (4) feet of a high-risk main is acceptable to the city engineer, a minimally invasive process to core the street and visibly locate a high-risk main is mandatory. Section 25-92 outlines scheduling restrictions and allowable methods for bores in in proximity to high-risk mains, where approved in advance by the city engineer. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-91. - Joint planning and construction; coordination of excavations. 
(a)  Excavations in rights-of-way disrupt and interfere with the public use of the city streets and damage the pavement and landscaping. The purpose of this section is to reduce this disruption, interference and damage by promoting better coordination among right-of-way users making excavations in rights-of-way and between these right-of-way users and the city. Better coordination will assist in minimizing the number of excavations being made wherever feasible and will ensure the excavations in rights-of-way are, to the maximum extent possible, performed before, rather than after, the reconstruction of the streets by the city. 
(b)  Utility coordination meeting. 
(1)  The city will hold a utility coordination meeting on a monthly basis. The purpose of the meeting is for the city to inform right-of-way users of proposed and current capital improvement projects in the City of Denton and for the right-of-way user to inform each other and the city of current and future projects. Each right-of-way user is encouraged to attend and participate in the meetings of the city, of which the right-of-way user will be made aware. 
(2)  The city engineer will notify the affected right-of-way user at least six (6) months before construction will start on a city project. Preliminary plans will be provided to the affected right-of-way user at least four (4) months before the project is to start construction. Final plans will be provided to the affected right-of-way user at least two (2) months before the project is to start construction. 
(3)  Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to joint trench or share bores or cuts, the right-of-way user shall work with other right-of-way users to reduce the number of cuts to paved surfaces and minimize interference to the public use of right-of-way within the city. 
(c)  Excavation master plan. In addition to participating in utility coordination meetings, any right-of-way user owning, operating or installing facilities in rights-of-way, providing water, sewer, gas, electric, communication, video, or other utility services, shall meet annually with the city engineer, at the city engineer's request, to discuss the right-of-way user's excavation master plan. At such meeting, to the extent not already in possession of the city, right-of-way user should submit documentation, in a form requested by the city engineer, showing the location of the right-of-way user's existing facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(1)  Right-of-way user shall discuss with the city engineer its excavation master plan and identify planned major excavation work in the city. The city engineer may make his own record on a map, drawing, or other documentation of each right-of-way user's planned major excavation work in the city; provided, however, that no such document prepared by the city engineer shall identify the entity, or the planned major excavation work of that particular entity. 
(2)  Between the annual meeting to discuss planned major excavation work, right-of-way user shall inform the city engineer of any substantial changes in the planned major excavation work discussed at the annual meeting. The city will not preclude a right-of-way user from obtaining a permit for a project that was inadvertently excluded from the agency's, network provider's or public infrastructure contractor's excavation master plan or was unknown at the time the plan was created. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-92. - Minimizing the impacts of work in the rights-of-way. 
(a)  Noise, dust, debris, hours of work. Each right-of-way user shall conduct work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. In the performance of the work, the right-of-way user shall take appropriate measures to reduce noise, dust, and unsightly debris. No excavation work shall be done between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except with the written permission of the city engineer, or in case of an emergency activity. Bore time for any work area within four (4) feet of any high-risk main is further restricted to the following schedule: 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to noon on Friday and no bore on Saturday and Sunday without prior written approval of the city engineer, a ten-business day advance written notification to the facility owner, and payment of applicable overtime fees established. Missiles are not considered to be an acceptable directional boring method and are not allowed unless otherwise approved in writing by the city engineer in advance. City may grant an exception to the operating hours if necessary. 
(b)  Trash and construction materials. Each right-of-way user shall maintain the work area so that: 
(1)  Trash and construction materials are contained so that they are not blown off the construction site, or viewed as litter within the work area itself; 
(2)  Trash is removed from a construction site for proper disposal off-site often enough so that it does not become a health, fire, or safety hazard; and 
(3)  Trash dumpsters and storage or construction trailers are not placed in the street without written approval of the city engineer. 
(c)  Deposit of dirt and material on streets. Each right-of-way user shall eliminate the tracking of mud or debris upon any street or sidewalk. Equipment and trucks used during construction, excavation, or occupying a work area shall be cleaned of mud and debris prior to leaving any work site. 
(d)  Protection of trees and landscaping. Each right-of-way user shall protect trees, landscape, and landscape features as required by the city engineer and shall be responsible for supplemental maintenance and watering during construction and until restoration is complete. All protective measures shall be provided at the expense of the right-of-way user. When directed by the city engineer, a right-of-way user shall trim trees, brush, or other landscaping overhanging facilities in a right-of-way under the supervision and direction of the city. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from right-of-way users actions under this section. 
(1)  Right-of-way users shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging rights-of-way (including sidewalks and driveways), after providing written notice to affected customers, so as to prevent the branches of the trees from coming into contact with the wires and cables of the provider, provided that all trimming is done in compliance with the National Electric Safety Code and city Code provisions, and at no expense to the city. 
(e)  Protection of paved surfaces from equipment damage. Backhoe equipment outriggers shall be fitted with rubber pads whenever outriggers are placed on any paved surface. Tracked vehicles with grousers are not permitted on paved surfaces unless specific precautions are taken to protect the surface. A right-of-way user shall be responsible for any damage caused to the pavement by the operation of such equipment and shall repair such surfaces. Failure to promptly complete required repairs, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way that may have been disturbed by the right-of-way user, and the cost shall be charged to the right-of-way user. 
(f)  Protection of property. Each right-of-way user, at its own expense, shall protect from injury any rights-of-way and adjoining property by providing trench protection and other measures necessary to shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property resulting from failure to properly protect such property and carry out work in the rights-of-way. 
(g)  Clean-up. As the work progresses, all rights-of-way and private property shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess dirt, rock, and other debris. All clean-up operations shall be done at the expense of the right-of-way user. Right-of-way user shall restore the work area to its original condition. All restoration work must be completed within twenty (20) business days following the date of substantial completion of the work in the right-of-way. Such clean-up and restoration shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city engineer. 
(h)  Vehicle parking. Each right-of-way user shall make provisions for their employee and construction vehicle parking so that neighborhood parking and/or alternative access necessary for properties adjacent to a work area is always available. 
(i)  Walkways. Each right-of-way user shall maintain an adequate and safe unobstructed walkway around the work area or blocked sidewalk in conformance with City Code, the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and Americans with Disabilities Act standards; as periodically revised. 
(j)  Graffiti abatement. As soon as practical, but not later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date right-of-way user receives notice thereof, the right-of-way user, shall remove all graffiti on any of its facilities located in the right-of-way. The foregoing shall not relieve the right-of-way user from complying with any city graffiti or visual blight ordinance or regulation. 
(k)  Ownership. No part of any facilities placed on the right-of-way pursuant to this division will become or be considered by the city as being affixed to or a part of, the right-of-way, except for facilities accepted as city facilities by the city engineer in writing. All other facilities placed in the right-of-way pursuant to this division will be and remain the property of the agency and may be removed by the agency at any time, provided the agency shall obtain permits or give notice as required by this division. 
(l)  Notifications. 
(1)  Once a permit is issued, the right-of-way user shall be required to coordinate all notification and construction activities with the city inspector after permit issuance, within the timeframes specified on the permit. 
(2)  Affected landowners: All landowners and residents that are affected and directly adjacent to the construction must be notified by the right-of-way user that construction will begin at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the beginning of construction. The city engineer may require notification of additional property owners/residents, and/or notification further in advance, depending on the scope, type, location or nature of the construction. 
(3)  General public: In addition to notice required for affected landowners, if in the opinion of the city engineer, the construction will have a regional impact including but not limited to disruption of traffic on an arterial or collector street, the right-of-way user may be required to give longer than forty-eight (48) hours' notice to the city inspector so that the proposed construction may be posted for advance notice to the public and emergency services personnel in on the city website, Denton Record Chronicle, DTV, or similar means of broadcast prior to the start of construction. 
(m)  Traffic control plan. All work within the right-of-way impacting the intended use will require a detailed traffic control plan approved by the city engineer. Traffic control plans must comply with the requirements in the Right-of-Way Management Manual and Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
(1)  The right-of-way user shall provide the city engineer fifteen (15) days written notice before the closure of any arterial streets, seven (7) days written notice before closure of any local street, and twenty-one (21) days written notice before closure of any other highway, street, or interruption in traffic flow. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-93. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  City construction standards. All construction under this division shall be done in accordance with the current city construction standards and the city's electric utility's construction standards for joint use. 
(b)  All construction must be done in a good and workmanlike manner and in faithful and strict compliance with the permit, this ordinance, other city ordinances, and regulations promulgated by the city relating to construction within the right-of-way. The right-of-way user shall maintain the work area in a manner that avoids health hazards, and hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic until the right-of-way is permanently restored. Specific construction requirements are contained in the city construction standards. 
(c)  A copy of the permit and associated plans, as pre-reviewed and cleared for construction by the city engineer, shall always be present at the work area and made available for inspection by the city when construction or installation work is occurring. 
(d)  Existing facility locates. Prior to construction, the right-of-way user shall obtain utility locates by contacting the Texas Excavation Safety System at 1-800-344-8377 or online at http://www.digtess.com. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-94. - Emergency activity. 
Construction in the right-of-way may commence prior to obtaining a permit if the city engineer or right-of-way user determines a valid need to perform an emergency activity, as defined in this division. Immediate verbal or written notice, including the reasons for the emergency activity, must be given to the city engineer and city inspector if the emergency activity requires excavation of any public street, impacts vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a non-residential street, or would otherwise require a permit to be issued in advance if a similar scope of work were performed under non-emergency circumstances. No later than the second business day following commencement of any emergency activity the right-of-way user shall apply for permitting to the city engineer. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-95. - Standards for repair and restoration. 
(a)  Right-of-way user responsibility. The right-of-way user shall be fully responsible for the cost and actual repairs and restoration of all work in the rights-of-way. The right-of-way user shall do all construction in conformance with any and all Denton Design Criteria or city construction standards, or other regulations. All restoration shall result in a work area condition equal to or better than the condition in which the work area existed prior to construction. In addition to the regulations, specifications, and standards referred to in subsection (a), the following provisions shall apply to work in the rights-of-way of within the city: 
(1)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer and the property owner. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work or better by sodding, as directed by the city engineer; 
b.  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
c.  Backfilling of all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes which must be done within seven (7) business days after excavation of the bore pits, potholes, trenches or other holes, unless other an extended timeframe and safety requirements are approved by the city engineer in advance; 
d.  Restoration of work area to city construction standards; 
e.  Restoration of all landscaping, trees, shrubs, and sprinkler systems; and 
f.  Repairing and replacing existing erosion control devices that have been damaged or destroyed during the work. 
(2)  All locate flags placed in the work area at the right-of-way user's request shall be removed during the clean-up process by the right-of-way user at the completion of the work. 
(3)  Restoration must be made in a timely manner. If restoration is not satisfactory and/or is not performed within the agreed upon timeframe, all work in progress, except that related to the outstanding restoration, including all other work areas previously permitted but not complete, may be halted and a hold may be placed on any permits not approved until all restoration is complete, or the city engineer may complete the work and bill the right-of-way user for all actual direct and indirect costs of the repairs performed by the city. 
(4)  Emergency activity during construction. If the city determines during its regular maintenance, construction, or any similar public improvement or development project, that an emergency repair to another right-of-way user's facilities within the right-of-way is necessary to correct a situation that is hazardous to the public, the city engineer shall immediately notify the right-of-way user. If the right-of-way user does not commence the emergency repair within twenty-four (24) hours, the city may, at its sole discretion, cause performance of such emergency repair work as is necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for the actual direct and indirect cost of the work necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The right-of-way user shall maintain the emergency repair for the work area of their emergency activity as directed by the city engineer until the right-of-way user completes construction and final repairs. 
(5)  Barricades, signage, and other traffic control devices shall be removed from the work area, following completion of the work, in a timely manner. 
(6)  Settling of backfill. 
a.  The city shall notify the permittee in writing if the backfill on a permitted pavement cut or excavation settles or shows any other signs of damage not attributable to the reasonable usage and expected wear of the work area at any time during the two-year maintenance period, including the area within three foot feet beyond the utility patch in any horizontal direction. Upon notification, the permittee shall commence repair work within ten (10) days and notify the city a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours in advance of commencement of the repair work. If the repair work is not commenced within ten (10) days, the repair work may be performed by the city at the right-of-way user's expense. 
b.  The city shall notify the permittee in writing if the backfill on a permitted pavement cut or excavation settles at any time during the two-year maintenance period. Upon notification, the permittee shall commence repair work within ten (10) days and notify the city forty-eight (48) hours in advance of commencement of the repair work. If the repair work is not commenced within ten (10) days, the repair work may be performed by the city at the right-of-way user's expense. 
c.  Failure to repair or restore: Upon failure of the permittee to perform any such repair or restoration work described in this division, the city may repair such portion of the right-of-way as may be required. The permittee or right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for the actual direct and indirect costs of the repair work. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-96. - Tests and inspections. 
(a)  Right-of-way user shall give the city engineer timely notice of readiness of the work area for all required inspections, tests, or approvals and shall cooperate with inspection and testing personnel to facilitate required inspections or tests. 
(b)  Right-of-way user shall be responsible for arranging, obtaining, and payment of all costs in connection with any inspections, tests, re-tests, or approvals required for city's acceptance of materials or equipment to be incorporated in the work area. 
(c)  The city may require testing of materials used in construction in the right-of-way to determine conformance to required specifications, including, but not limited to, compaction tests on backfill materials, subgrade, aggregate base course, concrete (concrete pavement), asphaltic concrete (asphalt pavement) and other construction materials as deemed necessary by the city engineer. The right-of-way user is responsible for all costs associated with the testing necessary in accordance with city construction standards. 
(d)  If any construction that is to be inspected, tested, or approved is covered by right-of-way user without written concurrence of the city engineer or city inspector, right-of-way user shall, if requested by city engineer, uncover such construction to complete the outstanding inspection, testing, observation or approval. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-97. - Relocation of facilities for public improvements. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, water, and other pipelines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes in aerial facilities in, across, along, over, or under a public street, alley, or rights-of-way occupied by an right-of-way user, and to change the curb, sidewalks, or the grade of streets. 
(b)  The right-of-way user must relocate its facilities at its own expense, in a timely manner, and prior to the start of construction of a city project. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject the right-of-way user to the enforcement provisions contained herein. 
(c)  A permit will be required when a right-of-way user makes facility adjustments in preparation for city projects, unless the adjustments are exempt under section 25-77(b). 
(d)  If the right-of-way user fails to remove or relocate its facilities as requested within ninety (90) calendar days of receipt of the final plans and proof of secured right-of-way, then the city shall be entitled to remove the facilities at the sole cost and expense of the right-of-way user without further notice. Right-of-way user, agency, or network provider shall, within thirty (30) calendar days following issuance of removal (including, without limitation, overhead and storage expenses) of the facilities reimburse the city for its actual direct and indirect cost of the removal or relocation work. A hold may be placed on any pending applications for a permit not yet issued to the right-of-way user until payment is received. 
(e)  The city shall not require right-of-way user to remove facilities entirely from a street, sidewalk, curb, alley, highway, or public way unless suitable alternatives are available for relocation of its facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-98. - Abandonment and removal of facilities. 
(a)  Any right-of-way user that intends to discontinue use of or abandon any facilities within the public rights-of-way shall notify the city engineer in writing of the intent to discontinue use. Such notice shall describe the facilities for which the use is to be discontinued, including the address and GPS coordinates of any pole, a date of discontinuance of use, which date shall not be less than thirty (30) calendar days from the date such notice is submitted to the city engineer. Upon receipt of notice of discontinuance of use, the city shall have a right of first refusal to acquire right-of-way user's facilities with the cost for such facilities to be negotiated by the city and the right-of-way user. 
(b)  Any right-of-way user shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove or relocate its facilities if ordered to do so by the city engineer pursuant to this division. The right-of-way user shall reimburse city for the city's actual costs of removal of facilities if agency or network provider fails to promptly disconnect, remove and relocate its facilities. Payment must be made within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of an invoice for the actual costs from the city. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from the city's actions under this section. 
(c)  The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by the right-of-way user for facilities or related ground equipment that have been removed. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-99. - Certified telecommunications providers (CTP). 
(a)  Authority required/nonexclusive use. A CTP must provide evidence that the CTP has acquired authorization from the state public utility commission pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use right-of-way. The CTP's right to use and occupy the right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its right-of-way, based on all applicable federal and/or state laws. 
(b)  Transfer and notice. A CTP shall notify the city engineer of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a CTP's business within thirty (30) days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A CTP shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the city engineer always during which the CTP uses the right-of-way. 
(c)  Exemption from fees. Other than the fee authorized by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 283.056, CTPs are exempted from any additional fees related to the use of the city's rights-of-way. 
(d)  Waiver of bonds. Unless determined otherwise by the city engineer, a CTP will be exempt from the bonding requirements of this division, however, in the event that the city engineer determines, based upon reasonable grounds, that a bond is necessary to protect the public assets, and/or the health and safety of the public, then the city engineer may require that a CTP post a reasonable bond not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Factors to be considered in determining reasonable grounds may include, but are not limited to, a conviction for violation of this division, a general pattern of substandard adherence to the provisions of this division or the failure to comply with this article. If three (3) years pass from the date that the city engineer requires a bond of a CTP and it has not been necessary for the city to seek performance under the bond, then a bond will no longer be required pursuant to this division. 
(e)  Indemnity. A CTP shall indemnify the city as specified by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 283.057, as amended. A CTP shall be exempt from all indemnity requirements of this division that are inconsistent with V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 283.057, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 25-100. - Network providers. 
(a)  Authority required/nonexclusive use. A network provider must provide evidence that the network provider has acquired all required authorization pursuant to federal and/or state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use the right-of-way. The network provider's right to use and occupy the right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its rights-of-way, based on V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 284 and all other federal and/or state laws. 
(b)  Transfer and notice. A network provider shall notify the city engineer of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a network provider's business within thirty (30) days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A network provider shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the city engineer always during which the network provider uses the right-of-way. 
(c)  Indemnity. A network provider shall indemnify the city as specified by Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(d)  Compliance with city's design manual. A network provider shall comply with the city's wireless services (Small Cells/DAS) design manual, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § I, 11-19-19)  
Secs. 25-101—25-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-2439 , § II, adopted November 19, 2019, repealed Div. 4, which pertained to barricading of construction and public rights-of-way and derived from §§ 21-55—21-59 of the 1966 Code. 
 
Secs. 25-121—25-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Cemeteries, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 711.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 25-156. - City cemeteries designated. 
The city cemeteries shall be the Oakwood Cemetery and the I.O.O.F. Cemetery, and the burial of a human corpse in any place in the city other than in an approved cemetery is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1)  
Sec. 25-157. - Cemeteries closed during certain hours. 
The city cemeteries shall be closed to the public from 9:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. the following morning. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9)  
Sec. 25-158. - Platting and sale of lots or blocks. 
(a)  Platting. Oakwood and I.O.O.F. Cemeteries shall be platted into lots and blocks by the director of parks and recreation, who shall prepare, maintain and keep in his office a plat of the cemeteries as a public record. 
(b)  Sale of lots or blocks. Such lots and blocks shall be sold for cash by the City of Denton Parks and Recreation Department at process established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  Execution of deed. The deed of conveyance of any such lot or block shall be executed by the city manager or his designee, and all such lots and blocks shall be sold in strict accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  Permission for buying or selling. No lot or block in either of such cemeteries shall be bought or sold without written permission from the director of parks and recreation, and all titles to such lots or blocks shall pass through the city. 
(e)  Recording fee. There shall be a recording fee, as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, for recording any change in title or ownership in any lot or block in either of the cemeteries after the initial conveyance of the lot or block by the city. 
(f)  Permit fees. Fees for permits for concrete work and interments shall be established by the city council and are on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(g)  Infant lots. Each infant lot or space shall be in designated areas at I.O.O.F. and Oakwood Cemeteries. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2; Ord. No. 90-144, § I, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 2009-238, § 1, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-159. - Payment for lots or blocks required prior to interment. 
No interment in the cemetery shall be made on any lot or block unless the payments have been made prior to the parks and recreation director. 
(Code 1966 § 6-3; Ord. No. 2009-238, § 2, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-160. - Interments. 
(a)  Permits. An application for burial must be filed with the director of parks and recreation and a special permit in writing shall be obtained for all interments. A fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary shall be paid for each permit issued under the terms of this section. Any permit obtained after the burial shall be assessed a late fee as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  Location of site. When an interment is to be made, the owner of the lot or his agent shall locate the site of the grave (by Block, Section and Grave at Oakwood, or Division, Block, Grave at I.O.O.F.) on the plat book in the office of the Parks and Recreation Department at 321 E. McKinney Street, and the city shall not be responsible for errors in location. 
(c)  Permit for grave digging services. No person shall perform any grave digging services in cemeteries owned and operated by the city without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section. Any person desiring to dig graves in the city cemeteries shall file with the director of parks and recreation a corporate surety bond payable to the city in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned that the principal shall well and truly perform all contracts entered into by him for the opening and closing of graves in the city cemeteries and conditioned further that the principal shall pay any and all damages to the city or any third party incurred because of such service. 
(d)  Twenty-four-hour notice required. A twenty-four-hour notice to the director of parks and recreation shall be required for the preparation of a grave for burial. 
(e)  Grave depth. All graves shall be excavated to a depth which will permit a minimum of eighteen (18) inches between the top of the permanent-type container and the ground surface. 
(f)  Grave backfilling. All graves shall be backfilled and force-settled by hydraulics or mechanical means to the satisfaction of the parks and recreation department. 
(g)  Permanent containers. All interments shall be made in a permanent-type concrete box, concrete vault or metal vault which will prevent settling and collapse of grave sites. Concrete boxes and vaults shall be reinforced with wire mesh and be a minimum of one and one-half (1½) inches thick. Metal vaults shall be a minimum of twelve-gauge thickness. 
(h)  Charge by owner prohibited. No owner of any lot or block shall charge for any interment made thereon. 
(Code 1966, § 6-4; Ord. No. 2009-238, § 3, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-161. - Concrete work. 
(a)  Permit required. Prior to performing any work, a person desiring to erect monuments or tombstones or perform concrete work in the city cemeteries shall first obtain a written permit from the director of parks and recreation, and shall meet with an agent of the city to locate the gravesite where the stone is being constructed. The person performing the work must comply with all rules, specifications and requirements of the city in regard to such cemeteries. 
(b)  Fee. A fee as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary shall be paid for each permit issued under the terms of this section. Any permit obtained after the monument or tombstone has been erected or the concrete work has been done shall be assessed a late fee as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  Bond. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the applicant shall file with the director of parks and recreation a corporate surety bond payable to the city in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that the principal shall well and truly perform all contracts entered into by him for the erection of monuments or tombstones or the performance of concrete work in the city cemeteries and conditioned further that the principal shall pay any and all damages to the city or any third party incurred because of the erection of monuments and tombstones or the performance of concrete work in the city cemeteries by the principal. 
(d)  Performance of work. Concrete for use on any lot or block shall be mixed and prepared in the streets of the city cemeteries and the person performing such work shall, upon completion, immediately remove all remaining sand, gravel, tools and other equipment from the cemeteries and leave the streets in the same condition as before the work was performed and, in addition, shall thoroughly clean the lot or block upon which such work was done of all trash or litter and remove the trash or litter from the cemeteries. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6; Ord. No. 2009-238, § 4, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-162. - Construction prohibited. 
No construction of any nature or kind, such as curbing, fencing, coping or enclosure of any kind, whether of vegetation or construction, around any block or lot within the cemeteries will be permitted. No reconstruction of any of the existing items mentioned in this section shall be permitted, except monuments and tombstones. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7(a))  
Sec. 25-163. - Granite, bricks, stones and walkways. 
No granite, bricks, stones, wood, concrete, cornerstones or any kind of artificial walkways or walks will be permitted on or adjoining lots in the cemeteries, except such walkways or walks as may have been provided or will be provided in the cemeteries by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7(b))  
Sec. 25-164. - Monuments, markers and tombstones. 
(a)  Authority to inspect. The city shall have the right to inspect all memorials before the same are placed on the foundations thereof, and may refuse the placing of any memorial on such foundation if the agent of the City of Denton finds that such memorial is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this section or that the workmanship has not been done in a skillful, workmanlike manner. 
(b)  Responsibility. Dealers or contractors who erect, install, construct or deliver memorials within the cemetery shall be responsible for the compliance with the provisions of this section and specifications. 
(c)  Authority to require removal and/or replacement. The city shall have the authority to require removal and replacement of any memorial which is erected, installed, damaged or constructed in a manner that is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this section or that the workmanship has not been done in a skillful, workmanlike manner. 
(d)  Temporary grave marker. At the time of interment a temporary grave marker must be placed. The marker should include the name, date of birth and date of death of the deceased, and the name of the funeral home. Within one year of interment the temporary marker must be replaced with a permanent monument in compliance with all the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Specifications. All monuments and tombstones shall be set in concrete on a four-inch-thick concrete foundation which shall extend three (3) inches beyond all sides of grave markers. 
(1)  Monuments can be upright: One (1) marker per grave not to exceed forty-two (42) inches in width for a single lot and not to exceed ninety (90) inches in width for a double lot. 
(2)  All monuments and markers at the head of a space shall consist of granite or marble except in those instances when existing monuments on spaces are being matched or duplicated. All markers must be centered on the end of the gravesite and in line with existing markers. 
(3)  No foot markers allowed except for veteran markers. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7(c); Ord. No. 2009-238, § 5, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-165. - Lettering on monuments in Oakwood Cemetery. 
All lettering on tombstones or monuments in the Oakwood Cemetery shall be on the east side of such monuments or tombstones in spaces one (1) through five (5) in any block and shall be on the west sides of such monuments or tombstones in spaces six (6) through ten (10) in any block. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7(d); Ord. No. 2009-238, § 6, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-166. - Lettering on monuments in I.O.O.F. Cemetery. 
All lettering on tombstones or monuments in the I.O.O.F. Cemetery shall be on the east side of such monuments in spaces one (1) through five (5) in any block and shall be on the west sides of such monuments or tombstones in spaces six (6) through ten (10) in any block. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7(e); Ord. No. 2009-238, § 7, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-167. - Grade level. 
All graves will be maintained at the same grade level as the surface of the ground surrounding the lot, and under no circumstances will the grave be covered with a concrete slab or any other type of slab or covering. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7(f))  
Sec. 25-168. - Placement of objects in cemetery, including floral designs and greenery. 
(a)  General. No object of any kind may be placed on graves or other cemetery property, except as specifically provided herein. 
(b)  Fresh flowers. Fresh flowers, floral pieces or funeral designs placed at gravesite at interment will be removed when they become wilted or unsightly at the discretion of parks staff. Items desired to be retained must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours after placement on the lot or grave. 
(c)  Containers. Up to two (2) individual containers of fresh or artificial flowers may be placed or affixed on each space, provided that the affixed flowers are only placed in containers approved by the city consisting of granite, marble, concrete, metal or heavy plastic. 
(1)  Fresh or artificial flowers placed directly in the ground will be removed by parks staff. 
(2)  All flowers and other memorabilia must be placed in the affixed containers, on or immediately next to the monument on its concrete base, or if there is no monument at the head of the grave not to exceed one (1) square foot. Fresh flowers will be removed when they become wilted or unsightly. 
(d)  Special arrangements. No wreathes, easels, grave blankets, or other special arrangements shall be permitted on graves except during interment and the first seven (7) days thereafter. 
(e)  Planting. No person shall plant any trees, flowers or shrubs on any lot without the written consent of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7(g); Ord. No. 2009-238, § 8, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-169. - Authorization to remove objects, etc. 
The parks and recreation department shall have the right to remove any structure or object on any lot or grave that the director may deem objectionable and to destroy all diseased, unsightly or undesirable trees, shrubs or plants. The department reserves the right to trim or prune any shrub or plant whenever it is deemed necessary or advisable. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7(h))  
Sec. 25-170. - Defacing property. 
It is unlawful to write upon, deface or in any manner injure any monument, marker or other structure in the city cemeteries. 
(Code 1966, § 6-8)  
Sec. 25-171. - Removing flowers. 
It is unlawful for any person other than the owner to remove flowers or plants from any lot or block in the city cemeteries; provided, however, the director of parks and recreation may remove or destroy any flowers, trees, shrubs or other plants in the cemeteries if, in his judgment, such are or may become detrimental to the adjacent lots or avenues or dangerous or inconvenient or which may interfere with the scheme of the cemetery development or maintenance. 
(Code 1966, § 6-8; Ord. No. 2009-238, § 9, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-172. - Opening of graves. 
No grave, vault or tomb of any person buried in any city cemetery shall be opened, except upon special written order from the county medical director. 
(Code 1966, § 6-8; Ord. No. 2009-238, § 10, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 25-173. - Parking. 
No person shall park any motor vehicle in Oakwood or I.O.O.F. Cemeteries except for the purpose of attending a funeral, visiting a gravesite, or maintaining or repairing cemetery property. 
(Ord. No. 91-099, § I, 7-2-91)  
Secs. 25-174—25-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic generally, Ch. 18. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city. 
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city. 
Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-192. - Public conduct. 
(a)  Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle, bus, bicycle, street car or trackless trolley to drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.11)  
Secs. 25-193—25-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 25-201. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(b)  The permit required in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.2)  
Sec. 25-202. - Application. 
(a)  Forms. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by the chief. 
(b)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than seven (7) days nor more than twenty (20) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(13)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(d)  Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this section which is filed less than seven (7) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.3)  
Sec. 25-203. - Standards for issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds the following: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons of property, to provide disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.4)  
Sec. 25-204. - Notice of rejection of application. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three (3) days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within seven (7) days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice of this action, stating the reason for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.5)  
Sec. 25-205. - Appeal procedure if permit denied. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within three (3) days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal at its next meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.6)  
Sec. 25-206. - Alternate parade permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three (3) days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.7)  
Sec. 25-207. - Notice to city and other officials upon issuance of parade permit. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  The fire chief; 
(3)  The city engineer. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.8)  
Sec. 25-208. - Contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.9)  
Sec. 25-209. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee shall comply with all parade permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.10)  
Sec. 25-210. - Revocation. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this division upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1966, § 24-58.12)  
Sec. 25-211. - Funeral escorts. 
The following fees for funeral escorts by the Denton Police Department shall be charged for any funeral procession within the City of Denton, Texas: 
		
Funeral Escort 	1 police unit, up to 1 hour 	$40.00 
Family/Funeral Escort 	1 police unit, up to 1.25 hours 	75.00 
Additional Unit per Escort 	Per each police unit, up to 1 hour 	35.00 
Escorts Exceeding Minimum Time Limits Stated Above 	Each police unit per 0.25 hour 	10.00 
 
(Ord. No. 99-309, § 1, 9-7-99)  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL EVENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-212. - Purpose. 
Due to their size and special requirements, some gatherings or organized activities may place unique demands on resources or pose a danger to public health, safety, welfare. In order to plan for these demands on public resources and to ensure that public health and safety is protected, it is necessary that the city receive advance notice of these special events. The provisions of this article are intended to address those concerns and are not intended to place unnecessary burden on any individual's right to association or freedom of expression. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-213. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person who has filed a written application for a special event permit. 
Application fee means a base fee established by city ordinance for processing a special event permit application. 
City means the City of Denton, a Texas Home Rule Municipal Corporation. 
Expressive activity means conduct, the sole or principal purpose of which is the expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or auditory means of opinion, views, or ideas. 
First Amendment activity means an expressive and associative activity on public right-of-way that is protected by the United States and Texas Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly, and the right to petition, but does not include commercial advertising, revenue-generating activities, fundraising, or a parade as defined herein. 
Force majeure means and includes fire, casualty, strikes, lockouts, labor trouble, inability to procure materials or supplies, failure of power, governmental authority, inclement weather, acts of God, war or terrorism or the potential or actual threat thereof, public safety or public welfare considerations, riots, or local, national, or international emergencies, or other reason of like nature. 
Neighborhood block parties means an organized small-scale activity that closes a small number of blocks on a local-service, residential street that are initiated by and intended to attract only local residents who live on or in close proximity to the street being closed and not intended for the general public. 
Parade means any assembly, march, demonstration, or procession upon public thoroughfares within the city consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles traveling in unison with an intent of attracting public attention and that is reasonably likely to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon public thoroughfares. 
Permittee means the person to whom a permit is granted pursuant to this article. 
Person means any individual, assumed named entity, partnership, association, corporation, or organization. 
Public safety plan means any plan submitted by the applicant setting forth a description and location of emergency services, evacuation, fire prevention, and fire suppression on the property being used for the event, and emergency medical services for entertainers, exhibitors, attendees, and other persons at the event. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines or lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Special event means a temporary event, gathering, or organized activity, including but not limited to parades, bike races, marathons, fun runs, block parties, parking lot parties, concerts, carnivals, or festivals involving two hundred (200) or more attendees or one or more of the following: 
(1)  Closing or impacting a public street, sidewalk, or trail; 
(2)  Blocking or restricting city-owned property; 
(3)  Sale or distribution of merchandise, food, or beverages on city-owned property; 
(4)  Erection of a tent equal to or greater than four hundred (400) square feet in area; 
(5)  Installation of a stage, band-shell, trailer, van, portable building, grandstand, or bleachers; 
(6)  Placement of portable toilets on city-owned property; 
(7)  Placement of temporary no-parking signs in a public right-of-way; 
(8)  Placement of pedestrian boundary markers on city-owned property; 
(9)  Placement of additional waste containers; or 
(10)  Having an impact on public safety. 
Special event permit means a permit as specified and obtained pursuant to this article. 
Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to use by the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Traffic control plan means any plan submitted by the applicant sets forth the regulations of traffic control devices used to facilitate vehicular and pedestrian traffic safely and efficiently through a temporary traffic control area associated with the event. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-214. - Application of ordinance; exceptions. 
(a)  All special events, except for those set forth in section 25-214(b), must conform with all applicable provisions of this article unless otherwise noted. 
(b)  The following events are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Motorcades which comply with all traffic laws; 
(2)  Funeral processions; 
(3)  Events which are authorized under a separate agreement or permit issued by the city or other authorizing jurisdiction; 
(4)  An event wholly contained on property specifically designed or suited for the event and that holds a certificate of occupancy for such use, including adequate parking (e.g. a hotel ballroom); 
(5)  Events managed entirely by the City of Denton Parks and Recreation Department; and/or 
(6)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 25-215. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a special event without first having obtained a special event permit from the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a special event for which the person knows a special event permit is required and has not been granted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a special event to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the special event permit. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-216. - Application for permit. 
(a)  A person seeking a special event permit shall file an application with the director of parks and recreation, or his designee, upon forms provided by the city. Each application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as adopted by city council. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation, or his designee, shall ensure that the other licenses and permits, restrictions, regulations, fees for city services, safeguards, or other conditions deemed necessary by individual city departments for the safe and orderly conduct of a special event be requested, submitted, and approved before the special event permit is granted. (i.e. health permit applications, agreement with police department for police coverage, insurance, etc.). Separate permits will be required for tents, awnings, canopies, or temporary signage in conjunction with the event. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-217. - Filing period. 
Except as provided below, a special event permit application may be filed at least sixty (60) days before the intended event date and not more than twelve (12) months in advance of the intended event date. Applications for permits filed less than specified number of days before the event may be considered for public assembly or if the director of parks and recreation, or his designee, determines that the application can be processed in a shorter time period, taking into consideration the nature and scope of the proposed event and the number and types of permits required to be issued in conjunction with the special event permit. 
(a)  A special event application requiring city council approval must be filed at least ninety (90) days before the intended date of the event including, but not limited to, the sale or consumption of alcohol in a city park, an exception to the amplified sound ordinance, and requests for in-kind services. 
(b)  This provision supersedes prior ordinances in conflict herewith, including but not limited to chapter 25, article IV of the Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-218. - Submittal requirements. 
The application for a special event permit shall set forth, as a minimum, the following information: 
(a)  The name, address, and telephone number of: 
(1)  The person seeking to conduct the special event; 
(2)  If the special event is to be held for or by an organization: The organization and the authorized agent of such organization; 
(3)  If the special event is to be held by or for a person other than the applicant: The applicant shall file a written statement from that other person showing authority to make the application; and 
(4)  The person who will be the event organizer and who will be responsible for conducting the event. 
(b)  The proposed location(s) for the special event. 
(c)  The purpose of the special event and type of activities held during the special event. 
(d)  The date(s) and time(s) the special event will start and end. 
(e)  The time at which on-site preparation for the special event will begin. 
(f)  The approximate number of persons who are attending per day and for the duration of the special event, including the estimated peak time, and approximate number of attendees during that peak time. 
(g)  The number and types of animals and vehicles that are part of the special event. 
(h)  In the case of a parade, the following additional information shall be provided: 
(1)  A route map; 
(2)  Approximate number of participants in the parade; 
(3)  Type of participants (ex. animals, floats, etc.); and 
(4)  Whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(i)  Proof of insurance for the special event. 
(j)  Site map(s) showing site setup indicating equipment that will be used by the special event, including the following additional information: 
(1)  Location of first aid station and fire lanes for emergency equipment; 
(2)  Location and orientation of loudspeakers and any other noise amplification devices to be used by or at the special event, if any; 
(3)  Location and size of tents, awnings, canopies, food service booths, or other temporary structures; 
(4)  Details for any planned signage; and 
(5)  Description of parking and public transportation. 
(k)  Description of the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, if any. 
(l)  Public safety plan. 
(m)  Traffic control plan showing streets and pedestrian ways that are impacted, and the placement of barricades and detour signage. 
(n)  Description of the notification process to affected properties owned or occupied immediately adjacent to the special event. 
(o)  Any other information which the city shall find necessary under the standards for issuance. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-219. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
A special event shall be conducted in such a way that it: 
(a)  Will not unnecessarily interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic near location or route. 
(b)  Will not require so great a number of police officers to properly police the special event that normal protection for the city is prevented. 
(c)  Will not require so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the special event and adjacent areas. 
(d)  Will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment in route to a fire. The concentration of people, animals, and vehicles at assembly points will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection or ambulance service to areas near such assembly points. 
(e)  In the case of a parade, the parade shall be scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination without unreasonable delays in route. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-220. - Denial or revocation. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation, or his designee, may deny a special event permit if: 
(1)  The special event will conflict in time and location with another event for which a special event permit has already been granted; 
(2)  The applicant fails to comply with, or the special event will violate, an ordinance of the city or any other applicable law; 
(3)  The applicant makes or permits the making of a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a special event permit; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of violating this article or has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
(5)  The applicant fails to provide proof of any license or permit required by this article, city ordinance, or state law; 
(6)  The special event, the opinion of one or more city departmental directors, would severely hinder the delivery of normal or emergency services or constitutes a public threat; 
(7)  Insurance requirements for the special event have not been met; or 
(8)  The applicant has, on prior occasions, damaged city property and has not paid in full for such damage. 
(b)  A special event permit shall be revoked by the director of parks and recreation, or his designee, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  If the police chief, fire chief, risk manager, building official, or other city official, or their designated representatives, find that any of the provisions of this article, city ordinance, or state law is being violated; 
(2)  If, in the judgment of the police chief or fire chief, a violation exists which requires immediate abatement, they shall have authority to revoke a permit in the absence or unavailability of the director of parks and recreation; or 
(3)  The applicant made, or permitted to be made, a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a special event permit. 
(c)  Prior to denial of a permit, the director of parks and recreation shall consider alternatives provided by the applicant to the time, place, or manner of the special event that will allow the event to occur without posing a threat to health or safety, or otherwise violate state or local law. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-221. - Appeals. 
Decisions of the director of parks and recreation, police chief, fire chief, or any other city official regarding the issuance of a special event permit or the imposition of costs, additional restrictions, or conditions upon the granting of a special event permit may be appealed to the city manager, or in his absence, the deputy city manager or assistant city manager. Such appeal shall be in writing and be delivered to the city manager within five (5) business days after the issuance of a decision by the director of parks and recreation or other official. When making a determination regarding the appeal, the city manager shall consider the application under the standards provided in this article and sustain or overrule the director's decision. The decision of the city manager, deputy city manager, or assistant city manager shall be issued within five (5) business days and shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-222. - Force majeure. 
(a)  The city may, in its sole discretion, postpone, cancel, suspend, or close any special event or revoke a special event permit for any force majeure event. 
(b)  The city shall have no liability for such postponement, cancellation, suspension, or closing. Further, the city shall have no liability for failure to postpone, cancel, suspend, or close a special event for a force majeure event or any other reason. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-223. - Quarterly reporting. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation shall, at least quarterly, provide the city council a report specifying the occasion upon which he or she has exercised the authority delegated herein, whether granting or denying a permit application, and any other information, material, or transactions applicable to the exercise of that authority. 
(b)  The city manager shall, at least quarterly, provide the city council a report specifying the occasion upon which he or she exercised the authority delegated herein, whether granting or denying a permit application, and any other information, material, or transactions applicable to the exercise of that authority. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 25-224. - Applicant parking requirements. 
Applicants shall describe in the site plan that parking and public transportation for the special event has been provided. If parking is planned to be on private property, written evidence that the applicant has a right of possession of the property through ownership, lease, license, or other property interest must be provided. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-225. - City authority over parking. 
The city shall have authority, when reasonably necessary as determined by the police department, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street, highway, or part thereof adjacent to the site of the special event. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-226. - Trailers. 
Trailers or other vehicles may be temporarily occupied as living quarters at the site of such special events. Such vehicles and trailers shall be parked not less than three hundred (300) feet from any residential district, and shall otherwise comply with all city ordinances and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-227. - Amusement rides. 
Rides and/or attractions associated with special events shall conform with the statutory rules and regulations set forth in Chapter 21, Article 21.53 of the Texas Insurance Code, designated the Amusement Ride Safety Inspection and Insurance Act, as amended. Copies of inspection reports will be required. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-228. - Tents and temporary structures. 
Any special event which includes the use of a tent, canopy, or temporary structure shall meet the requirements in the Fire Code. Fire lanes for emergency equipment must be provided and the site prepared in a manner so as not to be a fire hazard as determined by the fire chief. A certificate of flame resistance shall be provided for all tents, canopies, or other membrane structures that are equal to or greater than four hundred (400) square feet in area. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-229. - Food service. 
Where food service is provided, said operation shall be in compliance with all provisions of the food and food establishment ordinances of the city, as well as all other applicable state local laws. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-230. - Sanitary facilities. 
A sufficient number of portable type sanitary facilities must be provided on the premises as determined necessary using standards as established by the Portable Sanitation Association International ("PSAI"). 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-231. - Animal waste. 
In the case of a parade, the applicant shall provide cleanup for animals along the parade route at the conclusion of the parade in accordance with city ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-232. - Water usage and disposal of wastewater. 
Applicant shall submit a plan for the disposal of wastewater, including capture and containment, which must be approved by the city to the special event. The plan must be in accordance with local, state, and federal laws. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-233. - Trash disposal. 
Trash disposal containers must be provided on-site for all outdoor special events. There may be costs associated with the disposal of waste and recycling for larger special events in accordance with city ordinance. The appropriate waste and recycling containers to be selected are dependent upon the location and the number of event participants and visitors, and is to be handled on a case-by-case basis as determined by the director of solid waste and recycling. If special events are held on city-owned property, waste containers, excluding dumpsters, are available onsite for use by the special event, and additional containers or dumpsters may be necessary to provide adequate waste and recycling collection service. Recycling is required on all city-owned property in accordance with Resolution No. R2008-004. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-234. - Amplified sound. 
When loudspeakers, or any other amplifying device, are to be used in conjunction the special event, the location and orientation of these devices shall be indicated, along with the planned hours of use, on the site plan. 
Speakers which are positioned so as not to adversely affect an adjacent residential district may be used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. when a special event permit has been obtained. Applicants shall comply with all city noise ordinances and any variance requests require approval by city council. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-235. - Signage. 
Signage used in accordance with the special event shall comply with the sign regulations of the City of Denton under the provisions for special event and promotional signage found in chapter 33 of the Code of Ordinances. Accordingly, signs advertising the event or directing potential customers to the event site are expressly prohibited from placement in the city rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-236. - Alcohol. 
It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that if alcoholic beverages will be possessed and/or consumed during a special event that he/she/they have obtained all necessary city approvals for such possession and use. If alcohol is being served on city-owned property, a law enforcement professional is required to be onsite during the special event. If alcohol is being possessed or consumed in a city park as allowed by city ordinance, it requires recommendation by the parks and recreation board, approval by city council, and a special event application must be submitted to the director of parks and recreation, or designee, at least ninety (90) days prior to the event. 
For special events requiring a permit from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC), a copy of the state permit shall be required prior to the issuance of a special event permit. Additionally, liquor liability (dramshop liability) or host liquor liability insurance coverage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) shall be provided, naming the City of Denton as an additional insured. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-237. - Inspections. 
Inspections may be required to show compliance with city ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-238. - Electrical equipment. 
All electrical equipment and installations shall comply with the currently adopted version of the National Electric Code. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-239. - Direction of traffic. 
Traffic control and direction upon city rights-of-way shall be allowed only by a Denton Police Officer, Denton Parking Enforcement Officer, or other sworn Texas law enforcement officer. Vehicular traffic control and direction by private citizens in the city rights-of-way is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-240. - Police protection. 
When the presence of law enforcement officers is necessary for special events, the applicant shall be responsible for the cost of providing police personnel. Police protection and security must be provided by a licensed peace officer commissioned by a law enforcement agency in Denton County. The cost for police personnel provided by the Denton Police Department shall be paid at the rate set by the police chief. There is a minimum three-hour cost per individual. 
The objective standards used to determine the number of law enforcement officers shall be as follows: 
(a)  General traffic conditions in the area requested, both vehicular and pedestrian; 
(b)  Route to be taken if the special event is a parade or other moving event; 
(c)  Duration of the special event; 
(d)  Whether all or any portion of a roadway will be closed; 
(e)  The estimated number of people who will attend; 
(f)  Uses adjacent to the special event, such as residential or commercial areas; 
(g)  Time and date of the special event; 
(h)  Alcoholic beverages available for consumption at the special event; 
(i)  Wild or undomesticated animals at the special event; and 
(j)  Need for safety zones (balloon/helicopter launch or landing area, etc.). 
All reasonable alternative routes, times, and locations will be considered so as to offer the applicant the option that will provide the lowest costs consistent with the general public health, safety, and welfare. The cost or a portion of the cost of providing police personnel to meet these guidelines may be requested by the applicant and provided as in-kind services by the city upon approval from city council. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-241. - Emergency medical services. 
When the presence of emergency medical service ("EMS") is necessary for a special event, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost of providing personnel. The cost for city provided EMS personnel shall be in accordance with city ordinances. 
The objective standards used to determine the number of EMS personnel and ambulances shall be as follows: 
(a)  The estimated number of people who will attend; 
(b)  The peak hourly attendance; 
(c)  Duration of the special event; 
(d)  Whether all or any portion of a roadway will be closed; 
(e)  Uses adjacent to the special event, such as residential or commercial areas; 
(f)  Time and date of the special event; 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages available for consumption at the special event; and 
(h)  Need for safety zones (balloon/helicopter launch or landing area, etc.). 
All reasonable alternative routes, times, and locations will be considered so as to offer the applicant the option that will provide the lowest costs consistent with the general public health, safety, and welfare. The cost or a portion of the cost of providing EMS personnel to meet these guidelines may be requested by the applicant and provided as in-kind services by the city upon approval from city council. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-242. - Clean up. 
The applicant shall clean up immediately after the conclusion of the special event. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-243. - Traffic control plan. 
Traffic control plans submitted as part of the special event application must be developed by a professional engineer or licensed traffic control professional in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-244. - In-kind services. 
The city may find that a special event is in the public interest and a benefit to the citizens, and therefore may grant in-kind services by waiving fees, including but not limited to, staff, facility rental fees, and security. Event organizers may submit a request to the city for in-kind services. If in-kind services are requested, city council approval is required, and a special event application must be submitted to the director of parks and recreation, or his designee, at least ninety (90) days prior to the special event. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-245. - Neighborhood block parties. 
The city believes that neighborhood block parties are in the public interest and a benefit to the citizens. Persons organizing a neighborhood block party are required to obtain a special event permit from the city and must file an application at least fourteen (14) days before the intended event date. The director of parks and recreation, or his designee, may determine that the application can be processed in a shorter time period, taking into consideration the nature and scope of the proposed event. 
Neighborhood block parties will be exempt from special event application fees described in this article, but may be subject to other city fees (e.g. tent permit fees). A process for notifications to affected properties adjacent to the special event must be submitted in accordance with section 25-217. Neighborhood block parties are exempt from the insurance requirements set forth in section 25-248. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-246. - First Amendment activity. 
Persons organizing a First Amendment activity that is preplanned, scheduled, and promoted for a future date are required to obtain a special event permit from the city and must file an application at least seven (7) days before the intended event date. 
First Amendment activities will be exempt from special event application fees and costs associated with policing the event. First Amendment activities are exempt from the insurance requirements set forth in section 25-248. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
DIVISION 4. - PARADE 
 
Sec. 25-247. - Public conduct. 
(a)  Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade, parade assembly, or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade authorized under this article. 
(b)  Driving through parades. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle, bus, or bicycle to drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on a parade route. The chief of police shall have authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
DIVISION 5. - INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION, AND COSTS 
 
Sec. 25-248. - Insurance. 
(a)  The applicant for a special event permit shall furnish the city with a certificate of insurance complying with minimum standards sufficient to protect event attendees, the general public, and city-owned property as outlined below, including property damage arising from the special event that impacts or occurs on city property. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to lower or increase the amount based upon the type of event, equipment, machinery, location, number of people involved, provision of alcohol, and other pertinent factors or risks associated with the special event. 
(c)  Commercial general liability insurance: Must be provided with combined single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence. Depending on the scope and activities contemplated under the special event permit (i.e. estimated attendance, amusement rides, live animals, aerobatics, etc.) risk management may require higher limits of liability insurance. For event banners on street light poles, commercial general liability insurance must be provided with combined single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for each occurrence. 
(d)  Liquor liability insurance: If any alcoholic beverage is sold, served, or otherwise made available to the public at the special event, liquor liability (dramshop) insurance or host liquor liability coverage must be provided by the alcoholic beverage license holder in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. Depending on the scope and activities contemplated under the special event permit (i.e. estimated attendance, amusement rides, live animals, aerobatics, etc.) risk management may require higher limits of liquor liability insurance. 
(e)  Other insurance: If a special event includes vehicles, aircraft, or other equipment, devices, or activities that are excluded from coverage in the general liability insurance policy, or create a special or increased risk, then separate additional liability insurance coverage for the applicable exclusion(s) must be provided with the same combined single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage as outlined in the paragraphs above. 
(f)  Additional insured: The insurance required in subsections (c), (d) and (e) above shall name the city as an additional insured. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-249. - Indemnification. 
The applicant, permittee, and/or event sponsor(s) shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the city, its officers, directors, employees, agents, successors, contractors, subcontractors, assigns, sponsors, and volunteers from and against any and all liens, claims, demands, loss, liability, cost (including but not limited to attorneys' fees, accountants' fees, engineers' fees, consultants' fees and experts' fees), expense, damage, and causes of action for damages because of injury to persons (including death) and injury or damage to or loss of any property or improvements arising from or caused, in whole or or in part, by the acts and/or omissions of the applicant, permittee, event sponsor(s), their officers, directors, agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors, volunteers, and participants in the special event. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-250. - Fees/costs. 
(a)  Fees, other than cost for policing the event, if any, as specified in this article, shall be established by city council ordinance. 
(b)  In the event the city determines, upon a review of the application, that a special event may require the special attention and involvement of city personnel or facilities, the city shall so notify the applicant. In such event, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the city shall determine the anticipated additional cost to be incurred by the city because of the special event. Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to pay the anticipated additional costs to the city incurred as a result of the special event within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the city invoices the applicant for the anticipated costs. 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Sec. 25-251. - What constitutes penalty for violations of ordinance. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Knowingly commences or holds a special event without a special event permit or with a special event permit that has expired or been revoked; or 
(2)  Knowingly violates any terms or provisions of this article. 
(b)  It is hereby determined that this article governs fire safety and public health/safety and, therefore, any person, firm, corporation, or organization violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be fined a sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
( Ord. No. 2019-1160 , § 2(Att. A), 6-18-19)  
Chapter 26 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Issuance of revenue bonds against anticipated revenues of municipally owned utility, § 9.01(b); public utilities, § 12.01 et seq.; franchises of public utilities, § 13.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Cable television generally, Ch. 8; housing generally, Ch. 15; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28; water supply, sewers and electrical distribution system in mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, § 32-86 et seq.; water and sewer requirements for subdivisions, § 34-116 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-227, § 9, adopted September 17, 2013, repealed § 26-1, which pertained to Assistant city manager—Utilities and derived from § 25-1 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01.  
Sec. 26-2. - Right of entry. 
Employees of the utilities department shall have the authority to enter the land or any accessory building or structure at any reasonable time in the regular line of duty for the purpose of gaining access to inspect any water, electric or sewer line or any water or electric meter or for the purpose of making necessary repairs. If such access is refused, the employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure access, including the issuance of an administrative search warrant. 
(Code 1966, § 25-5; Ord. No. 2017-201 , § 2, 7-18-17) 
Cross reference— Inspection and abatement warrants, § 19-86 et seq. 
State Law reference— Inspection warrants, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05.  
Sec. 26-3. - Service deposits and alternatives. 
Employees of the utilities customer service department will determine the appropriate service deposit requirement based on the customer's credit rating with the city utility system or by a reliable external credit source available to the city. 
(a)  Residential customers. If a customer receiving residential service is required to make a deposit, the deposit may be as much as an amount equal to one-sixth of the last twelve (12) months billing at the service location or a similar location as determined by the utility representative. 
(b)  Residential exemption from deposit. No service deposit will be required of an applicant for residential utility service if the applicant can provide and qualify for one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The applicant has an acceptable credit rating for twelve (12) consecutive months within the last two (2) years with the city utility system. 
(2)  The customer receives an acceptable credit rating from a credit source available to the city. The customer must pay the cost of obtaining the credit rating. This cost will be set annually within the utility rate ordinance, but will not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(3)  Customers with little credit history or a fair credit rating may be allowed to provide one of the following alternatives in lieu of deposit: 
a.  A signed letter of good standing for utility services from a former utility company for verification within twenty (20) days of applying for service; or 
b.  The applicant provides a cosigner who accepts responsibility and is verified to have an acceptable credit rating with the city utility system, and who is willing to be listed on the applicant's account to guarantee payment of the applicant's utility bills. This guarantee will be in effect until the applicant develops an acceptable credit rating and the cosigner requests removal from the account. 
(4)  Customer is participating in a verifiable permanent supportive or rapid rehousing program and provides a dated and completed certification letter upon applying for utility services. 
(5)  Customer has been qualified as a victim of family violence and provides a dated and completed certification letter upon application for utility services. 
(6)  Customer signs up for auto pay and maintains an acceptable credit rating for twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(c)  Commercial customers. In the case of commercial or industrial service, if the applicant for service is required to make a deposit, the amount of the deposit shall be an amount up to one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the last twelve (12) months of billing at the location where service is requested. If no previous history is available for the location, a representative facility similar to the type where service is requested will be used to establish the amount of the deposit. 
(d)  Commercial exemption from deposit. An applicant for utility service for a commercial or industrial entity or business may not be required to make a deposit if the applicant: 
(1)  Provides the city an acceptable commercial/industrial credit rating for the last twenty-four (24) months the customer received service from the city utility system; or 
(2)  The customer receives an acceptable credit rating from a credit source available to the city. The customer must pay the cost of obtaining the credit rating. This cost will be set annually within the utility rate ordinance, but will not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(3)  If the credit of a commercial/industrial customer for service has not been established satisfactorily to the city, the applicant may provide an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of a deposit within twenty (20) days of signing for service. The irrevocable letter of credit must be executed by a Texas bank and must be approved by the city manager and city attorney. The customer must maintain the irrevocable letter of credit in effect at all times. If the customer allows the irrevocable letter of credit to expire, the customer shall pay a deposit in the amount provided as listed above, or the city may terminate utility service. 
(e)  For purposes of this chapter, "acceptable credit rating" shall mean a credit rating which is based upon a commonly used formula or a formula approved by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 25-4; Ord. No. 94-132, § I, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-316, § 1, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 2009-222, § 1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 2010-292, § 2(Exh. A), 11-16-10; Ord. No. 2018-016 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-9-18)  
Sec. 26-4. - Additional deposit required. 
(a)  Additional deposits. The city may require a customer to make an additional deposit in the event that a deposit made as specified in subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) is subsequently determined to no longer be sufficient. The city may disconnect service if the customer does not remit the additional deposit within fourteen (14) days of the city's request, provided a written disconnect notice has been issued. Such disconnect notice may be issued concurrently with the written request for the additional deposit. 
A customer may be required to pay a deposit or put down an additional deposit amount if: 
(1)  The customer has been terminated from the receipt of utility service due to non-payment of a utility bill; or 
(2)  The city has determined there is evidence of a customer tampering with the city's meter; or 
(3)  The customer has an unacceptable credit rating and the city does not have in its files a current cosigner who meets the requirements of section 26-3(a) or (b); or 
a.  Customer credit rating and deposit amount would be determined by internal point based scoring 
A 	<150 points 	No Deposit 
B 	150—300 Points 	No Deposit 
C 	301—750 Points 	No Deposit 
D 	751—2,000 Points 	1 Month 
E 	>2,001 Points 	2 Months 
 
(4)  The customer has been required to pay or is paying off a utility account balance previously deemed uncollectible or is past due; or 
(5)  The customer's irrevocable letter of credit filed with the city in lieu of a deposit has expired. 
(b)  Interest. The city shall pay interest on deposits at an annual rate established by city council. If a refund of the deposit is made within thirty (30) days of receipt of the deposit, no interest will be paid. If the deposit is retained more than thirty (30) days, payment of interest shall be retroactive to the date the entire amount of deposit has been made. The deposit shall cease to draw interest on the date it is returned or credited to the customer's account. Payment of the interest to the customer shall be made at the time the deposit is returned or credited to the customer's account. If the customer's account is active, the deposit will automatically be applied to the customer's account to offset current billing. 
(c)  Credit checks. After making application for service, the customer service department may at any time pursue a credit reference check. If the credit check shows the customer does not have an acceptable credit rating, the customer will be required to place a deposit on the account. Failure to do so will result in the discontinuance of service with no less than two (2) days of notification given verbally or in writing, to the prospective customer by the customer service department. 
(Ord. No. 94-132, § I, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-316, § 1, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 2010-292, § 2(Exh. A), 11-16-10; Ord. No. 2018-016 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-9-18)  
Sec. 26-5. - Refunds of deposits. 
The city shall refund deposits to applicants and customers if one of the following events occurs: 
(1)  The customer's service has been disconnected. The city shall refund the deposit plus accrued interest less any outstanding balances. A transfer of service from one service location to another shall not be deemed a disconnection and the city shall not require an additional deposit unless authorized by section 26-3 or section 26-4 hereof. 
(2)  When the customer has paid bills and avoided delinquent status for service for twelve (12) consecutive residential billings without having service disconnected for nonpayment of bills, or meter tampering, and provided the customer is not delinquent in the payment of the current bill. The city shall then, in that event, refund the deposit (plus accrued interest) to the customer in the form of a credit to the customer's account. 
(Ord. No. 94-132, § I, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-316, § 1, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 2010-292, § 2(Exh. A), 11-16-10)  
Sec. 26-6. - Other fees. 
(a)  Installation charge. A first service connection charge in an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary will be charged to customers requesting electric service, where no permanent service previously existed and where a new account number is established. 
(b)  Connection charge. A connection charge in an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary will be charged to customers requesting water and/or electric service. 
(c)  Delinquent service charge, reconnect charge, and deposit. If water and/or electric utility service is processed for nonpayment, then the customer will be required to pay a delinquent service charge or reconnect charge in an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary and establish and maintain a deposit sum up to one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the last twelve (12) months' billings on billing at the location where service is requested. If a twelve (12) month history is not available, an estimated usage will be used to determine the deposit amount. 
(d)  Unauthorized usage penalty. If a customer fails to request a water and/or electric connection within twenty-four (24) hours of occupancy in a new service location, then the customer will be required to pay an unauthorized usage penalty in an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(e)  Meter reading charge. If a customer requests a reading of a city meter due to a contested billing more than two (2) times in the previous twelve (12) months and if no error is found, the customer will be charged a meter reading charge. The meter reading charge will be in an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(f)  Meter testing charge. If a utility customer requests the testing of a city meter that was previously tested within the past four (4) years and the meter is found to be within accuracy standards, the customer will be charged a meter testing charge. The meter is defined as within accuracy standards when found to be plus or minus two (2) percent or less. This meter testing charge will be established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(g)  Meter tampering and/or damage charge. A meter tampering charge will be required of any person that tampers with, damages, or illegally connects to any city electric, or water, or wastewater system. The meter tampering charge will be established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(h)  Meter inaccessibility charge. A meter inaccessibility charge will be required of any customer that prevents the regular and routine reading or repair, maintenance or replacement of any city electric or water meter. The meter inaccessibility charge will be established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(i)  Returned payment charge. If a customer has a check, money order, or bank draft that has been dishonored by the maker's bank and returned to the city as unpaid, the customer will be required to pay a returned payment charge in an amount established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(j)  Late payment charge due on delinquent balances. A late payment charge in the amount of $20.00 will be assessed on past due balances on the fifth business day following the due date. 
(k)  Interest charge on past due account balances. Interest shall be assessed on any past due account balance (excluding late payment charges) that remains unpaid prior to the current month's billing calculation. Interest shall be assessed based on the customer's monthly billing schedule and the due date of the customer's past due bill. The interest charge shall be due and payable on the due date of the current month's billing. The interest charge will be established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(1)  Application fee. An application fee may be charged if the customer cannot provide a satisfactory credit rating through previous service history with Denton Municipal Utilities. The application fee will be established by the city council and will be on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 94-132, § I, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-316, § 1, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 2010-292, § 2(Exh. A), 11-16-10)  
Sec. 26-7. - Service prohibited to premises in violation of city ordinances. 
No utility service of the city or connection for such service shall be furnished or provided to any person engaged in the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or premises or any part thereof or engaged in the excavation or the laying of the foundation for any building or premises or part thereof where any part of such building or premises is being erected, constructed, altered or repaired in violation of any ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 25-2; Ord. No. 94-132, § III, 7-19-94)  
Sec. 26-8. - Grounds for discontinuance of service; timing of disconnection of service. 
(a)  The assistant city manager-utilities, or his designee, shall discontinue service to any person violating any provision of this chapter or any published rule or regulation of the utilities department, or of the city, until such violation has been corrected. 
(b)  The assistant city manager-utilities, or his designee, shall discontinue service to any person found defrauding the utilities department by tampering with any water or electric line or meter. Service disconnected for any such reason shall not be restored until the assistant city manager-utilities, or his designee, is satisfied that all loss to the utilities department has either been repaid, or is financed for repayment, and that service may be restored without undue risk of further loss through such acts or nonpayment. 
(c)  Subject to the approval of the city manager, the assistant city manager-utilities, or his designee, shall discontinue service to any person found to be unreasonably wasting or diverting electricity or water. 
(d)  Utility services may be terminated if payments become delinquent. The city may terminate services at any time upon delinquent status of an account. Once services are terminated, any deposit held by the city will be applied to the delinquent account when the final bill is generated. If the customer wishes to reconnect services, the customer will be required to pay a delinquent service charge or a reconnect charge and the remaining balance of the delinquent amount or at least fifty (50) percent with an agreement to pay the remainder with three (3) consecutive equal monthly installments. The city may refuse service and require payment in full, based on the credit history of the customer. For continued service, the city will require an additional deposit amount as described in section 26-4. 
(e)  The time at which the disconnection of service shall be done will be at the discretion of the city except as follows: 
(1)  Disconnection on holidays or weekends. Unless a dangerous condition exist or the customer requests disconnection, service shall not be disconnected on city observed holidays or weekends, or the day immediately preceding a holiday or weekend. Services shall also not be disconnected during the weeks of Thanksgiving, Christmas or New Year's. 
(2)  Disconnection during extreme weather. Utility services will not be disconnected for nonpayment when on the day of disconnection: 
(a)  The National Weather Service (NWS) has forecasted the day's temperatures to fall below thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  The NWS has forecasted the day's high temperatures to be at or above one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit or a heat advisory has been issued for Denton County. 
(Code 1966, § 25-3; Ord. No. 94-132, § III, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-316, § 1,9-17-02; Ord. No. 2010-292, § 2(Exh. A), 11-16-10; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 2(Exh. A), 1-9-18)  
Sec. 26-9. - Billing and collection for services. 
(a)  Due date for payment of statements. The due date for the payment of the bill for utility services shall not be less than ten (10) business days after issuance. Payment must be posted to the customer's account by close of business on the due date, in order to avoid assessment of a delinquent penalty. Payments placed in the mail and showing a postmark on the due date will not be considered as being received on the due date. In addition payments made through alternative sources such as, telephone, remote payment locations, drop box, or internet, will be accepted according to the terms established for those services. These payment requirements will be made available on the customer's utility bill, the city's website, and posted at customer access points when possible. 
(b)  Discontinuance of service for nonpayment. Each customer of the city's utility system who has not paid by the due date as noted on the billing, or according to finance agreements, is eligible for disconnect after the due date upon two (2) days notice. 
(c)  Notice of termination of services. A customer will be notified on his current utility statement that his service is eligible for disconnection if payment is not received by the terms stated on the current bill. The notice will inform the customer that he should remit payment immediately to avoid disconnection. Should the customer contact the utility customer service department within a five-day period and prior to disconnection of utility services to present any evidence or argument concerning the statement or amount of utility service provided by the city, the customer will be required to pay any amounts not registered by the customer service department as under dispute by the due date. Any disputed items must be resolved within sixty (60) days of notification to utility customer service. The city will attempt to call the customer and provide a verbal warning of termination of services at least two (2) days prior to actual termination. 
(d)  Alternatives to termination of service. A customer with a past due or delinquent balance may avoid termination of utility service by doing one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Paying the total amount due by the specified due date; 
(2)  Requesting a payment arrangement with the utility customer service department. The payment arrangement guidelines will be established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(e)  Certain adjustments prohibited. No adjustment will be made in any monthly bill because of any water or electric leak or loss, unless otherwise stated in this ordinance. No allowance shall be made on utility bills because of use of less service than the quantity set as the basis for the minimum charge. 
(f)  Service meters required. Each customer maintaining a separate residence, either house or apartment, shall have a separate water meter and electric meter and a separate service connection to the city sewer lines; provided, however, that multiple dwellings containing less than four (4) units may be served by one (1) water and one (1) electric meter and one (1) sewer service connection and will be billed under the residential multiple block rate. Multiple dwellings containing four (4) or more units which do not have separate metering and service facilities shall be classified as commercial buildings for utility purposes and shall be billed under the applicable commercial rates. 
(g)  Notice of service changes required. Any customer or prospective customer of the city utility system moving into or out of a building where electric, water, sewer or solid waste service is or will be provided, shall give a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours notice to the customer service department prior to the proposed date of connection or disconnection of utilities. If the customer fails to give proper notification for connection, he will be required to pay an unauthorized usage penalty and payment for services shall be prorated based on evidence provided by the customer or available to utility services and the amount billed will be due and payable by the customer. 
(h)  Proration of utility bills. The billings for utilities consumption may be calculated on a thirty-day basis and prorated higher or lower for longer or shorter billing periods respectively. 
(i)  Proration of customer facility charge. All monthly customer facility charges contained in this chapter shall be prorated higher or lower for billing periods longer or shorter than thirty (30) days, respectively. In such cases, the actual number of days in the reading period shall be divided by thirty (30) days, then multiplied by the net monthly charge to arrive at a customer facility charge. 
(j)  Estimated billings and billing adjustments. The city may estimate active utility services for no more than two (2) consecutive billing periods. This estimate shall be considered the current month billing and must be paid accordingly. The city shall also have the right to provide billing adjustments, consisting of back-billing or back credits, on prior billings for a period up to, but no greater than two (2) years. These prior period billing adjustments must be based on actual meter readings, verifiable evidence, or proration based on actual readings. 
(k)  Rejection of application for services. An application may be rejected if utility customer service has a record of previous past due accounts owing by the applicant and/or any occupant therein that will receive benefit of the services provided to the service location. The city has the option of requiring these amounts to be paid in full or transferring the amounts to the new service account. 
(Code 1966, § 25-6; Ord. No. 94-132, §§ III, IV, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-316, § 1,9-17-02; Ord. No. 2010-292, § 2(Exh. A), 11-16-10)  
Sec. 26-10. - Budget billing customer option. 
Any residential or local government utility customer of the city may request to be billed for electrical, water, sewer and/or sanitation services based upon an average billing amount. The eligibility and calculation criteria are as follows: 
(1)  The customer shall request budget billing in accordance with the provisions of this section. The customer must have established residence and have a good credit history within the past six (6) months with the city. Budget billing will not be open for enrollment during the four (4) months preceding the settlement month, or 12-month, of the budget billing year. 
(2)  The city may accept or deny the request based on the customer's credit history and circumstances as presented by the customer. Upon acceptance of the request, the city will compute the budget billing amount based on the last twelve (12) months of billing, and adjusted for any rate changes that would affect the budget billing calculation and as described in this subsection. The customer shall be billed this budget billing amount for the remaining months after approval of the application. On the settlement month, or twelfth billing month, the city will credit the customer's account for any accumulated amount in excess of the actual twelve (12) months' consumption. If the amount is greater than two (2) average monthly billings, the customer can request that the amounts be refunded, if requested prior to the due date of the credit. If the amount remaining represents an amount owed by the customer to the city, the customer shall have until the due date of the current billing to pay the additional amount due. The customer's account may be reviewed quarterly, and the budget billing amount may be adjusted based upon the current billings. 
(3)  Monthly billing amount calculation. The city will compute the customer's monthly budget billing amount by totaling the billings for the services for the previous twelve (12) months. If twelve (12) months of billing history is not available, utility customer service may estimate the billing based upon the best available information. These budget billing averages can be adjusted to reflect any rate changes that would likely increase or decrease the average annual billing amount. These annual billing amounts will be divided by eleven (11) to produce estimated usages per month for the next twelve (12) months. 
(4)  The city may provide budget billing for utility services based upon the customer's length of residence, credit history, and upon information provided by the customer. Upon approval, the customer's written or oral consent shall constitute a legal agreement between the customer and the city. The customer must comply with the terms of this section, the terms of the agreement, and the budget billing policies of the city. 
(5)  Termination of budget billing services. Any late payment (payment received after the billing due date) of any budget billing which occurs more than twice in a twelve-month period shall be cause for discontinuation of budget billing. Any returned check will also constitute a reason for termination of this service. Such customer may not re-qualify for such program until the customer re-establishes at least six (6) months of qualifying payment history. After a second removal from the program, a customer may not re-qualify for such program until after the expiration of one (1) year and a consecutive six (6) months of qualifying payment history. 
(Code 1966, § 25-6.1; Ord. No. 94-132, § III, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-316, § 1, 9-17-02)  
Sec. 26-11. - Electrical meters, electrical meter terminal boxes and supply conductors; water meters and water distribution mains and lines. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the city within the department of electric utilities or fire department, to knowingly or intentionally: 
(1)  Remove or cause to be removed any electrical meter owned by the city from any electrical meter terminal box; 
(2)  Remove or cause to be removed the cover or any other part or portion from any such meter or terminal box or loosen or cause to be loosened any part or portion thereof; 
(3)  Insert or cause to be inserted any foreign object or inject or cause to be injected any foreign substance into any such meter or terminal box; 
(4)  Make or cause to be made any adjustment in the mechanism of any such meter; or 
(5)  Tap onto or connect or cause to be tapped onto or connected any wire to the supply conductor of any such terminal box. 
(b)  In the prosecution of any offense charged under subsection (a)(1) of this section, it shall be a complete defense to such offense if the person charged shows to the court by legal and competent evidence: 
(1)  That such meter was removed for the purpose of protecting life or preserving property being immediately threatened by a hazard on the premises served by such; 
(2)  That such meter was removed for the purpose of preventing a hazard to the structure served by it due to a short circuiting in the electrical conductor between the terminal box in which such meter was housed and a main line switch or fuse box; or 
(3)  That such meter was removed by a duly licensed electrician to facilitate the repair of the defective electrical conductor or for checking the supply voltage and at a time when an employee of the city within the department of electric utilities was not available to remove such meter. 
(c)  In the event of the removal of any electrical meter by a duly licensed electrician under the circumstances enumerated in subsection (b)(3) of this section, the fact of such removal and the circumstances permitting the removal must be reported to the superintendent of the electric distribution division of the department of electric utilities by such electrician not later than one (1) hour after the commencement of the workday of such municipal employee next following such removal. 
(d)  Unless written permission is first obtained from the superintendent of the water distribution division of the department of utilities of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the city within the department of utilities, to knowingly or intentionally: 
(1)  Tap onto or connect or cause to be tapped onto or connected any pipe with any water distribution main or line owned by the city; 
(2)  Disconnect or cause to be disconnected any such water meter from any such water distribution main or line owned by the city; 
(3)  Remove or cause to be removed the cover from any such water meter; or 
(4)  Disconnect or cut off the water service to a structure, dwelling or building. 
All meters, curb cocks, valves and meter boxes connected with the city water mains and service pipes, including those furnished at the expense of the consumers or property owners, shall remain under the direct control of the department of utilities, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than those licensed to do plumbing or those with special permission from the city utilities department to connect, disconnect, move or tamper with any such meter or to turn on or off the water at the curb cock, valve or meter box in any way except with a regulation meter brass key. No bypass or connection between the meter and the main shall be made, maintained or permitted except upon written permission from the department of utilities. 
(e)  If any such water meter is found to have been removed, if the cover or any part or portion of any such meter or terminal box is found to have been removed, if any part or portion thereof is found to have been loosened, if any foreign object is found to have been inserted or any foreign substance is found to have been injected into any such meter or terminal box, if any adjustment is found to have been made in the mechanism of any such meter, if any wire has been found to have been tapped onto or connected to the supply conductor of any such terminal box, if any pipe is found to have been tapped onto or connected with any such water distribution main or line, if any such water meter is found to have been disconnected from any such water distribution main or line or if there is the finding at any time of any fact, circumstance or condition on or about any such electrical meter, terminal box, conductor, water meter or water distribution main or line tending to show or evidencing that any such act has been committed or performed in violation of any portion or provision of this section, the fact, circumstance or condition shall be and constitute prima facie evidence and a rebuttable evidentiary presumption of knowledge on the part of the person having subscribed for electric or water service through any such electric or water meter or the person having the custody, control or management of the building, room or place for which such subscription is made of the performance or commission of any such act prohibited under the terms and provisions of this section that such subscriber or other person performed or committed such act or caused or occasioned the performance or commission of the act and shall bring such subscriber or other person prima facie within the scope, meaning and penalties of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, §§ 17-11, 25-8; Ord. No. 94-132, § III, 7-19-94)  
Sec. 26-12. - Municipal utility lien for delinquent payments owing for municipal utility service. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions contained in this section and pursuant to state law, the City of Denton, Texas is authorized to impose a lien on real property owned by any customer of the city's electric, water, wastewater, and drainage utilities when such customer has failed to pay for the utility service provided. 
(b)  Any lien authorized by this section shall include all delinquent charges for utility service, penalties, interest, and collection costs. 
(c)  Any lien authorized by this section shall be perfected by recording it in the real property records of Denton County, Texas on a notice of lien, in a form approved by the city attorney, and duly executed by the city manager or his designee. The notice of lien shall contain a legal description of the real property and the utility's account number for the delinquent charges. 
(d)  Provided however, any lien authorized by this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Homestead real property; or 
(2)  Any bills for utility service connected to a tenant's name after the appropriate City of Denton utility department has received notice from the property owner that the property is rental property; or 
(3)  Any bills for utility services connected in a tenant's name prior to the effective date of this section. 
(e)  The lien authorized by this section shall be inferior to a bona-fide mortgage lien that is recorded before the recording of the city's notice of lien in the real property records of Denton County, Texas. The lien authorized by this section is superior to all other liens, including without limitation, previously recorded judgment liens and any lien recorded after the city's lien. 
(f)  The city manager or his designate shall have the authority to release any lien imposed in accordance with this section when all delinquent charges for utility service, penalties, interest, and collection costs have been fully paid. The release shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and shall be duly executed by the city manager or his designate, and recorded in the real property records of Denton County, Texas. 
(g)  The authority and the rights granted in this section are cumulative to any and all legal rights and remedies, methods of collection and/or security available to the City of Denton, Texas under common law, statutory law, the city's Charter or the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-258, § 1, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 26-13. - Internal point based scoring. 
Utility accounts within the utility billing system receive points for each credit event that occurs on their utility account. Each credit event and points associated will remain on the customer's account for a period of no less than three hundred sixty-five (365) days' from the date of occurrence. 
(1)  Late fee penalty—50 points. 
(2)  Disconnect notice—200 points. 
(3)  Disconnection for non-payment of utilities—500 points. 
(4)  Check returned for other reasons other than insufficient funds—200 points. 
(5)  Insufficient funds payment returned—200 points. 
(6)  Collection letter for closed utility account mailed—1,000 points. 
(7)  Account referred to third party collection agency—1,000 points. 
(8)  Write-off as uncollectable debt—2,000 points. 
(9)  Bankruptcy—2,000 points. 
( Ord. No. 2018-016 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-9-18)  
Sec. 26-14. - Identity theft prevention. 
The purpose of this policy is to prevent identity theft through the identification of "red flags." This program sets forth policies and authorizes the creation of written directives to: 
(a)  Identify relevant red flags. 
(b)  Detect red flags. 
(c)  Act to prevent and mitigate identity theft. 
(d)  Foster program maintenance and continuing staff training. 
Knowledge of specific administrative procedures, administrative directives, and internal practices employed to ensure customer identity theft protection shall be limited to customer service personnel who require them for the purpose of preventing identity theft and for maintenance of the program. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
Sec. 26-15. - Identity theft prevention measures definition of terms. 
For the purposes of this policy, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Denton, Texas. 
Covered account means: Under the rule, a "covered account" is: 
(1)  Any account customer service offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions; and 
(2)  Any other account customer service offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city from identity theft. 
Creditors means "to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility companies, and telecommunications companies. Where non-profit and government entities defer payment for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered creditors." 
Customer service means the department responsible for creation and maintenance of billed customer accounts. 
Identifying information means "any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person," including: name, address, telephone number, social security number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's Internet Protocol address, or routing code. 
Identity theft means fraud committed using the identifying information of another person. 
Program means the identity theft prevention program for the city. 
Program administrator means the customer service manager or designee responsible for the program. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
Sec. 26-16. - Identification of red flags. 
Customer service considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with identity theft. Customer service identifies the following red flags in each of the listed categories: 
(a)  Notifications and warnings from consumer reporting agencies. 
(1)  Report of fraud accompanying a consumer credit report; 
(2)  Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or applicant; 
(3)  Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant; and 
(4)  Indication from a consumer credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's usual pattern or activity. 
(b)  Suspicious documents. 
(1)  Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic; 
(2)  Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document; 
(3)  Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears forged); and 
(4)  Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged. 
(c)  Suspicious personal identifying information. 
(1)  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates, lack of correlation between Social Security number range and date of birth); 
(2)  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance, Social Security number or an address not matching an address on a credit report); 
(3)  Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent; 
(4)  Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address); 
(5)  Social Security number presented that is the same as one given by another customer; 
(6)  An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person; 
(7)  A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application when reminded to do so (however, by law social security numbers must not be required) or an applicant cannot provide information requested beyond what could commonly be found in a purse or wallet; and 
(8)  A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for the customer. 
(d)  Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account. 
(1)  Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name; 
(2)  Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account; 
(3)  Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example: very high activity); 
(4)  Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable; 
(5)  Notice to customer service that a customer is not receiving mail sent by customer service; 
(6)  Notice to customer service that an account has unauthorized activity; 
(7)  Breach in customer service's computer system security; and 
(8)  Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information. 
(e)  Alerts from others. 
(1)  Notice to customer service from a customer, identity theft victim, fraud detection service, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
Sec. 26-17. - Red flag detection. 
Customer service shall monitor accounts for detection of red flags under the requirements set forth in section 26-17 as they apply to new and existing customer accounts. 
(a)  In order to detect red flags associated with the opening of a new customer account, customer service personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account: 
(1)  Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification; 
(2)  Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's license or other identification card); 
(3)  Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity; 
(4)  Request additional documentation to establish identity; and 
(5)  Independently contact the customer or business. 
(b)  In order to detect red flags for an existing customer account, customer service personnel will take the following steps to monitor transactions with an account: 
(1)  Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email); 
(2)  Verify the validity of requests to close accounts or change billing addresses; and 
(3)  Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
Sec. 26-18. - Identity theft prevention and mitigation measures. 
In the event customer service personnel detect any identified red flags, such personnel shall take one (1) or more of the following steps to prevent and mitigate identify theft, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag. 
(1)  Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft; 
(2)  Contact the customer, sometimes through multiple methods; 
(3)  Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to accounts; 
(4)  Not open a new account; 
(5)  Close an existing account; 
(6)  Do not close the account, but monitor or contact authorities; 
(7)  Reopen an account with a new number; 
(8)  Notify the program administrator for determination of the appropriate step(s) to take; 
(9)  Notify law enforcement; or 
(10)  Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
Sec. 26-19. - Protection of customer identifying information. 
In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to utility accounts, customer service will take the following steps with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information: 
(a)  Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure; 
(b)  Where and when allowed, ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer files containing customer information; 
(c)  Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after a set period of time; 
(d)  Change passwords on office computers on a regular basis; 
(e)  Ensure all computers are backed up properly and any backup information is secured; 
(f)  Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information; 
(g)  Request only the last four (4) digits of Social Security numbers (if any); 
(h)  Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and 
(i)  Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for business purposes. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
Sec. 26-20. - Program maintenance and administration. 
Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with the program administrator. The program administrator will be responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of utility staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program. The program administrator may issue written directives in furtherance of this policy with the approval of the city manager. 
The program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of customer service from identity theft. At least annually, the program administrator will take any of the following steps: 
(a)  Consider customer service's experiences with identity theft situations; 
(b)  Consider changes in identity theft methods, detection and prevention methods; 
(c)  Review changes in types of accounts customer service maintains and changes in customer service's business arrangements with other entities as they apply to the program; 
(d)  Consult with law enforcement authorities; 
(e)  Consult with other city personnel, and 
(f)  Make determination whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags, are warranted; 
(g)  Present any recommended program changes for formal adoption. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
Sec. 26-21. - Program training. 
All customer service staff shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program administrator. Training shall occur at the time of employment and not less than annually thereafter in the following areas: 
(a)  Detection of red flags; 
(b)  Responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is detected. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
Sec. 26-22. - Application to service providers. 
In the event customer service engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more accounts, including but not limited to franchise utility providers, customer service will take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft: 
(a)  Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers have such policies and procedures in place; and 
(b)  Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers review customer service's program and report any red flags to the program administrator. 
( Ord. No. 20-476 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-7-20)  
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE UTILITY FRANCHISES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, § 13.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-36. - Gas. 
(a)  Definition. The term "bona fide consumer," as used in this section, means any person whose house is ready for gas connections to be made. 
(b)  Extensions. Upon application of any bona fide consumer within the city, any person supplying gas to the public within the city shall extend the necessary gas mains and make the required connections with such consumer within twenty (20) days; provided, however, that no such required extension shall exceed one hundred (100) feet per consumer. 
(c)  Repairs and corrections. Repairs and corrections of defects in gas service shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours after notice is given to the manager or other person locally in charge of the gas company. 
(d)  Service connections. Upon the application of any bona fide consumer in a block where the gas mains are already extended, connections shall be made within fifty-eight (58) hours after application is made to the office of the gas company. 
(Code 1966, § 25-94) 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 28-141 et seq.; mechanical code, § 28-251 et seq.  
Sec. 26-37. - Approval of rates required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person exercising or enjoying any public franchise or privilege within the city to charge or collect for the local service rendered to the public in the city any higher rate than is now fixed or in existence or being charged therefor, without first filing application for such increase with the city council and securing approval thereof. 
It shall be unlawful for an entity to pass on a utility charge greater than that charged by an authorized utility provider for an amount greater than the actual amount due or charged by the provider. 
(Code 1966, § 25-91; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01)  
Sec. 26-38. - Street rental charges; gross receipts taxes. 
The city council may from time to time levy reasonable street or public property rental or use charges against the holder of any franchise or may, in addition to other taxes, levy gross receipts taxes upon such franchise holders in such amounts as may be permitted by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1966, § 25-93)  
Secs. 26-39—26-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COGENERATION AND SMALL POWER PRODUCTION FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 26-51. - Purpose. 
In order to comply with Sections 201 and 210 of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and with the rules and regulations of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission pertaining thereto, the policies of this division relating to interconnections of the electric system of the city with cogeneration and small power production facilities, rates for sales of electric energy to such facilities and rates for purchases of electric energy from such facilities are hereby established. 
(Code 1966, § 25-96)  
Sec. 26-52. - Scope. 
(a)  The Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act (PURPA), as supplemented by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Order No. 69, issued February 19, 1980, encourages cogeneration in small power production. Cogeneration is the production of electric energy as well as steam or other forms of useful energy, i.e., heat, which are used for industrial/commercial heating and/or cooling purposes. Small power production is a facility with less than eighty thousand (80,000) kilowatts of installed capacity which produces electricity from such primary energy sources as biomass, waste and renewable resources, including wind, solar, geothermal or hydroelectric energy. 
(b)  The city department of utilities is required by PURPA and FERC guidelines to interconnect with, operate in parallel with, purchase electricity from and sell electricity to customers with qualified facilities. These guidelines make it clear that the city's customers are to be no worse off by addition of cogenerator and small power producers. It means that they will not see a higher cost of electricity, the city will not be required to make additional investments and the quality of service will not be lowered. 
(Code 1966, § 25-97)  
Sec. 26-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Avoided costs means the incremental costs to an electric utility of electric energy or capacity or both which, but for the purchase from qualifying facilities, such utility would generate itself or purchase from another source. 
Cogeneration facility means a facility which produces electric energy and steam or other forms of useful energy, such as heat, which are used for industrial, commercial, heating or cooling purposes. 
Interconnection costs means the reasonable costs of connection, switching, metering, transmission, distribution, safety provisions and administrative costs incurred by the electric utility directly related to the installation and maintenance of the physical facilities necessary to permit interconnected operations with a qualifying facility, to the extent such costs are in excess of the corresponding costs which the electric utility would have incurred if it had not engaged in interconnected operations, but instead generated an equivalent amount of electric energy itself or purchased an equivalent amount of electric energy or capacity from other sources. Interconnection costs do not include any costs involved in the calculation of avoided costs. 
Qualifying cogeneration facility means a cogeneration facility that meets the requirements of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission regarding ownership, fuel use and operating and efficiency standards. 
Qualifying small power production facility means a small power production facility that meets the requirements of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission regarding ownership, fuel use, fuel efficiency and reliability. 
Small power production facility means a facility which produces electric energy solely by the use, as a primary energy source, of biomass, waste, renewable resources or any combination thereof totaling not greater than eighty (80) megawatts at one (1) site. 
(Code 1966, § 25-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-54. - Interconnections with qualifying facilities. 
(a)  Qualifying facilities desiring to interconnect with the electric system of the city shall make application to the department of utilities for such interconnection. Applicants shall use such forms as are prescribed by the city and shall furnish all information requested. 
(b)  The city shall establish reasonable standards to be met by qualifying facilities to ensure system safety and reliability of interconnected operations. Such standards may include but shall not be limited to the following areas: power factor; voltage regulation; fault, overcurrent and over/under voltage protection; harmonics; synchronization; and isolation. 
(c)  Interconnection costs associated with the interconnection with a qualifying facility shall be paid for by such qualifying facility. Qualifying facilities shall be required to execute contractual agreements with the city before any interconnection is established. 
(Code 1966, § 25-99)  
Sec. 26-55. - Rates for sales of electric energy to qualifying facilities. 
Rates for sales of electric energy to qualifying facilities shall be those current standard rates adopted from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and city council which apply to other customers of the utility in the same classification of electric service. 
(Code 1966, § 25-100)  
Sec. 26-56. - Rates for purchases of electric energy from qualifying facilities. 
(a)  Rates for purchases of electric energy from qualifying facilities shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Such rates shall be just and reasonable to the electric consumer of the utility and in the public interest, shall not discriminate against qualifying cogeneration and small power production facilities and shall be related to avoided costs; however, in no case is the utility required to pay more than the avoided costs. 
(c)  Standard rates shall be established for purchases from qualifying facilities with a design capacity of one hundred (100) kilowatts or less. Rates for purchases from qualifying facilities with a design capacity over one hundred (100) kilowatts may be standard rates or may be by individual contracts, the terms of which are fair and reasonable. 
(Code 1966, § 25-101)  
Secs. 26-57—26-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRIC SERVICE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 28-61 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-76. - Private lighting luminaires. 
Private lighting luminaires (dusk-to-dawn lighting service) for homes, schools, security, churches, commercial areas and industry shall be provided, where feasible and in keeping with good electrical practice, according to the following specifications: 
(1)  A self-contained automatic dusk-to-dawn 175-watt mercury vapor lighting fixture shall be installed or caused to be installed by the city on an existing pole structure for the customer at a monthly rate for a minimum two-year period in an amount as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. The charge will be added to the customer's monthly utility bill and shall become an integral part of the bill. The city will be responsible for making the installation, furnishing the electricity for the operation of the lamp, provide all necessary maintenance, including the replacement of lamps, for the two-year period and all subsequent time addition to the contract. 
(2)  A self-contained automatic dusk-to-dawn 250-watt mercury vapor lighting fixture shall be installed or caused to be installed by the city on an existing pole structure at a monthly rate for a minimum two-year period in an amount as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. The charge will be added to the customer's monthly utility bill and shall become an integral part of the bill. The city will be responsible for making the installation, furnishing the electricity for the operation of the lamp, provide all necessary maintenance, including the replacement of lamps, for the two-year period and all subsequent time addition to the contract. 
(3)  A self-contained automatic dusk-to-dawn 400-watt mercury vapor lighting fixture shall be installed by the city on an existing pole structure at a monthly rate for a minimum two-year period in an amount as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. The charge will be added to the customer's monthly utility bill and shall become an integral part of the bill. The city will be responsible for making the installation, furnishing the electricity for the operation of the lamp, provide all necessary maintenance, including the replacement of lamps, for the two-year period and all subsequent time addition to the contract. 
(4)  Where necessary for proper illumination or where existing poles are inadequate, the city will install or cause to be installed one (1) pole for each installed light, at a distance not to exceed eighty (80) feet from existing lines, at no charge to the customer. Each additional pole span shall not exceed a span spacing of one hundred (100) feet. Additional poles required to install a light in a customer's specifically desired location and not having a light installed on the pole shall bear a cost established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, payable by the customer prior to installation. 
(5)  A two-year contract shall be agreed to and signed by each customer desiring dusk-to-dawn lighting service authorizing fixed monthly charges to be applied to the monthly municipal utilities bill. If a customer desires the removal of the unit or discontinuance of the service, the remainder of the contract shall become due and payable. 
(6)  Dusk-to-dawn lighting shall be installed on wood poles with a normal ground to lamp height of approximately twenty-seven (27) feet. Where a customer desires his lighting on steel poles and/or underground cable installation, the city shall install or cause such to be installed; however, the customer shall bear the total cost above that of a normal wood pole installation, and it shall be payable by the customer prior to installation. 
(Code 1966, § 25-10)  
Sec. 26-77. - Rates, charges, fees, etc. 
The rates, charges, fees, deposits, billings and procedures for providing electrical service by the city to its customers shall be established and be in accordance with ordinances adopted and as from time-to-time amended by the city council; the ordinances and amendments thereto to be kept on file with the city secretary and to be available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(Code 1966, § 25-21)  
Secs. 26-78—26-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Underground electrical utility policy for subdivisions, § 34-122. 
 
Sec. 26-91. - Scope. 
The scope of this division is to cover all portions of the electrical installation from the point of attachment at the entrance of the high tension cable from the municipal facilities through fusing, switching, transformation, cable service through to and including the main entrance switch attached to the consuming unit. The scope of this division is to also cover any conduits for yard lights, decorative lighting, underground outbuilding service or control and/or any underground electrical wiring used for illumination, motors, heating or other types of electrical consuming unit. 
(Code 1966, § 25-105)  
Sec. 26-92. - Inspector—Office created; assistants. 
There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector of underground utilities of the city within which may be assistant electrical inspectors. 
(Code 1966, § 25-107) 
Cross reference— Electrical inspector generally, § 28-81 et seq.  
Sec. 26-93. - Same—Qualifications. 
The electrical inspector of underground utilities and his assistants shall be competent persons of good moral character; each shall have adequate experience in the electrical field, with emphasis on underground high and low tension installations; each shall have adequate knowledge of current and approved methods and practices relating to electrical installations, splicing and terminations of cables and be currently up to date on the latest editions of the electric code adopted by the city in chapter 28 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 25-108)  
Sec. 26-94. - Same—Member of utilities department. 
The electrical inspector of underground utilities shall be a member of the public utilities department. 
(Code 1966, § 25-109)  
Sec. 26-95. - Same—Duties generally. 
(a)  The electrical inspector of underground utilities shall inspect all installations, alterations and repairs of electrical work in consumer installations as set out in this division. He shall be allowed twenty-four (24) hours, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays recognized by the city excluded, to make such inspection. For an approved installation, he shall attach a green tag or card; for a disapproved installation, he shall attach a red tag or card and immediately notify the master electrician (electrical contractor) performing work on such premises, in writing and by telephone, specifying the exact deficiency existing and shall allow a reasonable time, as determined by the inspector, to correct the deficiency. It shall be a violation of this division to remove, deface, damage or mutilate any tag or card which the inspector has attached to an installation. If this corrective action is not begun immediately or the deficiency is not corrected within the prescribed time, the inspector shall notify the owner or his agent by letter and include a copy of the previous notice to the electrical contractor and shall, if he believes the public welfare endangered, in writing order the electrical supply to the premises discontinued. 
(b)  When in the performance of his duties and as may be necessary for the performance of his duties, the inspector shall have the right to enter any consumer's premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making tests or inspections of the electrical wiring, appliances or apparatus contained in this division. 
(c)  When on duty, the inspector shall have adequate identification, with photograph, furnished by the city to indicate his position. 
(d)  The inspector shall keep or cause to be kept a written record of all permits, licenses and inspections which are required under this division. He also shall keep a written record of all condemnations and disconnects of electrical installations resulting from condemnations. 
(e)  The inspector shall stop the installation, alteration, operation or repair of any electrical work on or in any consumer's premises when, in the inspector's opinion, the work is being done in a reckless, careless or unsafe manner which violates the provisions of this division. 
(f)  Upon determining that particular work should stop, the inspector shall post a notice to that effect on the consumer's premises and notify the permit holder in writing and by telephone. Thereafter no person shall proceed with the installation until the inspector has cancelled the stop-work notice in writing and by telephone. 
(Code 1966, § 25-110)  
Sec. 26-96. - Same—Authority. 
The electrical inspectors of underground utilities shall be endowed with all the police powers necessary for the proper enforcement of this division and shall be responsible for its strict enforcement. The inspectors shall not deviate from the minimum standards or rules and regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1966, § 25-114)  
Sec. 26-97. - Same—Liability. 
The electrical inspectors of underground utilities shall not be liable for damage arising because of duties performed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1966, § 25-111)  
Sec. 26-98. - Same—Conflict of interest. 
The electrical inspector of underground utilities shall not have any monetary interests in any electrical contracting company nor shall he do any electrical work for any private party or any company at any time while he is in the employment of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 25-112) 
Charter reference— Personal interest of officers or employees, § 14.04.  
Sec. 26-99. - Installation standards generally. 
(a)  In the installation and maintenance of electrical wiring systems and apparatus, the electrical code adopted in chapter 28 of this Code shall be the minimum requirements permitted within the scope of this division, and shall rule where this Code is silent. 
(b)  All material and apparatus used in electrical installations shall have the approval of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and bear the Underwriters' label. 
(Code 1966, § 25-113)  
Sec. 26-100. - Procedure required in order to install underground distribution systems. 
(a)  When the developer of an approved subdivision or land development desires to install an underground electrical distribution system in the subdivision or development, the developer shall make formal application to the assistant city manager - utilities by providing all information and drawings of the proposed facilities as required by the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(b)  The assistant city manager - utilities, upon approval of the application, shall furnish the developer information as to the routing and sizes of the conduit systems to be used, including the switch and transformer foundations, pull boxes, etc., which shall be installed to city specifications by the developer at his sole cost and expense. The developer shall also be responsible for all or part of the cost of additional underground electrical facilities, which are required or installed, in accordance with the city's specifications allocating the cost of such facilities. 
(c)  Upon approval and acceptance of the system, the city will install conductors, transformers, pedestals and switches. 
(Code 1966, § 25-106; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01)  
Sec. 26-101. - Inspection tags to be attached to service entrance switch. 
In inspecting the electrical wiring of any building or premises, the electrical inspector of underground utilities shall leave a tag or notice attached to the service entrance switch. This notice shall state clearly whether the wiring is approved or is to be kept open for further inspection, and no person shall conceal any wiring until he has been informed that such wiring has been approved by the inspector. The general contractor or owner shall be held responsible for any violation of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 25-117)  
Sec. 26-102. - Interference with wiring during construction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any electric wiring being installed on any premises or on any building during construction. 
(Code 1966, § 25-116)  
Sec. 26-103. - Loose wiring not to be left on buildings or streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit pieces of wire to be left on the surface of buildings, in streets, alleys or roadways or for dead ends to dangle from poles or buildings or in any manner leave old or new wire in a condition that is dangerous to life or property. 
(Code 1966, § 25-115; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01)  
Sec. 26-104. - High voltage installations. 
(a)  High voltage installations for underground services in subdivisions shall consist of a dual feeder service capable of being energized from either end and capable of being sectionalized and insulated at each transformer location. 
(b)  The main distribution point of each end of the dual feeder shall be protected by line class arresters, fused disconnects and approved pothead cable terminations. 
(c)  The cables shall have a metal conduit protection at all points where mechanical damage is likely to occur, and all cables shall conform to all utility department requirements and specifications regarding such metal conduits, and metal conduits shall be installed when required by the inspector of underground utilities. 
(d)  All conduit systems shall be buried at a minimum depth of forty-two (42) inches below finished grade. After excavation the first six (6) inches of refill earth shall be of selected material free of stones and sharp objects. The remainder of the refill may be of the excavated materials. 
(e)  Conduit bends shall not be less than ten (10) times the diameter of the conduit. 
(f)  Terminations within the high voltage chamber of the transformer may be either stress cones or an approved cable termination. 
(g)  Terminations in weathered locations may be only of an approved cable termination. 
(h)  Underground high voltage conduits shall contain a bare soft drawn or medium hard drawn copper cables of the same physical size of the current-carrying cables 
(i)  Underground high voltage cables shall be of the shielded and grounded 15 KV approved type and the shields and grounds shall be securely fastened to the ground network system. 
(j)  Sizing of underground high voltage cables shall be done by the city electrical engineer but in no case shall be smaller than a No. 2 AWG size. 
(k)  All underground direct burial shall be under the strict supervision of the inspector of underground utilities and shall conform to all utility department requirements and be in accordance with the plans and specifications previously submitted therefor by the installer or developer and approved by the assistant city manager - utilities. All underground direct burial of high voltage systems shall be marked aboveground at locations and in the manner directed by the inspector of underground utilities. 
(Code 1966, § 25-118)  
Sec. 26-105. - Transformer installation. 
(a)  Each transformer utilized in underground residential service shall be of the pad-mount type, complete with a high and low tension cable chamber. The high tension chamber shall contain visible disconnection means, a sectionalizing switch for selection of alternate feeders and a no-load tap changing capability. The low voltage chamber shall contain bus facilities for connecting six (6) 120/240 volt service cables, complete with metering facilities. The transformer spade connections shall each contain six (6) lugs with a cable range of No. 4 to No. 2/0 AWG. 
(b)  High and low voltage chambers shall be separated by a metal partition having rigid hinged doors. 
(c)  The transformer shall be placed on a concrete slab installed after underground cables have been installed. The slab shall project a minimum of six (6) inches on all sides of the transformer and shall be six (6) inches thick. Slabs in unstable soil shall be pinned by four (4) piers ten (10) inches in diameter and thirty-six (36) inches deep. 
(Code 1966, § 25-120)  
Secs. 26-106—26-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 26-115. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in their present tense include the future tense, words in plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
Blade arc sphere is the three-dimensional sphere in the air created by the 360 degree rotation of the blades combined with the 360 degree rotation of the WECS nacelle. 
Building-mounted WECS is any WECS that is mounted directly to a building's roof, chimney, vent stack, cooling tower, dome, spire, or other similar structure, rather than a free-standing monopole support structure. 
Decibel means the unit of measure used to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity. 
Free-standing WECS is any WECS that is self-supporting via a monopole support system or is and not mounted to a building or structure in any way. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Height, for the purposes of this section, is measured from the average natural ground level to the highest point of the arc of the blades' elevation for free standing WECS. If a free-standing WECS does not use blades, then height is measured from the average natural ground level to the highest point of the WECS. For building-mounted WECS, the height shall be measured from the base of the WECS where it is mounted on the building to the highest point of the arc of the blades' elevation. If the building-mounted WECS does not use blades, then height is measured from the base of the WECS where it is mounted on the building to the highest point of the WECS. See "Limitations", Subchapter 35.5 of Denton Development Code, for additional information regarding height of building mounted WECS. 
Nacelle is a streamlined enclosure that connects the blades and WECS hub to the WECS support device and houses specific mechanical parts including, but not limited to braking mechanisms, shafts, gearboxes and generators. 
Sound pressure means the average rate at which sound energy is transmitted through a unit area in a specific direction, as measured at a receiver. 
Sound pressure level means the sound pressure as measured on a logarithmic scale and reported in decibels. 
Tower height shall mean the height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine and blades. 
Turbine shall mean the parts of a wind energy system including, but not limited to, the blades, generator and tail. 
Wind energy conversion system or WECS shall mean a system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine, a nacelle, associated control or conversion electronics, and (depending on design) a tower. A WECS is intended for on-site production of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-088, § 3, 5-17-11)  
Sec. 26-116. - General regulations. 
The following general regulations apply to all WECS located within the city limits. Pre-existing WECS installations lawfully in existence at the time of the enactment of this division shall not be required to meet the requirements established herein, other than those contained in subsections (z) and (aa) below. To be considered lawful, the owner of the WECS must provide documentation proving that the subject WECS was in existence at the time of the enactment of this division. If no documentation is available, the burden of proof shall be on the owner of the WECS. 
(a)  Zoning restrictions imposed upon WECS installations are as specified in the Denton Development Code. 1 [] 
(b)  Compliance with Denton Municipal Electric (DME) Interconnection Provisions. The installation of any WECS that is within the service area of Denton Municipal Electric (DME) shall comply with the DME "Agreement for Interconnection and Parallel Operation of Distributed Generation" and shall abide by the conditions of the "Agreement for Interconnection and Parallel Operation of Distributed Generation". No WECS shall be installed prior to submitting an Application for Interconnection and Parallel Operation of Distributed Generation with DME and having a fully executed Agreement for Interconnection and Parallel Operation of Distributed Generation with DME. 
(c)  WECS permit required. No WECS shall be installed without first obtaining a WECS permit from the building official, or his/her designee. The permit's application shall be submitted with the required numbers and types of plans as deemed necessary by the building official to adequately review the proposal. An application for building permit must be accompanied by: 
(1)  The appropriate permit fees as established by the city; 
(2)  A site plan of the proposed WECS at a scale no smaller than 1? = 30'. The site plan shall include: 
(i)  A survey and legal description of the parcel where the proposed WECS will be located; 
(ii)  A plan view layout of the proposed WECS clearly showing: 
• The location of the system; 
• All components of the system; 
• Distances to property lines; 
• Required setbacks; 
• Adjacent land uses and zoning designations; 
• Existing structures on the site; 
• Required screening of the base of the tower structure; 
• Natural features such as watercourses, trees, and environmentally sensitive areas (ESAs); 
• Existing overhead and underground utility lines including any pad -mounted equipment and appurtenances; and 
• Easements; 
(3)  Elevation drawings showing: 
• The design and height of the proposed WECS; 
• Detailed drawings of all system components; and 
• A profile view of the setback distances and distances to property lines; 
(4)  A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the Electrical Code; 
(5)  Standard installation drawings of the WECS, including the tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer registered in the State of Texas shall also be submitted; and 
(6)  Evidence of notice to utility company as required by subsection (t) below. 
An issued permit shall expire if the WECS is not installed and functioning within six (6) months, including completion of the required inspection, from the date the permit is issued; or, if the WECS is out-of-service or otherwise unused for a continuous twelve-month period. 
(d)  Construction standards. A WECS must be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations and under the seal of a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas, and may not exceed the manufacturer's recommendations for maximum tower height. Additionally, all components of a WECS shall comply with applicable state and local building codes. 
(e)  Location and setback. 
(1)  Free-standing monopole support structure: 
a.  Free standing WECS shall be located behind the front elevation of the primary structure on the lot. 
b.  No part of the WECS, including blades, may extend into any required yard setback or utility easement. 
c.  The horizontal separation from all property lines shall not be less than the height of the WECS, plus ten (10) additional feet. 
d.  Free standing WECS shall have a setback distance equal to 1.25 times the height of the WECS from any overhead utility lines. 
e.  Free-standing WECS blade arc spheres shall have a minimum thirty-foot clearance from any structure or any other impediment. 
f.  Free standing WECS shall have a minimum thirty-foot setback distance from any tree. 
(2)  Building-mounted: 
a.  Building-mounted WECS shall be located behind the front elevation of the primary structure on the lot. 
b.  No part of the WECS, including blades, may extend into any required yard setback or utility easement. 
c.  The horizontal separation from all property lines shall not be less than the height of the WECS, plus ten (10) additional feet. Building-mounted WECS shall have a setback distance equal to 1.25 times the height of the WECS from any overhead utility lines. 
d.  Building-mounted WECS blade arc spheres shall have a minimum five-foot clearance from any structure or any other impediment. 
(f)  Principal structure required on lot. A WECS shall be erected on a lot only after a principal structure has been constructed on the lot. The WECS shall serve the structures (principal or accessory) on the lot. 
(g)  Sound pressure levels. Sound pressure levels shall not exceed fifty decibels (50dBA) measured from the property line closest to the WECS. If the existing ambient noise is suspected of exceeding fifty decibels (50dBA), that applicant shall establish and submit to the city, a continuous seventy-two (72) hour ambient noise level measured from the property line closest to the proposed location of the WECS. The seventy-two-hour time span shall include at least one (1) twenty-four-hour reading during either a Saturday or Sunday. If the ambient noise level established and submitted to the city is higher than fifty decibels (50dBA), the noise generated from the WECS may not exceed the established ambient noise level by more than five decibels (5dBA). 
(h)  Lights. Lighting not required by the FAA is prohibited. When lighting is required by the FAA, such lighting shall not exceed the minimum requirements of said administration. A tower structure may be artificially lighted ONLY with steady-burning red obstruction lights (FAA type L-810) or flashing red obstruction lights (FAA type L-864) flashing no faster than twenty (20) flashes per minute. Flashing red obstruction lights (FAA type L-864) flashing faster than twenty (20) flashes per minute, medium intensity flashing white obstruction lights (FAA type L-865 or L-866), high intensity flashing white lights (FAA type L-856 or L-857) or dual flashing red obstruction lights and medium intensity flashing white obstruction lights (FAA types L-864/L-865) may be used ONLY when the FAA specifies that the specific lighting pattern is the ONLY lighting pattern acceptable to promote aviation safety and when the FAA refuses the applicant's request for authorization to use the lighting required by the city herein. Upward lighting, flood lights or other lighting not strictly required by the FAA is prohibited. If lighting is required by the FAA, the applicant shall submit written evidence of this requirement as a part of the application. 
(i)  Signs. No advertising or other signs shall be allowed on a WECS, other than operational warnings and instructions affixed by the manufacturer. 
(j)  Prohibited in easements. No portion of a WECS shall be placed in any public easement. 
(k)  Screening. WECS are exempted from the screening requirements outlined in Section 35.13.9.B of the Denton Development Code. 
(l)  Electronic interference. All WECS shall be filtered, shielded or otherwise designed and constructed so as not to cause electrical, radio frequency, television, and other communication signal interference. Should interference occur or be detected in the future, the WECS shall cease operation until said interference has be addressed and corrected by the WECS owner and operator. 
(m)  Color. All WECS shall be white, grey, or silver color. The finish shall be a dull or matte finish so as to reduce the possibility of any glares or reflections and to minimize the visual obtrusiveness of the WECS. 
(n)  Tower design. A WECS tower shall be constructed in a monopole design of tubular steel and shall be self-supporting without the use of guy wires or other similar features. 
(o)  Braking. All WECS shall be equipped with a manual and/or an automatic braking device capable of stopping the WECS operation in high winds. 
(p)  Grounding and shielding. All WECS shall be grounded and shielded to protect against natural lightning strikes and stray voltage, including the blades, in accordance with the Electrical Code. 
(q)  Load requirements. All WECS shall be designed to withstand loads including, but not limited to ice and wind, as detailed in the Building Code. 
(r)  Location in environmentally sensitive areas. If located within an environmentally sensitive area ESA categories defined by Denton Development Code 35.17.4, WECS may only be allowed in developed or undeveloped floodplain, and must be located outside of any designated stream buffer or water related habitats. All WECS proposed to be installed within floodplains shall have approval of the City of Denton Floodplain Administrator or his/her designee and, where applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Applicants requesting such approval shall undertake all measures required by the floodplain administrator or his/her designee to protect the WECS from damage from potential flooding, and compensate for any loss of valley storage resulting from the installation of the WECS. Following installation, the applicant shall re-vegetate the site in accordance with the specifications of the watershed protection manager, or designee. 
(s)  Flicker and blade glint. WECS shall be sited to prevent the impact of blade glint and minimize the impact of shadow flicker on any inhabited structures (except for the owner's) or city roadways. WECS found to be in violation of this condition shall be shut down until the flicker or glint problem is remedied. 
(t)  Notice to utility company on grid-interconnected systems. No WECS, proposed for interconnection to the power grid or electric utility infrastructure, may be installed until an agreement authorizing such interconnection has been finalized and approved by the electric utility providing service to the owner. Completely off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement only upon demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the electric utility serving the owner, that the system is truly off-grid and cannot inadvertently be tied into the electric utility grid. 
(u)  City Building Codes/Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of a WECS, the owner of such system must ensure that it is maintained in compliance with all provisions of the City of Denton's Building Code and zoning regulations. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a WECS fails to comply with such codes and regulations, or otherwise constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon written notice to the owner of the WECS, the owner shall have thirty (30) calendar days to bring the WECS into compliance with applicable standards. Failure to bring the WECS into compliance shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WECS at the owner's expense. This notice requirement shall not preclude immediate action by the building official as allowed by law, if required in the interest of public safety. 
(v)  Certification by engineer. The application shall include a standard drawing and engineer analysis of the WECS tower or building attachment, and certification by a professional mechanical, structural, or civil engineer. 
(w)  Climbing apparatus. No free-standing WECS shall include a ladder or any other tower climbing apparatus within twelve (12) feet of the ground, unless such device is secured from access by a locked device approved by the building official. 
(x)  Other regulations. All WECS shall be adequately designed structurally, electrically, and in all other respects to accommodate the safety and general well being of the public. All WECS shall be required to meet all applicable regulations specified in the Building Code, Electrical Code, and any other applicable regulatory documents. All tower heights, plus the additional height associated with blades, must be in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration requirements. 
(y)  Maintenance. All WECS shall be maintained at all times according to the manufacturer's specifications and all other applicable regulations including, but not limited to the Building Code and the Electrical Code. The appearance of a WECS shall also be maintained, including, but not limited to, painting, fencing/screening, and maintenance of structural integrity. 
(z)  Removal of unsafe wind energy conversion system. WECS that have, due to damage, lack of maintenance or repair, or other circumstances, become unstable, lean significantly out-of-plumb, or pose a danger of collapse shall be removed or brought into repair within thirty (30) days following notice given by the building official. If the wind energy system is not made safe or removed within thirty (30) days of notification from the city, the city may remove the WECS and place a lien upon the property for the costs of the removal. However, at any time the building official may order immediate action to prevent or remove an imminent threat to public safety or property. 
(aa)  Abandonment. 
(1)  At such time as an owner abandons, discontinues, or is required to discontinue, the operation of a WECS, such owner must notify the Building Official of the City of Denton by certified U.S. Mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given no less than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Owner shall also provide written notification to all interconnected electric service providers, in accordance with the terms of the governing interconnection agreement. 
(2)  In the event that an owner fails to give such notice, the WECS shall be considered abandoned if the WECS is not used to generate electricity for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, unless the owner of said WECS provides proof of operation, on at least a quarterly basis, for the period that the WECS is being considered abandoned. 
(3)  Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the person who constructed the WECS or the person who operated the WECS or the property owner shall physically remove the WECS within ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(i)  Removal of the tower, turbine and all other components of the WECS; and 
(ii)  Transportation of the tower, turbine and all other components of the WECS to an appropriate disposal site. 
(4)  The owner of the WECS shall restore the site to its pre-construction condition. 
(5)  If a party as stated in subsection (3) herein fails to remove a WECS in accordance with this section, the city shall have the authority to enter the subject property and physically remove the WECS as a nuisance, consistent with statutory authority and the procedures established in article XI, chapter 17 of the Denton Code. Costs for the removal of the WECS shall be charged to the landowner of record in the event the city must remove the WECS, and the city may place a lien on the property for such costs of removal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-088, § 3, 5-17-11) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Cross Reference—Zoning restrictions, generally, see Subchapter 35.5 of Denton Development Code. 
 
Secs. 26-117—26-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code generally, § 28-141 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-126. - Private installation of water and sewer main taps. 
(a)  Permit required. No person, firm, association or corporation may remove, install or relocate any water or sewer main tap or loop, or cut any street surface for the purpose of removing, installing or relocating any such tap or loop without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of water/wastewater field services ("superintendent"). A separate permit is required for each and every tap or loop that is to be removed, installed or relocated. Permits issued under this section are not transferable. 
(b)  Requirement for issuance. Any person desiring issuance of a sewer and water tap permit shall, upon written application to the superintendent, be issued a permit if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant must certify that the work will take place under his on-site supervision. 
(2)  The applicant must obtain the following minimum licensure or certification: 
a.  For installation of sewer taps, the applicant must be a master plumber licensed by the State of Texas or be issued a certificate of competency by the Texas Water Commission as a wastewater plant operator. 
b.  For installation of water taps and loops, the applicant must be a master plumber licensed by the State of Texas or be issued a certificate of competency by the Texas Department of Health as a water supply system operator. 
(3)  The applicant must not have been convicted of any prior offense under this section, or had a permit issued under this section revoked, during the twelve (12) months preceding the application. 
(4)  The applicant must execute a performance bond, maintenance bond, and payment bond, each in an amount not less than the fee currently charged by the utility department for such installations, and sufficient to guarantee that funds will be available for completion of the project and payment of workers in the event of applicant's default, and to cover maintenance for one year after completion. 
(5)  The applicant must attend a briefing on the city's standards and procedures relative to the task permitted and must adhere to those standards during the course of the permitted work. 
(6)  The applicant must demonstrate that he has sufficient equipment and manpower to safely complete the permitted task consistent with all applicable city, state and federal standards. 
(7)  The applicant shall provide and maintain valid certificates of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, and in an amount and type meeting the following minimum coverages: 
a.  Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability: 
Workers' Compensation—Statutory Limits 
Employer's Liability—Statutory Limits 
b.  Comprehensive Automobile Liability: 
A combined single limit of $500,00.00 
c.  Comprehensive General Liability: 
A combined single limit of $500,000.00 
d.  Owner's Protective Liability: 
A combined single limit of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) 
e.  Policies must cover all claims on a per occurrence basis and must provide, at a minimum, no less than thirty (30) days' notice of cancellation. 
(8)  The applicant shall pay in advance a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for inspection of a tap and loop installation, or a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for inspection of a loop installation. This fee will cover the cost of barricade inspection, safety inspection, digging inspection, backfill inspection, asphalt laying inspection, and tap and loop inspection. Any person who installs a tap exclusively dedicated to a fire sprinkler system, as determined by the utility department, shall be exempted from the payment of the inspection fee, but not from the inspection itself. 
(c)  Offenses. The following acts constitute offenses punishable by a fine and shall additionally be grounds for revocation of an existing permit: 
(1)  Failure to maintain the minimum permit requirements set forth in section 26-126(b); 
(2)  Making any materially false or misleading statement in connection with the permittee's application; or 
(3)  Violation of any requirement of this section. 
(d)  Permit denial, revocation and appeal. 
(1)  If the superintendent determines that the requirements set forth in section 26-126(b) for issuance of a permit have not been met, or if he determines that revocation of an existing permit is appropriate, he shall reduce his decision to writing, listing the reasons for his actions, and transmit a written copy to the applicant or permit holder. 
(2)  The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the superintendent to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the superintendent. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the superintendent is final. 
(3)  The city manager or his designated representative shall serve as the hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing and the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within thirty (30) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the superintendent, and his decision is final. 
(e)  Inspection of taps and loops and payment of inspection fees. The city shall inspect all taps and loops which are removed, installed, or relocated to insure that such removals, installations, and relocations are in compliance with City of Denton specifications and codes. 
(Code 1966, § 25-7; Ord. No. 91-063, § I(25-7), 4-16-91)  
Sec. 26-126.1. - Installation of taps by utility department. 
(a)  Utility department may install. The utility department upon the approval of the superintendent of water/wastewater field services ("superintendent"), and upon receipt of the required fees, may remove, install, or relocate water and sewer taps and loops. 
(b)  Fees for routine installations. Any person, association of persons, or corporation desiring that a water or sewer main tap, water meter loop, meter relocation, or sewer manhole breakout be removed, installed, or relocated by the utility department shall pay in advance to the utility department the applicable fees as established from time to time by the city council and kept on file with the city secretary. 
(c)  Fees for installations not listed: 
(1)  Any person requesting the installation of a tap or loop by the utility department for which a fee is not specified in subsection (b) shall pay in advance to the utility department a deposit based upon the estimated cost of such installation, or similar work, plus an administration charge of twenty (20) percent. 
(2)  Upon completion of the installation or similar work requested per subsection (c)(1), the applicant shall be billed at actual cost, as determined by the utility department, plus a twenty (20) percent administrative charge. Any excess deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(d)  Tapping fees in addition to other fees and charges. The fees and charges established herein shall be in addition to any other applicable fees and charges provided by ordinance. Any person, association of persons, or corporation requesting the city to perform related services for which a fee has not been set shall be charged the city's cost for providing such work, service, material, and equipment plus twenty (20) percent. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Wastewater tap fees waived under certain circumstances. Upon the presentation of satisfactory evidence by the property owner to the city, through its director of water/wastewater utilities, that a resident had multiple wastewater service where two or more residences had service on a single line prior to enactment of tap fees and the utility department decides to serve the properties on multiple lines under circumstances that will promote redevelopment of the property, no additional wastewater tap fees may be charged against the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 91-063, § III(25-8), 4-16-91; Ord. No. 2000-406, § 1, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 2019-2136 , § 2, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 26-126.2. - Tampering with or damaging electric or, water or, wastewater system; illegal connection to electric or, water or, wastewater system; unlawful use of electric or, water or, wastewater system; prima facie evidence; separate offense. 
(a)  Tampering with or damaging water, wastewater, or electric system. A person commits an offense if, without the written permission of the city manager or the assistant city manager-utilities, he knowingly, within the City of Denton, Texas or its extraterritorial jurisdiction: 
(1)  Tampers with, damages or destroys any part of the water system; or 
(2)  Tampers with, damages or destroys any part of the wastewater system; or 
(3)  Tampers with, damages or destroys a fire hydrant; or 
(4)  Tampers with, damages or destroys an electric meter or equipment. 
(b)  Illegal connection to water, wastewater, or electric system. A person commits an offense if, without the written permission of the city manager or the assistant city manager-utilities, he knowingly, within the City of Denton, Texas or its extraterritorial jurisdiction: 
(1)  Connects to the water distribution system illegally, such as, by: 
a.  Connecting to a fire hydrant without a fire hydrant meter that has been tested monthly and is properly registering usage; or 
b.  Connecting to water service without a water meter; or 
c.  Connects to electric service by cutting meter seals; or connects service ahead of the meter, such as not to record usage; or to disrupt the function of the meter by any act, in any manner. 
(2)  Discharges wastewater or other effluent from the customer's service address into the city's wastewater system through un-metered bypass piping. 
(c)  Obstruction of city access to a meter for the purpose of reading, maintenance, repair or removal. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if, after either oral or written notification, they continue to obstruct the city access to a meter. 
(d)  Certain conditions creating prima facie evidence of tampering. For purposes of this section, it is prima facie evidence that a person has tampered under subsections (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section if the person is a customer, owner, or person in control of the premises and: 
(1)  Water is prevented from passing through a meter used or furnished by the department to supply water to the premises; or 
(2)  Electricity is prevented from passing through a meter used or furnished by the department to supply electric service to the premises; or 
(3)  A meter is used or furnished by the department is prevented from correctly registering the quantity of water supplied to the premises; or 
(4)  A meter is used or furnished by the department is prevented from correctly registering the quantity of electricity supplied to the premises; or 
(5)  Water is diverted or bypassed by the use of a device, from or around a pipe, main, meter, hydrant or other connection of the department; or 
(6)  Electricity is diverted to or bypassed by the use of a device, from or around a meter, wire, or other connection of the department; or 
(7)  A conversion or misappropriation of water by any form of connection to the water system which is not metered; or 
(8)  A conversion or misappropriation of electricity by any form of connection to the electric system which is not metered; or 
(9)  A meter or service connection of the department used for service to the premises is removed; or 
(10)  Wastewater is prevented or diverted from flowing from the premises into the wastewater system; or 
(11)  Tampering with, or damaging, or destroying a city electric meter, water meter box, or vault; or 
(12)  Tampering with, or damaging, or destroying a part of the wastewater collection system; or 
(13)  Obstruction to the system, including a meter, will consist of the following, but the following are not considered all-inclusive: 
a.  Restricting access by building a fence or other object that prevents access; or 
b.  Access restricted due to aggressive animals knowingly placed near the system by a person; or 
c.  Access restricted with improper planting or growth of bushes or landscaping knowingly placed near the system by a person; or 
d.  Access restricted by covering the meter by dirt, debris, fences, shrubs or any other item that would prevent the ready reading or maintenance of the system, knowingly placed near the system by a person. 
(e)  Prima facie evidence of knowledge. The existence on premises of a device used for any of the unlawful purposes stated in this section shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge of the unlawful purpose on the part of the customer, owner or person in control of the premises. 
(f)  Separate offense. It shall be a separate offense under this section for each connection, for each day, that the customer, owner or person in control of the premises commits an act, or continues an act under this section. 
(g)  Penalties. 
(1)  A person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12 (a)(1) of the "general provisions" of this Code. 
(2)  The city attorney is authorized to commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such relief may include: 
a.  An injunction to prevent a violation of this section; 
b.  Recovery for damages to the water, wastewater, or electric system(s) resulting from a violation of this section; 
c.  Recovery for expenses incurred by the city in responding to a violation of this section; 
d.  A civil fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for a violation of this section; and 
e.  All other damages, costs, and remedies to which the city may be entitled. 
(Ord. No. 2002-316, § 1, 9-17-02)  
Sec. 26-127. - Rates, charges, fees, etc. 
The rates, charges, fees, deposits, billings and procedures for providing water and sewer service by the city to its customers shall be established and be in accordance with ordinances adopted and as from time-to-time amended by the city council; the ordinances and amendments thereto to be kept on file with the city secretary and to be available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(Code 1966, § 25-35)  
Sec. 26-128. - Adjustments in bills for losses from hidden water leaks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Excess usage means the difference in the greatest normal usage of water at a service location and the actual amount of water metered and billed in the billing month for which the adjustment is requested at the service location. 
Greatest normal usage means that amount of water metered at the customer's service location in the billing month of greatest consumption during the previous twelve (12) consecutive billing months or, if there is less than twelve (12) prior billing months, the greatest consumption during any prior billing month, prorated to the number of days in the billing month for which the adjustment is requested. 
Hidden water leak means any leak of a water pipe or water line caused by deterioration, corrosion, natural forces or other similar cause which is not immediately and reasonably detectable from the surface of the ground. The term "hidden water leak" does not include any leak to a customer's fixtures, or appliances, or equipment. Included in the term "fixtures, appliances, or equipment" are leaks related to the following, without limitation: a sprinkler system, or washing machine, or water heater, or lavatory, or toilet. 
Substantial increase in water usage means an increase in the amount of water metered and billed at the customer's service location for the billing month for which the adjustment is requested which is in excess of fifty (50) percent of the greatest normal usage for that service location. 
(b)  Request for adjustment. Any customer who is billed for a substantial increase in water usage during any one (1) billing month due to a hidden water leak may request and receive an adjustment in the amount billed for water and sewer usage for that month in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Written request. Any customer requesting an adjustment pursuant to this section shall make the request in writing to the customer service department on forms provided for that purpose. A request for an adjustment based upon a hidden water leak shall state the location and cause of the leak, the date it was first discovered and the date of, and the person making the repair, with attached copies of itemized, paid repair bills. All requests shall be submitted no later than thirty (30) days of the due date of the monthly bill for which an adjustment is sought. 
(d)  Adjustment allowed. A request for an adjustment in a monthly bill for water and sewer usage shall be granted if it meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  A request, with all required information, is filed within the required time, and 
(2)  The requested adjustment is for a monthly billing in which there was a substantial increase in water usage resulting from a hidden water leak, and 
(3)  There has not been an adjustment made in the monthly billing for water and sewer usage at the same service location within the prior thirteen (13) months under the provisions of this section; and 
(4)  Previous adjustments were not given at the same service location for leaks of the same nature as leaks which are the subject of a claim under this section. 
(e)  Amount of adjustment. If an adjustment is granted under this section, the customer's account shall be credited by billing the customer for the excess usage of water and sewer at the service location for the month in which the adjustment is granted at a reduced rate established by the city council and which rate is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1966, § 25-36; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2005-092, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 26-129. - Requirements, significant recitations, and findings. 
That the requirements, significant recitations, and findings stated hereinabove in the Preamble are incorporated by reference into this ordinance for all purposes pertinent. 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 1, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 26-130. - Schedule and charges of drainage services. 
That the city council finds and directs that: 
(1)  The city will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real property in the proposed service area subject to charges under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Subchapter C, §§ 402.041—402.054; 
(2)  The city will provide drainage for all real property in the proposed service area on payment of drainage charges, except real property exempted under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Subchapter C, §§ 402-041—402.054; and 
(3)  The city will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms. 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 2, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 26-131. - Adoption. 
That the city council hereby adopts and incorporates the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Subchapter C, §§ 402.041—402.054, as amended (the "Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act"), as chapter 26, article IV, sections 26-129 through 26-142, [with sections 23-138—26-142 reserved for future use] of the City of Denton Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 3, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 26-132. - Public utility. 
That the city council hereby declares, recognizes and confirms the existing drainage function of the wastewater utility, to be a public utility. 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 4, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 26-133. - Incorporation. 
That in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A. Government Code, § 402.046, the city shall incorporate existing drainage facilities, materials, supplies, and other properties into the drainage function of the wastewater utility system. 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 5, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 26-134. - Wastewater utility system. 
That the income of the drainage function of the wastewater utility system, as hereby declared and recognized, must be segregated and completely identifiable in municipal accounts, and that all other provisions of V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 402.049, as amended, shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 6, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 26-135. - Amendments to ordinance. 
That the city council, by ordinance, may adopt and enforce such other and further rules as it considers appropriate to operate the drainage function of the wastewater utility system, in accordance with V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 402.045(e). 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 7, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 26-136. - Schedule of drainage charges. 
That the city council shall, after the passage of this ordinance, consider the passage of a further ordinance establishing a schedule of drainage charges, which shall include proper advance published notice of, and a public hearing before the city council on the proposed schedule of rates before the drainage charges are levied, all in accordance with V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 402.045(d). 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 8, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 26-137. - Amendments. 
That upon passage of the further ordinance[s] providing for the schedule of drainage charges, as referenced in section 26-136 hereinabove, the drainage charge may be reflected and identified as a separate line item on each customer's utility bill. 
(Ord. No. 2001-428, § 9, 11-6-01)  
Secs. 26-138—26-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - INDIRECT DISCHARGE INTO SANITARY WASTEWATER SYSTEM[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, adopted June 21, 2011, amended article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article V, §§ 26-151—26-161, 26-171—26-177, 26-186—26-26-191, 26-201—26-209, pertained to direct and indirect discharge into sanitary wastewater system, and derived from Ord. No. 93-112, § I, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2006-025, § 2, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 2009-145, § 1, 6-16-09. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-151. - Purpose. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Denton and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.} and the general pretreatment regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). 
The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(c)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(d)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(e)  To enable the City of Denton to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-152. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to the discharge of all water-carried wastes in the city and shall, among other things, provide for the regulation of sewer construction in areas within the jurisdiction of the city, the approval of plans for sewer construction, the quantity and quality of wastewater discharged, the degree of wastewater pretreatment required, the issuance of industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permits and of other miscellaneous permits. 
(a)  Industrial users within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with all Federal General Pretreatment regulations and with those Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each. (Title 40, Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 403—471). 
(b)  Industrial users within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall comply with all applicable sections of Chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abnormal strength wastewater means any wastewater having a suspended solids, BOD, COD, chlorine demand or total phosphate concentration in excess of that found in normal strength wastewater. 
Act means Public Law 92-500, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. as enacted by the United States Congress and known as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Clean Water Act. 
Approval authority means the regional administrator of the EPA, or the director of a state agency delegated to act on the EPA's behalf with an approved pre-treatment program (eg, director of TCEQ). 
Approved methods means analysis performed in accordance with 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants under the Clean Water Act" and amendments, or with any other test procedures approved by EPA. 
Authorized representative of the users means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: A general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City of Denton. 
BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
Building drain means that part of the piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge of all soil, waste and other drainage from inside the structure and conveys the drainage to the building service line outside the foundation wall of such building. 
Categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits applicable to a specific category of users as promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act. (33 U.S.C. § 1317) (40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471). 
Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water, wastewater or industrial wastes and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a twenty-minute contact period. 
COD, denoting chemical oxygen demand, means the measure of the oxygen equivalent of that portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. Committee means the environmental appeals committee. 
Composite sample means sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample; composed of discrete sample aliquots collected in one container at constant time intervals providing representative samples irrespective of stream flow; or as a flow proportional composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to stream flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots. 
Control authority means the City of Denton acting by and through its assistant city manager - utilities. 
Control manhole means an opening giving access to a service line at some point before the service line discharges to the wastewater system. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any system of condensation such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration. 
Daily discharge means the discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day for purposes of sampling. For pollutants with limitations expressed in units of mass, the "daily discharge" is calculated as the total mass of the pollutant discharged over the day. For pollutants with limitations expressed in other units of measurement, the "daily discharge" is calculated as the average measurement of the pollutant over the day. 
Daily maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
Domestic user means a source of the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any source not regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Dry closet means an indoor room or an outdoor privy used as a toilet, but lacking water for conveyance of waste. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or its successor agencies. 
Assistant city manager-utilities means the chief executive officer of the utilities department of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Flow rate means the quantity of wastewater that flows past a particular point in a certain period of time. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source. 
Industrial/commercial user means any non-domestic source discharging pollutants to the City of Denton POTW which is not a significant industrial user. 
Industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit, referred to in this article as "industrial/commercial discharge permit", means a permit required of a significant industrial user to deposit or discharge waste into any wastewater system under jurisdiction of the city. 
Industrial/commercial wastewater surcharge means a charge, as set forth in this Code, levied on industrial/commercial users of the sewage treatment works for the additional costs of treating wastewater discharges of abnormal strength wastewater. 
Interfere means inhibition or disruption of the wastewater system which contributes to a violation of any requirement of this article. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City of Denton's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
May means that the possibility or likelihood of response exists; discretionary action. 
mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
Monthly average limit means the highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed on a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
i.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
ii.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source, facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Normal strength wastewater means wastewater which, when analyzed by the city, shows by weight a daily average of not more than two thousand eighty-five (2,085) pounds per million gallons (two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter) of suspended solids and two thousand eighty-five (2,085) pounds per million gallons (two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter) of BOD and two thousand eighty-five (2,085) pounds per million gallons (two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter) of COD and not more than seventy-five and one-tenth (75.1) pounds per million gallons (nine (9) milligrams per liter) of chlorine demand and forty-one and seven-tenths (41.7) pounds per million gallons (five (5) milligrams per liter) of phosphorus and which is otherwise acceptable into a public sewer under the terms of this article. 
NPDES permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDE'S) permit as issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Objectionable waste means any wastewater that can harm the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or otherwise endanger life, health or property or constitute a nuisance. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of Denton's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural except as otherwise indicated by the context. 
pH means the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed as the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in gram equivalents per liter of solution. 
Point of discharge means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance or vessel from which wastewater may be discharged into a public waterway or public wastewater system. 
Polluted water means any water, liquid or gaseous waste containing any of the following: soluble or insoluble substances of an organic or inorganic nature; settleable solids that may form sludge deposits; grease and oils; floating solids which may cause unsightly appearance; color; phenols and other substances to an extent which would impart any taste or odor to the receiving stream; and toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, solution or gases. 
POTW (publicly owned treatment works) means a treatment works as defined by, Section 212 of the Act through which the City of Denton wastewater is collected, stored, treated, recycled or reclaimed. This definition includes all sanitary sewers that convey wastewater to the contracted POTW treatment plants. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, and users of the city's wastewater collection system. The term also means the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standard, or National Pretreatment Standard or standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to users. This term includes: 
(1)  Discharge prohibitions and local limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5; and 
(2)  Categorical pretreatment standards established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6. 
Privy means an outhouse or similar type small building used as a toilet where wastes are either buried on site or collected and disposed of elsewhere. 
Public nuisance means all sewage, human excreta, wastewater, or other organic wastes deposited, stored, discharged or exposed in such a way as to be a potential instrument or medium in the transmission of disease to or between any person or persons. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer intended to receive domestic wastewater and admissible industrial/commercial wastewater, but to which stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means any covered watertight tank not connected to the wastewater system and which is designed for the treatment of wastewater. 
Service line means that part of the horizontal piping of the building drainage system beginning at the outside foundation wall and terminating at its connection with the wastewater system. 
Sewage means water which contains, or which has been in contact with organic and inorganic contaminants such as human or animal wastes, vegetable matter, cooking fats and greases, laundry and dishwashing detergents, and other chemical compounds and waste products. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
Sewer system means all facilities which are owned by the city for collecting, carrying, treating and disposing of wastewater. 
Shall means the obligation or necessity to respond; mandatory action. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC; 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the City of Denton determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under provisions of the City of Denton Code of Ordinance to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order to starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the City of Denton determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Slug means any discharge of wastewater concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow for any period longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow of normal operations of the user in question. 
Slug load means any pollutant discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the specific prohibitions under section 26-187 or 40 CFR 403.5(b) to 403.12(f). 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President of the United States, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, or latest edition. 
Standard methods means the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a public drainage pipe which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but is not intended to carry wastewater other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Stormwater means rainfall or any other form of excess water which is derived from precipitation. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are removable by acceptable laboratory procedures as set forth in standard methods. 
Total dissolved solids means the material left in the vessel after evaporation of a sample and its subsequent drying in an oven at a defined temperature. 
Toxic substance means any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which, when discharged to the sanitary sewer in sufficient concentrations, as determined by the executive assistant city manager - utilities, may be hazardous to sewer maintenance and personnel, tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process or to constitute a hazard to human beings or animals or to inhibit aquatic life or to create a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
Transport truck discharge (TTD) permit shall mean a permit to deposit or discharge septic tank, cesspool or seepage pit wastes into the wastewater system. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances from wastewater before entering the wastewater system. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
User charge means a charge levied on users of the wastewater system for the capital cost, as well as the operation and maintenance of such works, as set forth in this Code. 
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means the water-carried wastes which are discharged into the wastewater system. 
Water closet means a compartment or room equipped with a toilet that is properly connected to the sanitary sewer and has the means for mechanical discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-154. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided, the assistant city manager - utilities shall administer the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-155. - Procedures for abatement of violations. 
(a)  Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(1)  Notice of violation. When the assistant city manager - utilities finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the assistant city manager - utilities may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within the timeframe specified in this notice, which is usually but not always ten days, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the assistant city manager - utilities. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the assistant city manager - utilities to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(2)  Administrative orders. 
i.  Compliance orders. When the assistant city manager - utilities finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager - utilities may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
ii.  Cease and desist orders. When the assistant city manager - utilities finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the assistant city manager - utilities may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
A.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
B.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(b)  Service of notice or order. Any notice or order issued under this article shall be in writing and served in person or by registered or certified mail on the record user or users of the wastewater system or other persons determined to be responsible for such violation. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(c)  Appeals. Any person may appeal an order of the assistant city manager - utilities by filing a written notice of appeal with the assistant city manager - utilities on forms provided by the utilities administration office. Such notice of appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days of service of the order. 
(d)  Termination of service. If no timely appeal is filed, the assistant city manager - utilities may, if a violation is continuing or reoccurring or may reoccur, terminate wastewater service to the person ordered to correct or abate such violation if such violation has not been corrected or abated within the time specified in such order. 
(e)  Emergency suspension of service. 
(1)  Suspension. The assistant city manager - utilities may, without prior notice, suspend water service, sanitary sewer service and/or storm sewer access to a user or to a person discharging to the sanitary sewer or storm sewer when such suspension is necessary in the opinion of the assistant city manager - utilities to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
i.  Presents or may present imminent substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons; 
ii.  Presents or may present imminent substantial danger to the POTW, storm sewer or waters of the state; or 
iii.  Will cause pass through or interference of the POTW. 
(2)  Notice of suspension. As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the assistant city manager - utilities shall notify the user or the person discharging to the wastewater or storm sewer of the suspension, and order such person to cease the discharge immediately. 
(3)  Other steps. If a person fails to comply with a notice or order issued under subsection (a), the assistant city manager - utilities shall take such steps as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer, POTW or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons. Such steps may include immediate severance of a person's sanitary sewer connection. 
(4)  Reinstating service. The assistant city manager - utilities shall reinstate suspended services to the wastewater user or to the person discharging to the storm sewer: 
i.  Upon proof by such person that the noncomplying discharge has been eliminated; 
ii.  Upon payment by such person of its outstanding water, sewer and stormwater utility charges; 
iii.  Upon payment by such person of all costs incurred by the city in responding to the discharge or threatened discharge; and 
iv.  Upon payment by such person of all costs incurred by the city in reconnecting service. 
(5)  Written statement. Within five (5) days of the day of suspension of services, the wastewater user or the person discharging to the storm sewer shall submit to the assistant city manager - utilities a detailed written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 
(6)  Right to hearing. A person whose service has been suspended under this section may apply to the department which suspended service for a hearing on the issue of the suspension. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Hearing and determination. 
(1)  An environmental appeals committee is hereby established and authorized to hear and decide appeals from any order issued by the assistant city manager - utilities pursuant to this article. The committee shall be composed of three (3) members appointed by the city manager. No individual appointed to the committee shall be employed in the chain of command of the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(2)  The committee may call and hold hearings, administer oaths, receive evidence at the hearing, and make findings of fact and decisions with respect to administering its powers in this chapter. 
(3)  Upon the hearing, the committee shall determine if there is substantial evidence to support the assistant city manager - utilities determination and order. The decision of the committee shall be in writing and contain findings of fact. If the committee, determines that there is substantial evidence to support the determination and order of the assistant city manager - utilities, the committee shall, in addition to its decision, issue an order: 
a.  Requiring discontinuance of such violation or condition; 
b.  Requiring compliance with any requirement to correct or prevent any condition or violation; or 
c.  Suspending or revoking any permit issued under this article. 
(4)  In any decision and order issued by the committee, the order shall specify the time in which the compliance with the order must be taken. A copy of the decision and order shall be delivered to the appellant or person to whom the order is directed in person or sent to him by registered or certified mail. 
(5)  Should the appellant fail to comply with the order of the committee within the time specified therein, if any, the assistant city manager - utilities, in addition to any other remedy provided for in this article, may terminate sewer service to the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-156. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction by the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the "General Provisions" chapter of this Code. 
(b)  The city attorney is authorized to commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such relief may include: 
(1)  An injunction to prevent a violation of this chapter; 
(2)  Recovery for damages to the POTW or storm sewer resulting from a violation of this chapter; 
(3)  Recovery for expenses incurred by the city in responding to a violation of this chapter; 
(4)  A daily civil penalty of up to the maximum provided by Texas Local Government Code 54.017(b) for a violation of sections 26-151 through 26-208; and 
(5)  All other damages, costs and remedies to which the city may be entitled. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-157. - Determining the character and concentration of wastewater. 
(a)  The wastewater discharged or deposited into the wastewater system shall be subject to periodic inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the assistant city manager - utilities. Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the wastewater system and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property. 
(1)  Except as indicated in section 26-157(a) subsection (2) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the assistant city manager - utilities may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(b)  The examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with Section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act; 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto; or any techniques approved by EPA; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control points authorized by the city. 
(c)  The determination of the character and concentration of wastewater shall be made by the assistant city manager - utilities at such times and on such schedules as may be established by the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(d)  Any person determined to be discharging wastewater in violation of this article shall compensate the city for the cost of sampling and monitoring the discharges until such time as the discharged wastewater is in compliance with this article. The assistant city, manager - utilities shall determine the number of samples and the frequency of sampling necessary to maintain surveillance of the discharges. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-158. - Approval of plans, issuance of permits and certification of final inspection. 
(a)  Wastewater system work permit required. It shall be unlawful for any user of the wastewater system to construct, reconstruct, modify, enlarge or alter any equipment, device, machinery, apparatus or facility or system or component thereof which is used or is intended to be used to treat, process, measure or convey any wastewater which is or will be discharged into the wastewater system without first obtaining a wastewater system work permit from the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(b)  Requirements for permit. A wastewater system work permit shall be issued when all plans, drawings and specifications are submitted in such detail as the assistant city manager - utilities may require and the assistant city manager - utilities has determined that the work to be done will result in adequate treatment, processing, measuring and conveyance of the wastewater discharged into the wastewater system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Certificate of final inspection upon completion. 
(1)  Upon completion of the work to be done under the wastewater system work permit, the assistant city manager - utilities shall inspect the work and, if done in accordance with the permit, the executive assistant city manager - utilities shall issue a certificate of final inspection to the permit holder. 
(2)  If the completed work does not comply with the plans and specifications submitted for which the permit was issued, the assistant city manager - utilities shall require such correction as necessary before a certificate of inspection is issued. 
(3)  No person receiving a wastewater system work permit shall utilize or make use of any equipment, device, machinery, apparatus or facility covered by the permit until a certificate of final inspection is issued in accordance with this article. 
(d)  Right to inspect. No person shall refuse the assistant city manager - utilities the right to inspect any work done or required to be done under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-159. - Inspections. 
Representatives of the city, the EPA, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and the state health department or any successor agency bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon the premises of industrial users for the purpose of inspection, observation, flow measurement, sampling and testing of the wastewater system or any wastewater discharged into the wastewater system or examination of any records, files and operational activities associated with the industrial pretreatment program and generation of hazardous waste and discharges into the environment. The city will, at a minimum, inspect all significant industrial users once per year. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-160. - Access to industrial user records 
(a)  The assistant city manager - utilities shall have access to, and the right to inspect and copy, any and all industrial user records (documents, memorandums, reports, correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof) which pertain to that industry's discharge to the POTW, disposal and/or generation of hazardous waste and discharges into the environment. 
(b)  The industrial user shall be required to retain records of all information resulting from any monitoring, sampling analyses, or reporting activity required by these regulations for a minimum of five (5) years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or POTW or when requested by the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(c)  The constituents and characteristics of wastewater discharged by an industrial user shall not be considered confidential and shall be available to the public without restriction. 
Other information obtained from documents, memorandum, reports, correspondence, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests, in writing, at the time the information is to be obtained by the assistant city manager - utilities, that the information is to be considered confidential. Information submitted to the assistant city manager - utilities by the industrial user shall be stamped "confidential information" on each page containing such information that the industrial user wishes to be held confidential. If a claim of confidentiality is asserted, and a records request is received from the public, the assistant city manager - utilities in consultation with the city attorney shall determine if such information is protected by law from disclosure under either the Texas Open Records Act or 40 CFR Part 2 (Public Information). If the industrial user does not claim the information as confidential at the time the information is obtained by the assistant city manager - utilities, it will be available to the public without further notice. 
(d)  All non-domestic users shall furnish, upon request, to the city, information needed to develop a systematic program according to the pretreatment standards or requirements. The information must be available to the assistant city manager - utilities for inspection and reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-161. - Right of entry. 
The assistant city manager - utilities shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the assistant city manager - utilities ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(a)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the assistant city manager - utilities shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(b)  The assistant city manager - utilities shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(c)  The assistant city manager - utilities may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a frequency determined by the assistant city manager-utilities to ensure their accuracy. 
(d)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the assistant city manager - utilities and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(e)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the assistant city manager - utilities access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-162. - Affirmative defense to discharge violations. 
If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of article V of this chapter or a permit issued under article V of this chapter was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of this article V of this chapter or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-163. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Bypass notification. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the assistant manager - utilities, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the assistant manager - utilities of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The assistant manager - utilities may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  Bypass. 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the assistant manager - utilities may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(i)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(ii)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(iii)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The assistant manager - utilities may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the assistant manager - utilities determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-164. - Public participation. 
The assistant city manager - utilities shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Secs. 26-165—26-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 26-171. - Connections required. 
(a)  Any owner or occupant of every building where such building is within one hundred (100) feet of any city sanitary sewer and is utilized as a dwelling or residential unit shall construct or cause to be constructed a suitable water closet upon such property and shall connect or cause the water closet to be connected with the sanitary sewer in accordance with all ordinances of the city regulating such construction and shall, within thirty (30) days after written notice to do so from the assistant city manager - utilities, abate and cease to use any septic system, dry closet or privy upon such premises. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant of every building where such building is within three hundred (300) feet of any city sanitary sewer and is utilized as a business or commercial establishment discharging wastewater exceeding the limits established by this article shall construct or cause to be constructed a suitable water closet upon such property and shall connect or cause the water closet to be connected with the sanitary sewer in accordance with all ordinances of the city regulating such construction and shall, within thirty (30) days after written notice to do so from the assistant city manager - utilities, abate and cease to use any septic system, dry closet or privy upon such premises. 
(c)  The owner or occupant of any such property shall keep and maintain such water closet and all connections in good condition and free from any obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-172. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-173. - Dry closets prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, use or maintain any privy or dry closet on any lot or land within the corporate limits of the city, except for portable sanitary privies utilized temporarily. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-174. - Construction of sanitary sewers and connections. 
The construction of sanitary sewers and connections thereto shall be as provided in the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-175. - Owner responsible for maintenance of sanitary sewer service lines. 
The city shall not be responsible for the maintenance of any building drains or service lines, and such maintenance shall be the responsibility and duty of the owner of the premises serviced by any such service line. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-176. - Compliance with building regulations required. 
Sanitary sewer service shall not be furnished to any premises where the plumbing thereof has not been installed in accordance with the building regulations or any other provisions as provided in the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-177. - Reserved.  
Secs. 26-178—26-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
Sec. 26-186. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW or into a natural outlet materials, waters or wastewater, if such substances may cause pass through or interference or have an adverse effect on the environment or may otherwise endanger life, health or property or constitute a public nuisance, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.). In determining the acceptability of substances for discharge into the wastewater system, the assistant city manager - utilities shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject substances in relation to flows and velocities in the wastewater system, materials of which the wastewater system is constructed, nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the substances in the wastewater treatment plant and such other factors which may be pertinent to such evaluation. 
(b)  No person shall discharge into public sewers: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases, including but not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides or any other, substances which are a fire or other hazard to the system, which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fires, explosions or be injurious in any other way to the facilities or operation of the wastewater system including wastestreams with a closed-cup flash point of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit [sixty (60) degrees Celsius] using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any substance which causes two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter to be more than five (5) percent or any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter as measured at the point where the wastewater is discharged into the wastewater system. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than five (5), greater than twelve point five (12.5) or any wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the wastewater system or any person. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic substances in sufficient quantity that may, either singly or by interaction with other substances, injure or cause interference with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the effluent waters of the wastewater system or exceed the limitation set forth in the categorical pretreatment standards. A toxic substance shall include but not be limited to any substance identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)  Any substance discharged into the wastewater system, such as residues, sludges or scums, which causes interference with the reclamation process or any substance which causes the wastewater system to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or any guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act, as amended by the U.S. Congress. 
(6)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150 o F) sixty-five degrees Celsius (65 o F). If, in the opinion of the assistant city manager - utilities, lower temperatures of such wastewater could harm either the wastewater system, wastewater treatment process, equipment or have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or could otherwise endanger life, health or property or constitute a public nuisance, then the assistant city manager - utilities may prohibit such discharges. In no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred and four degrees Fahrenheit (104 o F) forty degrees Celsius(40 o C). 
(7)  Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of two hundred (200) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit (32 o F) zero degrees Celsius (0 o C) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150 o F) sixty-five degrees Celsius (65 o C) and which might cause obstruction of flow in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(8)  The assistant city manager - utilities may reject any waste which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance. The assistant city manager - utilities may require any information from an industrial user necessary to determine the characteristics of the user's wastewater discharge prior to the commencement of such discharge to the POTW. The assistant city manager - utilities may deny or condition new, increased or changed contributions. 
(9)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(10)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-187. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into the wastewater system, unless such discharge is allowed under the provisions of section 26-208, any of the following: 
(a)  The following pollutant limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW and are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum limits: 
	DAILY MAXIMUM DISCHARGE LIMITS (mg/l) 
POLLUTANTS 	Composite Values 
Aluminum 	137.45 
Arsenic 	0.12 
Cadmium 	0.08 
Chromium 	2.19 
Chromium (VI) 	0.66 
Copper 	0.84 
Cyanide 	0.36 
Lead 	0.51 
Mercury 	0.0006 
Molybdenum 	1.18 
Nickel 	1.10 
Selenium 	0.09 
Silver 	0.13 
Zinc 	0.96 
 
All concentrations for pollutants are for "total" values unless otherwise indicated. 
(b)  Other metals not listed in subsection (1)(a) of this section which will, in the opinion of the assistant city manager - utilities, damage the wastewater system or interfere with the treatment process; 
(c)  Toxic organics found in quantifiable concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l (10 ppb) shall not total more than 2.13 mg/l for any discharge. Any organic compound considered toxic by the assistant city manager - utilities and reasonably expected to be found in the industrial user's discharge may be included in the calculations of total toxic organics if detected in any industry's discharge in quantifiable concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l; 
(d)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes into the public wastewater system without permission of the city; 
(e)  Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a slug; 
(f)  Materials or substances which cause: 
(1)  Concentrations of suspended solids or BOD in excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l; 
(2)  Concentrations of phosphorous exceeding five (5) mg/l; 
(3)  Discolorations, such as but not limited to dye waters and vegetable tanning solution. 
(g)  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N are hereby incorporated. 
(h)  Waters contaminated by petroleum fuel or petroleum substances according to the following effluent limitations (TPDES GENERAL PERMIT NO. TXG 830000; under provisions of Section 402 of the Clean Water Act and Chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code): 
	DAILY MAXIMUM DISCHARGE LIMITS (mg/l) 
POLLUTANTS 	Composite Values 
Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons (TPH) 	15 
Total Lead 	0.10 
Benzene 	0.005 
Total BTEX 	0.10 
Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) 	0.01 
MTBE 	0.24 
 
(1)  The above constituents shall be measured or analyzed as follows: 
a.  TPH must be analyzed using Texas method 1005. 
b.  BTEX shall be measured as the sum of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and total xylenes (EPA Method 8260 B). 
c.  PAH shall be measured as the sum of acenapthene, acenapthylene, anthracene, benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, benzo(ghi)perylene, benzo(a)pyrene, chrysene, dibenzo(a,h)anthracene, fluoranthene, fluorine, indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, naphthalene, phenanthrene, and pyrene. 
d.  MTBE, as referenced above, is methyl tert-butyl ether. 
(i)  The pollutant limits in (b) through (f) and (h) of this section will be applied to industrial/commercial users through inclusion in an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit when the assistant city manager - utilities determines that the pollutant(s) is reasonably expected to be present in the industrial/commercial user's indirect discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-188. - Discharge of waters not containing wastewater. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge unpolluted waters into the wastewater system. Except with the approval of the assistant city manager - utilities or as otherwise provided in this article, no stormwater connection from any building or yard nor any drain from any catchbasin, lake, swamp, or pond nor any outlet for surface water, stormwater or groundwater of any kind shall be connected to the wastewater system. 
(b)  Within any area served by a separate sanitary sewer and a storm sewer, no stormwater shall be allowed to enter the sanitary sewer from waste or vent pipes of any building. Within any such area no downspout, roof leaders, gutters, other pipes or drains such as channels which may at any time carry stormwater, surface drainage derived from hydraulic pressure or from well points or lake water shall be connected with any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-189. - Discharge to a natural outlet. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge polluted water to any storm sewer or natural outlet within the area served by the city, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article and except where a Federal National Pollutant Discharge Elimination Systems (NPDES) permit has been duly issued and is currently valid for such discharge. A valid copy of such a permit and any modifications thereof must be filed with the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Secs. 26-190, 26-191. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-176, § 2, adopted August 21, 2012, repealed §§ 26-190, 26-191, which pertained to wastewater discharges requiring traps; wastewater discharge from transport trucks and derived from Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11.  
Secs. 26-192—26-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE 
 
Sec. 26-201. - Permit—Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to connect to the wastewater system or to discharge wastewater to the wastewater system without first obtaining an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit from the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(b)  All significant industrial users discharging wastewater into the wastewater system prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue that discharge one hundred eighty (180) days after such effective date. Prior to the expiration of the one-hundred-eighty-day period, the significant industrial user shall apply for an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit from the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-202. - Same—Procedure for obtaining. 
(a)  Application. Significant industrial users required to obtain an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. New significant industrial users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the wastewater system for an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit. In support of the application, the significant industrial user shall submit the following information: 
(1)  All information required by (f)(1) of this section. 
(2)  Name, address, and location, if different from the address; 
(3)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(4)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those mentioned in this article as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended; 
(5)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(6)  Average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(7)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all service lines, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; 
(8)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(9)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city law or regulation or by the state or categorical pretreatment standards and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis; 
(10)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the significant industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
i.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the significant industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards, e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction. 
ii.  No increment referred to in subsection (a)(10)i. of this section shall exceed nine (9) months. 
iii.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the significant industrial user shall submit a progress report to the assistant city manager - utilities including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the significant industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(11)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(12)  Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day; 
(13)  Number and type of employees and hours of operation of the plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system; 
(14)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(b)  Modifications. Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a categorical pretreatment standard, the industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit of significant industrial users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the timeframe prescribed by such standard. Where a significant industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application for an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit, the significant industrial user shall apply for an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the significant industrial/commercial user with an existing industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the assistant city manager - utilities, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, the information required by subsections (a)(8) and (a)(9) of this section. 
(c)  Conditions. Industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, significant industrial user charges and fees established by this Code. Permits shall contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of significant industrial user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater system; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article and requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f). 
(d)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed three (3) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than one (1) year or may be stated to expire on a specified date. The significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the significant industrial user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit. The significant industrial user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. 
(e)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days advance notice to the assistant city manager - utilities, and the assistant city manager - utilities approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to assistant city manager - utilities must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(A)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(B)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(C)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. A copy of the existing control mechanism will be provided to the new owner or operator by the permittee and the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(f)  Reporting requirements for permittee. The permittee shall submit the following reports: 
(1)  All significant industrial users, including new sources, that are subject to categorical pretreatment standards must submit baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) to the assistant city manager - utilities in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b). 
i.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
ii.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
iii.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
iv.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
v.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by assistant city manager - utilities of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 26-157(b) of this article. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 26-157(a)(1) and (2) of this article. 
vi.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
vii.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule shall contain: 
1.  Progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction and beginning and conducting routine operations); 
2.  No increments referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
3.  The user shall submit a progress report to the assistant city manager - utilities no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
4.  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress report to the assistant city manager - utilities. 
viii.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 26-202(f)(12) and (f)(13) of this article. 
(2)  Within ninety (90) days following the commencement of the contribution of wastewater into the POTW, any significant industrial user classified as a regulated categorical standard industry, and therefore subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, shall submit to the assistant city manager - utilities a ninety-day compliance report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d). 
(3)  Significant industrial users not classified as categorical standard industries may, at the discretion of the assistant city manager - utilities, be required to submit a baseline monitoring report and/or a ninety-day compliance report. 
(4)  Regulated categorical standard industries subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of new sources, after commencement of the discharge to the POTW, shall submit a semi-annual compliance report to the assistant city manager - utilities in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(e). 
(5)  Significant industrial users, not subject to federal categorical limitations, may be required to submit a semi-annual compliance report to the assistant city manager - utilities in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(h). 
(6)  Semi-annual compliance reports required under subsection (f)(4) and (5) of this section shall be based on sampling and analytical data collected during the period covered by the report by both the assistant city manager - utilities and the industrial user if self-monitoring is performed. Sampling and analytical data shall be representative of the conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(7)  Significant industrial users shall perform self-monitoring sampling and analysis of the regulated process wastestream(s) at a minimum frequency of once during each semi-annual compliance reporting period, unless the Control Authority performs the required sampling in lieu of the industrial user pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(g) and 40 CFR Part 403.12(h). 
(8)  Self-monitoring samples shall be collected, preserved and analyzed in accordance with approved methods. 
(9)  For each self-monitoring samples, the industrial user shall submit an industrial self-monitoring sampling report which shall include: 
i.  The date, exact place, sampling method, preservation method, times of sampling and the name(s) of the person(s) taking the samples; 
ii.  The dates the analyses were performed; 
iii.  The analytical techniques/method used; and 
iv.  The results of the analyses. 
(10)  For categorical industries, at least once during each semi-annual compliance reporting period, self-monitoring samples shall be analyzed for all federally regulated parameters. 
(11)  If self-monitoring indicates a violation, the industrial user shall notify the assistant city manager - utilities within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving the results. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. For industrial users required to self-monitor each month, the next month's self-monitoring may be used as the repeat sampling so long as the sample is analyzed for the violating parameter and the thirty-day submission deadline is observed. 
(12)  All compliance reports, self-monitoring sampling reports and applications for industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permits must be signed by an authorized official of the industrial user in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.12(1). The authorized official may designate a representative, in writing, to the assistant city manager - utilities. The authorization must specify either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the industrial user. If the authorization becomes invalid because of changes in responsibilities or personnel, a new written authorization must be submitted to the assistant city manager - utilities prior to or along with any report being signed and submitted by the new representative. 
(13)  All compliance reports, self-monitoring sampling reports and applications for industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permits must include the statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervised in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information including the possibility of fine and imprisonment." 
(14)  All industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings by the industrial user. 
(15)  An industrial user shall notify the assistant city manager - utilities, the EPA regional waste management division director, and the state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12 (p) 
(16)  Each user must notify the assistant city manager - utilities of any planned changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least ninety (90) days before the change. 
i.  The assistant city manager - utilities may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application. 
ii.  The assistant city manager - utilities may issue an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
iii.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, changes or additions in process(es) which generate wastewater, or changes to pretreatment facilities. 
(17)  The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this section shall be subject to: 
i.  The provisions of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements; 
ii.  The provisions of Sections 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation, or certification; 
iii.  The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Act regarding responsible corporate offices; and 
iv.  The applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-203. - Same—Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Permit not a vested right. A permit issued under this article does not become a vested right in the person holding the permit. 
(b)  Grounds for suspension or revocation. A permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The permittee has or is violating one (1) or more provisions of this article; 
(2)  The permittee has failed or is failing to comply with one (1) or more conditions of a permit; 
(3)  There is a change in conditions which requires elimination or modification of the discharge covered by a permit; 
(4)  Revocation or suspension is necessary in order to prevent harm or damage to the wastewater system or treatment process or is necessary to protect the health or welfare of persons, animals or property; 
(5)  The permit was obtained by misrepresentation or failure to disclose all relevant facts. 
(c)  Procedure for suspension or revocation. The assistant city manager - utilities may issue an order suspending or revoking a permit issued under this article upon the grounds specified in this article. Such order shall state the grounds therefore and shall be served upon the permittee in person or by certified or registered mail. Such order of suspension or revocation shall become effective after five (5) days from the date of service, unless the permittee within such five-day period files an appeal and filing fee in accordance with section 26-155 of this article. 
(d)  Procedure for appeals from order of revocation or suspension. Appeals from the order of the assistant city manager - utilities suspending or revoking a permit shall be processed and heard in accordance with procedures for other appeals as set forth in section 26-155. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-204. - Same—Effect of suspension or revocation. 
Any permittee who receives an order from the assistant city manager - utilities revoking or suspending a permit required under this article shall discontinue any discharge covered by the permit after five (5) days from notice of such order, unless within such five-day period the permittee appeals such order to the environmental appeals committee. Any permittee who has been notified by the assistant city manager - utilities of a suspension or revocation of a permit and does not appeal such order or any permittee who has been notified of the order of the committee, after a hearing, of the revocation or suspension of a permit and who continues a discharge covered by a permit after the effective date of the revocation or suspension of the permit may have sewer service terminated by the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-205. - Same—reinstatement of suspended or revoked permit. 
(a)  The assistant city manager - utilities shall reinstate a suspended industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit upon satisfactory proof to the assistant city manager - utilities of corrective action of the permittee of the conditions or discharge for which the permit was suspended. 
(b)  A user whose industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit has been revoked must, apply for a new permit and comply with all provisions and conditions required as though a permit had not been issued for such user. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-206. - Pretreatment of industrial wastewater. 
Significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and the categorical pretreatment regulations. All wastewater treatment and treatment systems shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the assistant city manager - utilities for review before construction of such facilities. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the assistant city manager - utilities under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. All records relating to compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the environmental protection agency or city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-207. - Control manhole. 
As a prerequisite to receiving an industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit, the assistant city manager - utilities may, when necessary to monitor wastewater discharged into the wastewater system, require a significant industrial user to install a suitable control manhole together with such meters, equipment and appurtenances as deemed necessary by the assistant city manager-utilities in order to adequately sample and measure such wastewater. All required control manholes shall be located so as to permit unrestricted access by the assistant city manager-utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-208. - Industrial/commercial wastewater surcharge. 
If abnormal strength wastewater is acceptable for discharge into the wastewater system under the provisions set forth in the industrial/commercial wastewater discharge permit, an industrial/commercial wastewater surcharge shall be added to the base charge to cover the additional cost of treating abnormal strength wastewater. Such surcharge shall be calculated as follows: 
Cu = Vu [(Bu - 250) B + (Su - 250) S)] 
Where: 
Cu is the surcharge for user X. 
Vu is the billing volume for user X. 
Bu is the tested BOD level for user X or two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, whichever is greater. 
B is the unit cost factor for treating one (1) unit of BOD per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
Su is the tested SS level for user X or two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, whichever is greater. 
S is the unit cost factor for treating one (1) unit of SS per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
Sec. 26-209. - Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as amended. 
The terms and provisions set forth in this chapter referencing and/or incorporating provisions contained in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) are intended to adopt such sections to the CFR as they exist at the time of passage of this article and as the CFR may be subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-103, § 1, 6-21-11)  
ARTICLE VI. - IMPACT FEES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2004-183, § 4, adopted July 20, 2004, amended article VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VI, §§ 26-210—26-234, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 98-301, § III, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 2001-200, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2003-137, § 4, 5-13-03. 
 
Sec. 26-210. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "Denton Impact Fee Ordinance." ;hn0; (Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-211. - Statement of purpose. 
This article is intended to assure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring each development to pay its proportional share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development as related to water and wastewater capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-212. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 395 and pursuant to the Denton Charter. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the powers of the city to utilize other methods authorized under state law, or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this article. The effective date of this article is September 15, 1998. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-213. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Area-related facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan and which is not a site-related facility. Area-related facility may include a capital improvement, which is located offsite, within, or on the perimeter of the development site. 
Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit that can be imposed on new development pursuant to this article. 
Capital improvement means any water supply; or treatment, transmission, pumping and storage facilities; or wastewater treatment and conveyance facilities that have a life expectancy of three (3) or more years, and are owned and operated by or on behalf of the city. 
Director means the Director of Water or Wastewater Utilities, or General Manager of Utilities for the City of Denton, or his or her designee. 
Facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing facility for the purpose of serving new development. The term does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing facility to serve existing development. 
Impact fee capital improvements plan means the adopted plan for a service area, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or wastewater facilities and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water or wastewater impact fees pursuant to this chapter 26, article VI. 
Land use assumptions means the projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities for a service area adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to time, upon which the impact fee capital improvements plan for the service area is based. 
New development means an activity involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of land, which has the effect of increasing water or wastewater demand, measured by an increase in the number of the service units utilizing the city's water or wastewater system that are attributable to such activity, and which requires either the approval and filing of a plat, or a re-plat pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, or the issuance of a building permit, or a utility connection. 
Service area means a geographic area within the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, within which impact fees for water or wastewater facilities may be collected for new development occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will be expended for those types of improvements identified in the type of capital improvements plan applicable to the service area. 
Service unit means a standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards, for a particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions. For water and wastewater facilities, the service unit shall constitute the basis for establishing equivalency within various customer classes based upon the relationship of the continuous duty maximum flow rate in gallons per minute for a water meter of a given size and type compared to the continuous duty maximum flow rate in gallons per minute for a three-fourth-inch diameter simple water meter. 
Single-family equivalency ("SFE") means an equivalency factor, based on the demand associated with the smallest water meter used in the City of Denton, Texas utility system. SFE's are utilized to establish the number of service units to be allocated to various meter sizes used in the City of Denton, Texas Water and Wastewater utilities system. 
Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is the for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of water and wastewater facilities to serve the new development and which is not included in the impact fee capital improvements plan and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under subdivision and other applicable regulations. 
Small residential housing unit means a single-family residence of less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet on a lot of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
Utility connection means connection of an individual meter to the city's water or wastewater system, or an increase in the size of an existing meter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-214. - Impact fee as condition of development approval. 
No new development shall be connected to the city's water or wastewater system within the service area without the assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this article, and no building permit or request for service shall be issued until the applicant has paid the impact fee imposed herein, except for those entities that are expressly exempt from impact fees as set forth in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 395. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-215. - Land use assumptions. 
(a)  Said land use assumptions for the city shall be updated at least every five (5) years utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 395. 
(b)  Amendment to the land use assumptions shall incorporate projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population for the service area over at least a ten-year period. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-216. - Water impact fee service area. 
There are hereby established three (3) water impact fee service areas, to include all land within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the boundaries of which are depicted in Exhibit A, which exhibit is attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-217. - Wastewater impact fee service areas. 
There is hereby established one (1) wastewater impact fee service area, to include all land within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the boundaries of which are depicted in Exhibit A, which exhibit is attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-218. - Determination of service units. 
The number of service units for both water or wastewater impact fees shall be determined by using the land use, and the service unit equivalencies table which converts the demands for water or wastewater improvements generated by typical land uses to water meter size, and which table is included within Exhibit B and incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-219. - Impact fees per service unit. 
(a)  Maximum impact fees per service unit for each service area shall be established by category of capital improvements. The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area for each category of capital improvement shall be computed in the following manner: 
(1)  For each category of capital improvements, calculate the total projected costs of capital improvements necessitated by and attributable to new development in the service area identified in the impact fee capital improvements plan; 
(2)  From such amount, subtract a credit in the amount of that portion of utility service revenues, if any, including the payment of debt, to be generated by new service units during the period the capital improvements plan is in effect, including the payment of debt, associated with the capital improvements in the plan; 
(3)  Divide the resultant amount by the total number of service units anticipated within the service area, based upon the land use assumptions for that service area. 
(b)  The maximum impact fee per service unit for water or wastewater facilities by service area shall be as set forth in Schedule 1, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. Schedule 1 shall be used to assess impact fees. Schedule 1 may be amended from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in section 26-228. 
(c)  The impact fee per service unit which is to be paid by each new development within a service area shall be as set forth in Schedule 2, which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference, and shall be an amount less than or equal to the maximum impact fee per service unit established in Schedule 1. Schedule 2 may be amended from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in section 26-228. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-220. - Assessment of impact fees. 
(a)  Assessment of impact fees for any new development in all of the Denton Water and Wastewater Service Areas shall be made as follows: 
(1)  For land which is unplatted at the time of application for a building permit or utility connection, or for a new development which received final plat approval prior to the effective date of this article, and for which no re-platting is necessary pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time application is made for the building permit or utility connection, whichever first occurs, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit in effect, as set forth in Schedule 1. 
(2)  For a new development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations on or after the effective date of this article, or for which re-platting results in an increase in the number of service units after such date, assessment of impact fees shall be at the time of final plat recordation, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit in effect as set forth in Schedule 1. 
(b)  Following assessment of impact fees pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of impact fee assessment per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval or other development application that results in approval of additional service units, in which case a new assessment shall occur at the Schedule 1 rate then in effect for such additional service units. 
(c)  Following the vacating of any plat or approval of any re-plat, a new assessment must be made in accordance with subsection (a)(2). 
(d)  An application for an amending plat made pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 212.016 and the City of Denton Subdivision Ordinance, and for which no new development is proposed, is not subject to reassessment for an impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-221. - Computation of impact fees. 
(a)  Following the filing and acceptance of a written application for building permit or utility connection, the city shall compute the impact fee due in the following manner: 
(1)  The number of service units shall be determined by the size of the water meter purchased using the Land Use and Service Unit/SFE Equivalencies table incorporated as Exhibit B herein. The service units for multi-family apartment projects with eight (8) or more units shall be determined by multiplying the number of bed rooms in said apartment project by 0.26 SFE; 
(2)  Service units shall be summed for all meters, or for all bedrooms within a multi-family apartment project with eight (8) or more units purchased for the development; 
(3)  The total number of service units shall be multiplied by the impact fee per service unit for water and/or wastewater service facilities using Schedule 2 then in effect as established in section 26-219; 
(4)  The amount of each impact fee shall be reduced by any allowable offsets or credits for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in section 26-223. 
(b)  The amount of impact fee due for new development shall not exceed the amount computed by multiplying the assessed fee for water and/or wastewater service by the total number of service units generated by the development. The amount of impact fee due for redevelopment shall not exceed the amount computed by multiplying the assessed fee for water and/or wastewater service by the net increase in service units generated by the redevelopment. 
(c)  The developer may submit or the director may require the submission of a study, prepared by a professional engineer, licensed in the State of Texas, clearly indicating the number of water and/or wastewater service units which will be consumed or generated by the new development. The director will review the information for completeness and conformity with generally accepted engineering practices and will, when satisfied with the completeness and conformity of the study, multiply the number of service units determined by the study, times the impact fee per service unit contained in section 26-219 above to determine the total impact fee to be collected for the development. The director may also use recent historical water billing records for existing customers to determine water demands and single-family equivalents ("SFE") in accordance with data from the most recent Capital Improvements Plan. 
(d)  Whenever the property owner increases the number of service units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined based on Schedule 2 and applicable offsets, credits, and discounts then in effect, and such additional fee shall be assessed and collected at the time the additional meters are purchased. 
(e)  In the event the property owner decreases the number of service units for a development, the property owner shall be entitled to a refund of the impact fee or impact fees actually paid, but only for the amounts represented by the decrease in service units based on the assessed fee and offsets, credits, or discounts applicable at the time the fee was paid. 
(f)  If the building permit for the property on which an impact fee is paid has expired and a new application for a building permit is thereafter filed for the identical property and the identical number of service units, the impact fee previously paid satisfies the requirements of this article, unless the earlier impact fee was refunded to the applicant at the expiration of the previously issued building permit, or is otherwise refunded. 
(g)  The impact fee shall attach to the property for which the impact fee was paid and shall not be transferable to other properties or service units. 
(h)  No building permit or utility connection shall be issued if the applicant cannot verify payment to staff of the appropriate impact fee and other applicable fees, or if existing facilities do not have actual capacity to provide service to the new connection(s), except for those entities that are exempted from impact fees as are specifically set forth in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 395. 
(i)  All matters pertaining to the enforcement, assessment, computation, or collection of impact fees provided for herein shall be determined by the director, or his or her designate. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-222. - Collection of impact fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the impact fee for the new development shall be collected at the time the city issues a building permit, or if a building permit is not required, at the time an application is filed for a new connection, to the city's water or wastewater system or for an increase in water meter size. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by contracts with political subdivisions, developer's contracts, or wholesale customers, no building permit shall be issued until all impact fees due and owing have been paid to the city. 
(c)  The city may enter into an agreement for capital improvements with a property owner pursuant to section 26-229 that establishes a different time and manner of payment. 
(d)  In the event that a property owner agrees to construct or finance capital improvements in the capital improvements plan pursuant to section 26-229, the costs of which are to be reimbursed to the owner from impact fees paid from other new developments that will use such facilities, the city may collect impact fees from such other new developments at the time final plats are recorded for such development. 
(e)  Schedule 1 sets the assessment rate and establishes maximum impact fees as set forth in subparagraphs (e)(1) through (e)(4) below: 
(1)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after September 15, 1998, but before May 29, 2003, the maximum impact fee per service unit shall be two thousand forty-four dollars ($2,044.00) for the water service area, and four hundred eighty-three dollars ($483.00) for the wastewater service area. 
(2)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after May 29, 2003, but before July 29, 2008, the maximum impact fee per service unit shall be three thousand one hundred fifty-five dollars ($3,155.00) for the water service area; and one thousand seven hundred three dollars ($1,703.00) for the Zone 1 wastewater service area. 
(3)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after July 29, 2008, but before December 3, 2013 the maximum impact fee per service unit shall be as follows: Three thousand four hundred dollars ($3,400.00) for the Zone 1 water service area and four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) for the Zone 2 water service area; and one thousand seven hundred dollars ($1,700.00) for the Zone 1 wastewater service area and one thousand seven hundred sixty dollars ($1,760.00) for the Zone 2 wastewater service area. 
(4)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after December 3, 2013, but before January 9, 2019, the maximum impact fee per service unit shall be as follows: Three thousand one hundred sixty-seven dollars ($3,167.00) for the Zone 1A water service area, five thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($5,250.00) for the Zone 1B water service area, and five thousand seven hundred fifty-three dollars ($5,753.00) for the Zone 2 water service area; and two thousand eight hundred fifty-one dollars ($2,851.00) for the wastewater service area. 
(5)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after January 9, 2019, or for any plats filed prior to September 15, 1998, the maximum impact fee per service unit shall be as follows: Three thousand five hundred sixty-nine dollars ($3,569.00) for the Zone 1A water service area, five thousand three hundred fifty-two dollars ($5,352.00) for the Zone 1B water service area, and seven thousand six hundred thirty-eight dollars ($7,638.00) for the Zone 2 water service area; and four thousand seven hundred sixteen dollars ($4,716.00) for the wastewater service area. 
(f)  Schedule 2 sets the collection rate for impact fees as set forth in subparagraphs (f)(1), (f)(2) and (f)(3) below: 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraphs (2)—(5) below, impact fees shall be collected and paid as follows: 
Water Service Area (Zone 1A) 	$3,569 per service unit 
Water Service Area (Zone 1B) 	$3,532 per service unit 
Water Service Area (Zone 2) 	$7,638 per service unit 
Wastewater Service Area 	$4,716 per service unit 
 
(2)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after September 15, 1998, but before May 29, 2003, and for which no new service units have been added, impact fees shall be collected as follows: 
Water Service Area 	$2,044 per service unit 
Wastewater Service Area (Zone 1) 	$483 per service unit 
 
(3)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after May 29, 2003, but before July 29, 2008, and for which no new service units have been added, impact fees shall be collected as follows: 
Water Service Area (Zone 1) 	$3,155 per service unit 
Wastewater Service Area (Zone 1) 	$1,703 per service unit 
 
(4)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after July 29, 2008, but before December 3, 2013, and for which no new service units have been added, impact fees shall be collected as follows: 
Water Service Area (Zone 1) 	$3,400 per service unit 
Water Service Area (Zone 2) 	$4,000 per service unit 
Wastewater Service Area (Zone 1) 	$1,700 per service unit 
Wastewater Service Area (Zone 2) 	$1,760 per service unit 
 
(5)  For a new development for which final plat recordation occurred on or after December 3, 2013, but before January 9, 2019 for which no new service units have been added, impact fees shall be collected as follows: 
Water Service Area (Zone 1A) 	$3,100 per service unit 
Water Service Area (Zone 1B) 	$3,900 per service unit 
Water Service Area (Zone 2) 	$4,500 per service unit 
Wastewater Service Area (Zone 1) 	$2,200 per service unit 
 
Provided, however, if the service unit is a "small residential housing unit" as defined herein, which consists of a residence of less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet, which is also located on a lot of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, that service unit shall be assessed and charged a 0.5. SFE charge, no matter in which zone it is located in, and no matter when the lot is platted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-223. - Offsets and credits. 
(a)  The city shall offset the reasonable value of any area-related facilities, identified in the impact fee capital improvements plan and constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city, except as otherwise provided therein, which are dedicated to and received by the city on or after the effective date of this article, against the amount of the impact fee due for that category of capital improvement. No offsets or credits shall be provided for required over-sizing of water and wastewater lines or lift stations not identified in the capital improvements plan or for pro-rata payments to repay other developers for such over-sizing. 
(b)  The city shall credit any new development that occurs subsequent to the effective date of this article, any amount of capital recovery fees which have been collected by the city pursuant to duly adopted ordinances and any impact fees collected by the city pursuant to this article. 
(c)  All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this article and additional standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative guidelines. 
(1)  No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities. 
(2)  No offset or credit shall exceed the impact fee to be collected from new development as established in section 26-219. 
(3)  The unit costs used to calculate the offsets shall not exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the impact fee capital improvements plan for the category of facility within the service area for which the impact fee is imposed. 
(4)  If an offset or credit applicable to a plat has not been exhausted within ten (10) years from the date of the acquisition of the first building permit issued or connection made after the effective date of this article or within such period as may be otherwise designated by agreement for capital improvements pursuant to section 26-229, such offset or credit shall lapse. 
(5)  In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer for an offset or credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to this article or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees collected or due for the development for that category of capital improvement, unless otherwise agreed to by the city. 
(6)  No offset shall exceed an amount equal to the eligible costs of the improvement multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the impact fee per service unit due for the new development as computed using Schedule 2 and the denominator of which is the maximum impact fee per service unit for the new development as computed using Schedule 1. 
(7)  Offsets or credits for area-related facilities dedicated to and accepted by the city for a development prior to the effective date of this article shall be prorated among the total number of service units within such development and reduced by an amount equivalent to the number of existing service units within such development and shall be further reduced by the amount of any participation funds received from the city and by any payments received from other developments who utilize the system facility. 
(8)  The city may participate in the costs of an area-related improvement to be dedicated to the city, including costs that exceed the amount of the impact fees due for the development under Schedule 1 for that category of capital improvements, in accordance with policies and rules established under the city's subdivision regulations and when incorporated into an agreement for capital improvements pursuant to section 26-229. The amount of any offset shall not include the amount of the city's participation. 
(d)  Unless an agreement for capital improvements is executed providing for a different manner of offsetting or crediting impact fees due pursuant to section 26-229, an offset or credit associated with a plat shall be applied to reduce an impact fee at the time of application for the first building permit or at the time of application for the first utility connection for the property, in the case of land located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and, thereafter, to reduce impact fees subsequently to be collected, until the offset or credit is exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-224. - Establishment of accounts. 
(a)  The city's department of finance shall establish separate interest-bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital improvement (i.e., water facilities and wastewater facilities) within the service area for which the impact fee is collected. 
(b)  Interest earned by each account shall be credited to the account on which it is earned and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for impact fees as authorized herein. 
(c)  The city's department of finance shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in this article. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this article; provided, however, that any fee paid shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten (10) years from the date the fee is deposited into the account. 
(d)  The city's department of finance shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for each such account, which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all monies received, the number of service units for which the monies are received, and which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the impact fee capital improvements plan as area-related capital projects. The city's department of finance shall also maintain such records as are necessary to ensure that refunds are appropriately made in accordance with this article. The records of the account into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The city may establish a fee for copying services. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-225. - Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts. 
(a)  The impact fee collected pursuant to this article may be used to finance or to recoup capital construction costs for water and wastewater facilities identified in the impact fee capital improvements plan and for any purpose authorized in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 395, as amended. Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facilities expansions. 
(b)  Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses: 
(1)  Construction, acquisition, or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified for the water and wastewater utility in the impact fee capital improvements plan; 
(2)  Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facilities expansions; 
(3)  Upgrading, expanding, or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; 
(4)  Upgrading, expanding, or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development; provided, however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital improvements generated by new development; or 
(5)  Administrative and operating costs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-226. - Appeals. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following staff decisions and determinations to the Denton Public Utilities Board: (a) the applicability of an impact fee to the new development; (b) the method of calculating the amount of the impact fee due; (c) the availability or the amount of an offset, credit or rebate; (d) the application of an offset or credit against an impact fee due; or (e) the amount of a refund due, if any. The property owner or applicant shall notify the City Secretary of the City of Denton, Texas in writing, of its desire to appeal any such decision and determination to the public utilities board, no later than thirty (30) days following the date of staff decision or determination. This notice shall be untimely if it is received by the city secretary more than thirty (30) days following the date of staff decision and determination. 
(b)  The owner and/or applicant must file a notice of appeal with the city secretary within thirty (30) days following the determination of the amount of the impact fees to be paid by the development by city staff. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal of the impact fee is pending. 
(c)  The written notice to the city secretary requesting an appeal shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the owner and/or applicant of the appeal; and 
(2)  The business address and telephone number of the owner and/or applicant; and 
(3)  The specific decision or determination of staff which owner and/or applicant are complaining of, and the date of issuance thereof; and 
(4)  State specifically the grounds regarding owner's and/or applicant's application for appeal; and 
(5)  State specifically what amount of money that you believe is owing the city, as well as your basis therefor; and 
(6)  The name and address of any legal counsel who will appear before the public utilities board to argue on your behalf; and 
(7)  The signature of the owner and/or applicant regarding this appeal. 
(d)  The burden of proof shall be on the property owner and/or applicant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the offset, credit or rebate was not calculated according to the provisions of this article. Upon submission of the case and the hearing held before the public utilities board (the "board"), a decision shall be made by the board, upon public hearing, which shall constitute a formal recommendation to the Denton City Council. The board shall submit all of the materials that it receives as evidence from staff and all of the materials that it receives as evidence from the owner and/or applicant to the city council for its final consideration. All evidence as well as the record shall be closed by the public utilities board. A record shall be made of the public utilities board hearing and shall be forwarded to the city council. The city council shall then make its decision on the record produced by the public utilities board and upon the oral arguments that are limited to not more than fifteen (15) minutes each for the owner and/or applicant, and the city. The city council shall then determine the appeal and issue its written decision. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-227. - Refunds. 
(a)  Any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to this article which has not been expended within ten (10) years from the date of payment, shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid, or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 395.025(d) which states that V.T.C.A. Finance Code § 302.002, or any successor statute applies. 
(b)  Upon the written request of an owner of the property on which an impact fee has been paid, the city shall refund such fees if: 
(1)  Existing service is available and service is denied; or 
(2)  Service was not available when the fee was collected and the city has failed to commence construction of facilities to provide service within two (2) years of fee payment; or 
(3)  Service was not available when the fee was collected and has not subsequently been made available within a reasonable period of time considering the type of capital improvement or facility expansion to be constructed, but in any event no later than five (5) years from the date of the payment. 
(c)  The city shall refund an appropriate proportion of impact fee payments in the event that a previously purchased but uninstalled water meter for which the impact fee has been paid is replaced with a smaller meter, based on the service unit differential of the two (2) meter sizes and the fee per service unit at the time of the original fee payment. 
(d)  A petition for refund under this section shall be submitted to the director on a form provided by the city for such purpose. Within one (1) month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the director must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request, including the reasons for the decision. If a refund is due to the petitioner, the director shall notify the general manager of utilities and request that a refund payment be made to the petitioner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-228. - Update of plan and revision of fees. 
(a)  The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at least every five (5) years, commencing approximately from the date of adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in accordance with the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 395, or in any successor statute. 
(b)  The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital improvements plans and other factors such as market conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (a) to determine whether the land use assumptions and capital improvements plans should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly, or whether Schedules 1 or 2 should be changed. Schedule 2 may be amended without revising land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at any time prior to the update provided for in subsection (a), provided that the impact fees to be collected under Schedule 2 do not exceed the impact fees assessed under Schedule 1. 
(c)  If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a), the city council determines that no change to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such update by following the procedures in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 395.0575. 
(d)  The city may amend by resolution the Land Use and Service Unit/SFE Equivalency Table (Exhibit B), at any time prior to the update provided for in subsection (a), provided that the number of service units associated with a particular land use shall not be increased. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-229. - Agreement for capital improvements. 
An owner of a new development may construct or finance a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan, if required or authorized by the city, by entering into an agreement with the city prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the city and shall identify the estimated cost of the improvement or expansion, the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement or expansion, a requirement that the improvement be designed and completed to city standards and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the city. The agreement shall provide for the method to be used to determine the amount of the offset to be given against the impact fees due for the development or any reimbursement to the owner for construction of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-230. - Use of other financing mechanisms. 
(a)  In addition to the use of impact fees, the city may finance water and wastewater capital improvements or facilities expansions designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public improvements districts or other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property. 
(c)  The city may pay all or part of impact fees due for a new development taking into account available offsets and credits pursuant to duly adopted criteria. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2019-008 , § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-231. - Conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in force when the provisions of this article become effective, which are inconsistent or in conflict with the terms or provisions contained in this article, are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2004-183, § 4, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-326, § 4(Exh. A), 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2018-008, § 4, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 26-232. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-233. - Water conservation and drought contingency plan. 
(a)  Adoption of plans. The Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan of the City adopted dated April 19, 2005, and the previous amendment thereto adopted by ordinance dated May 2, 2006, and the "City of Denton—Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan—April 2009" are hereby adopted by reference herein; and the attached "City of Denton—Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan (updated February 2012)" is hereby added to, incorporated by reference herewith, being attached as Exhibit "A" hereto, and made a part of this Code of Ordinances for all purposes, as to its Sections 6.6 and 6.7, as if fully set forth herein (hereafter collectively referred to as the "plan"). 
(b)  Surcharges. In addition to the penalties set forth in section 26-234 below, the surcharge penalties of twenty (20) percent for commercial, industrial, and residential customers may be imposed in accordance with the water conservation and drought contingency plan: 
(c)  Authority. The city manager and assistant city manager for utilities are authorized to implement measures prescribed and required by this section and by the water conservation and drought contingency plan approved by the city council. The assistant city manager for utilities is authorized to enforce the measures implemented and to promulgate regulations not in conflict with this section or with state and federal laws in aid of enforcement. 
(d)  Implementation of emergency order. The assistant city manager for utilities, upon determination that the conditions for a water emergency exist, may take the actions indicated under the water conservation and drought contingency plan, and shall advise the city manager. The city manager may order that the appropriate state of emergency response, as detailed in the water conservation and drought contingency plan, be implemented. To be effective, the order must be: 
(1)  Made by public announcement via electronic media; and 
(2)  Published in a newspaper of general circulation of the city within twenty-four (24) hours after the public announcement, which order becomes effective immediately upon publication. 
(e)  Duration of the order; change; extension. All initiated actions will remain in effect until the conditions that triggered the order have been eliminated or as otherwise provided in the water conservation and drought contingency plan. Upon recommendation of the assistant city manager for utilities, the city manager may terminate, upgrade, or downgrade the state of emergency in accordance with the requirements of the water conservation and drought contingency plan. Any change in the order must be made in the same manner prescribed in subsection (d) for implementing an emergency order. 
(f)  Wholesale service to customers outside the city. The assistant city manager for utilities shall notify customers receiving wholesale water service from the city when any stage of the water conservation and drought contingency plan has been initiated or terminated in case of pro-rata water allocations. The assistant city manager for utilities may restrict service to customers outside the city, as permitted under contract and state law. 
(g)  Authority under other laws. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the mayor, the city council, or the city manager to take emergency action or to seek emergency relief under chapter 9, "emergency management" or under the provisions of any applicable state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2005-121, § 1, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 2006-127, § 1, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2012-064, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 26-234. - Criminal and civil penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly makes, causes, or permits a use of water contrary to the measures implemented in the water conservation and drought contingency plan, as amended. For purposes of this section, it is presumed that a person has knowingly made, caused, or permitted a use of water contrary to the measures implemented if the mandatory measures have been implemented according to the Plan and any one of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The plan prohibits the manner of use; or 
(2)  The amount of water used exceeds the amount allowed by the plan; or 
(3)  The amount of use or the amount used violates the terms and conditions of a compliance agreement following a variance granted by the assistant city manager for utilities; or 
(4)  The violation of any provision of the "Land and Landscape Irrigation and Water Waste Ordinance". 
(b)  The following penalty shall apply during stages 3 and 4 of the water conservation and drought contingency plan, as amended. Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that one or more provisions in this plan is violated shall be considered to be a separate offense. 
(c)  The city attorney is authorized to commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the penalty mentioned in the above subsection (b). Such additional relief may include: 
(1)  An injunction to prevent a violation of this chapter, or of the water conservation and drought contingency plan, as amended; 
(2)  Recovery for expenses incurred by the city in responding to a violation of this chapter, or of the water conservation and drought contingency plan, as amended; 
(3)  A civil fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for violations of section 26-233 or for violations of the water conservation and drought contingency plan, as amended; 
(4)  All other damages, costs, remedies and legal processes to which the city may be entitled. 
(Ord. No. 2005-121, § 1, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 2006-127, § 1, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2012-064, § 2, 3-6-12)  
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER AND DETENTION FACILITY IMPROVEMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2004-174, § 2, adopted June 15, 2004, added a new article VII, §§ 26-235—26-239. Former article VII was renumbered as article VIII. 
 
Sec. 26-235. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Capacity shall mean the quantity of stormwater that can be distributed, or conveyed, through stormwater drain lines, channels or detention facilities. 
City shall mean the City of Denton, Texas. 
Cost shall mean the actual costs to design and construct Improvements, including Oversized Improvements, which costs shall include but not be limited to engineering costs and costs for land, labor, and materials. 
Developer shall mean the party responsible for constructing oversized improvements. The term developer includes the city should the city construct at its expense or pay for the oversized improvements. 
Impervious surface shall mean any surface through which water cannot pass, or through which water passes with great difficulty. 
Improvements shall mean drainage improvements, including, but not limited to stormwater drain lines, channels and/or detention facilities, whether on-site or off-site. 
Oversized shall mean the design and construction of an improvement larger than necessary to support the development and existing up stream run-off, whether on-site or off-site. 
Pro rata charge shall mean a monetary fee charged to a property owner to reimburse a developer for the installation, extension, or any related construction cost of oversized improvements provided by a developer to accommodate the drainage needs of the property owner's development. 
Pro rata agreement shall mean an agreement between the city and a developer, or between the city and a property owner, approved by the city council, establishing reimbursement procedures for the cost of oversized improvements constructed by a developer. 
Property owners shall mean the record owners of real property from which surface water run-off from such real property flows into the oversized improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-174, § 2, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-236. - Pro rata agreement. 
(a)  On and after the passage of this article, the city may enter into pro rata agreements with developers to impose a pro rata charge due from property owners. The pro rata charge shall represent the property owner's pro rata share of the calculated cost of constructing the oversized improvements in accordance with the following formula (the "formula"): 
The pro rata charge shall be computed based on the additional impervious surface area being generated by the upstream development that contributes surface runoff to the downstream drainage structure. The following method shall be used to determine the pro-rata charge calculation: 
Step 1: Determine impervious cover areas and costs for drainage infrastructure. 
Drainage improvements shall be sized using the following method: Compute the total impervious surface area within the contributing watershed using existing development conditions with the proposed development added. This impervious area is identified as impervious area (IA). 
Next, determine the peak runoff rate for the new drainage improvements following the procedures described in the Drainage Criteria Manual Section 4. Compute the runoff rate using the existing development conditions of the upstream watershed with the proposed development added. Determine the size and extent of new drainage infrastructure required to convey this peak runoff rate in accordance with the requirements of the Drainage Criteria Manual. Determine the construction cost for the required drainage improvements, identified as drainage cost ($DC). 
Next, compute the total impervious surface area within the contributing watershed for a future fully developed condition with the proposed development added. Compute estimates of impervious surface areas for undeveloped sub-areas using the zoning classification or future land use identified on the current City of Denton Land Use Plan, and as described in the Drainage Criteria Manual Section 4. Include planned unit developments and preliminary plats identified by the city for the impervious surface area computation. This impervious area is identified as future impervious area (FIA). 
Compute the peak runoff rate using the future fully developed conditions upstream watershed with the proposed development added, following the procedures described in the Drainage Criteria Manual Section 4. Determine the size and extent of new drainage infrastructure required to convey this peak runoff rate in accordance with the requirements of the Drainage Criteria Manual. Determine the construction cost for the required drainage improvements, identified as future drainage cost ($FDC). 
Step 2: Compute the pro-rata formula. 
The pro-rata formula in dollars per square foot of impervious surface shall be calculated as follows: 
$FDC - $DC 
FIA - IA 
The oversized improvements' costs shall be calculated in accordance with the criteria in the Drainage Design Criteria Manual. No pro rata charge is or shall be deemed an impact fee, as defined in V.T.C.A. Texas Local Government Code, Ch. 395, as amended. 
(b)  Upon approval of a pro rata agreement by the city council, a pro rata charge shall be assessed against all property owners and their real property in order to reimburse the developer for the cost of constructing such oversized improvements. All pro rata agreements shall include exhibits listing the affected properties, listing the estimated amounts of the pro rata charges that will be due from each property owner, and showing a location map of the oversized improvements. the actual amount of the pro rata charges will be determined in accordance with the formula at the time the pro rata charges are collected. Prior to approving a pro rata agreement the developer shall submit to the city a watershed map clearly identifying the perimeters of the watershed basin that will be the subject of the pro rata agreement. 
(c)  In addition to pro rata charges for any oversized improvements, property owners shall pay all other charges related to the use of the oversized improvements, including but not limited to, impact and permit fees, if any, as established by the city. 
(d)  Pro rata charges will be determined based on the actual amount of calculated surface water runoff determined at the time of final plat application of the affected upstream properties within the same watershed basin, or at the time of building permit application if a final plat is not required, in accordance with the formula set forth in section 26-236(a) above. Oversized improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards of Subchapter 19 of the Denton Development Code and the Drainage Design Criteria Manual. In the event the developer wishes to construct oversized improvements that exceed the design standards specified in Subchapter 19 of the Denton Development Code and the Drainage Design Criteria Manual, the costs associated with exceeding such design standards shall not be reimbursable through a pro rata agreement. Because the pro rate charges are based upon the actual development within the watershed basin and the oversized improvements are based on the estimated full development of the watershed basin, there is no guarantee that the pro rata charges will completely cover the cost of the oversized improvements. The pro rata charges shall not bear interest and shall not be adjusted for inflation. 
(e)  The public improvement three-way agreement between the developer, the developer's contractor and the city (the "three-way agreement") shall provide for the construction of the oversized improvements at the cost of the developer. The three-way agreement shall be executed and the developer shall pay all permit fees, including but not limited to impact, review and inspection fees, if applicable, prior to the release of a construction permit by the city for the oversized improvements. The developer will look solely to the property owners within the same drainage basin for reimbursement of the oversized costs through the pro rata charges provided for in this ordinance and in the applicable pro rata agreement. 
(f)  Pro rata agreements and pro rata charges are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Prior to commencing construction of the oversized improvements, or prior to acceptance by the city of the oversized improvements when an exaction variance request is pending for consideration, the developer may submit to the city a written request for the establishment of pro rata charges for the oversized improvements under this article. The request shall comply with all requirements of this article and shall include documentation of the costs associated with the construction of the oversized improvements, including a copy of the actual construction contract with unit prices as well as an engineer's cost estimate for a system sized for only the developer's property and existing off-site conditions with a cost estimate for the costs of the oversized improvements. The costs of the oversized improvements shall be calculated on the basis of the fully developed or redeveloped surface water run-off within the same watershed basin and based upon the zoning at the time of the calculation of the oversized improvements as measured by the criteria in the Drainage Design Criteria Manual. 
(2)  The city engineer, or his designated representative, shall verify the developer's cost calculations for reimbursement based on the criteria in the Drainage Design Criteria Manual. In the event of a discrepancy, the city engineer, or his designated representative, shall establish the calculated cost for the pro rata charge. The city's cost calculations may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  The pro rata charge shall be paid by a property owner prior to final plat approval of the property owner's property. Should final plat approval not be required the pro rata charge shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(4)  The city shall not be obligated to collect all or any part of a pro rata charge from a property owner under either of the following situations: 
a.  A property owner has filed written objections to all or part of a pro rata charge as being unlawful or invalid, and the city in its sole opinion determines that such objection has merit. In such case, upon written request from the developer, the city will assign its right to collect such pro rata charge to the developer. In such case the city will not withhold the approval of the final plat or building permit for the subject property. 
b.  A court of competent jurisdiction determines that all or part of a pro rata charge is unlawful or invalid. In such case if the pro rata charge has not been paid at the time of the court determination the city will not withhold approval of the final plat or building permit for the subject property. If the pro rata charge has already been collected by the city and paid to the developer, the developer shall refund the pro rata charge to the city with accrued interest, no later than sixty (60) days after written demand from the city. The city will not be obligated to collect any future pro rata charges under the applicable pro rata agreement until this refund is made. 
(5)  In collecting a pro rata charge from a property owner, the city is performing a governmental function and thereby has governmental immunity to any claim or action from a developer under this ordinance or the applicable pro rata agreement. The city shall not be liable to the developer should it make a mistake in calculating the applicable pro rata charge or inadvertently fail to collect a pro rata charge, whether or not the city acted negligently. In such case, upon written request from the developer, the city will assign its right to collect such pro rata charge to the developer. 
(6)  The city hereby establishes reasonable administrative fees to recover its costs in administering the pro rata agreement. An administrative fee is hereby established in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) of the administrative fee shall be paid by the developer upon the approval of the pro rata agreement. The city will collect the remaining $2500.00 by deducting it from pro rata charges collected from property owners within the watershed. The percentage of the fee deducted from pro rata charges collected from each property owner is the proportionate share of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) based upon the number of properties within the watershed identified at the time the pro rata agreement is signed. 
(7)  The city may not collect pro rata charges from a property owner if more than twenty (20) years have passed since the completion of the oversized improvements for which reimbursement is sought. 
(Ord. No. 2004-174, § 2, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-237. - Extension of stormwater drain lines to developments and within developments. 
(a)  Extension of improvements to developments. Where extensions of certain improvements are required to serve property which will be subdivided or platted for development and resale, the costs of approach mains or channels fronting on or extending through property not owned by the developer but required and necessary to connect the developer's property shall be borne solely by the developer, unless the city authorizes reimbursement of such costs related to oversizing through a pro rata agreement according to the provisions of section 26-236. 
(b)  Oversized improvements within or downstream of residential or commercial developments. Developers shall bear the entire costs of improvements required within or downstream of their developments as required by Subchapter 19 of the Development Code, except that the city may elect to participate in the cost of constructing any oversized improvements. The city shall only reimburse the developer for oversized improvements by exacting pro rata charges from a property owner at such time as such property owner develops or redevelops property within the same drainage basin and increases drainage run-off. 
(c)  Detention facilities within residential developments. In the event a detention facility with capacity that exceeds the area necessary to serve a specific development is required, the Developer of that specific development may submit a written request for the establishment of a pro rata charge to reimburse the developer for the oversizing costs associated with the detention facility. The pro rata charge for detention facilities shall be calculated on a cost-per-acre, per tract basis for properties within the approved service area. 
(Ord. No. 2004-174, § 2, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-238. - Payment of pro rata charge. 
(a)  Each property owner shall pay the applicable pro rata charge prior to final plat approval and if a final plat is not required, prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  The developer will look solely to the pro rata charges provided for in this ordinance and the applicable pro rata agreement for reimbursement for the oversized costs. The city has no obligation to pay for the oversized costs from its general revenues, bond funds or any other revenues it may receive. Should any court of competent jurisdiction determine that all or part of this article is unlawful or invalid, the city may cease to charge or collect the pro rata charges, and will have no further obligations hereunder or under the applicable pro rata agreement. Should any court of competent jurisdiction determine that a pro rata charge as applied to a particular property owner is unlawful, the city will have no further obligation to collect such pro rata charge. By electing to enter into a pro rata agreement the developer will waive any other claims or causes of action it may have against the city for the costs to construct the oversized improvements other than any claims or causes of action it may have to collect the pro rata charges collected by the city under the pro rata agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2004-174, § 2, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-239. - Enforcement of pro rata agreements and oversizing costs. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed in any way to be an exclusive method of enforcing the payment of pro rata agreements and oversizing costs against property owners, and this procedure shall not be deemed in any manner to be a waiver of the city's right to validly assess affected persons for the cost of the construction of improvements and to fix and enforce liens against said property, in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-174, § 2, 6-15-04)  
ARTICLE VIII. - UNIFORM REGULATIONS TO GOVERN THE USE AND OCCUPANCY OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY PROVIDERS OF ELECTRIC SERVICE IN THE CITY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-406, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 2001, repealed art. VII, §§ 26-240—26-256, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to be read as herein set out. Prior to amendment §§ 26-240—26-256 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-041, § 2, adopted Feb. 1, 2000; and Ord. No. 99-373, § I, adopted October 12, 1999. Subsequently, Ordinance No. 2004-174, § 3, adopted June 15, 2004, renumbered article VII as article VIII. 
 
Sec. 26-240. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article and for franchises granted hereunder, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. These definitions shall be subject to revision after review by the city to account for changes necessitated by retail competition in the electric utility industry commencing January 1, 2002. 
City shall mean the City of Denton, Texas, a home rule municipal corporation. 
Corporate limits shall mean the corporate limits of the city as said limits are now established or as such limits may hereafter be extended. 
Customer shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind served by a provider hereunder within the city. 
Electric utility service shall include all sales of electricity, net of customer credits, to all customers within the corporate limits of the city. 
Electric utility system or system shall mean an electric power system installed and operated in the city which shall include, but not be limited to, the generation, transmission and distribution facilities, equipment and administrative services necessary to provide electric service for any use to the city and such extensions, additions or reductions as may hereafter be made. 
Gross revenues shall mean all revenues received by the provider from the provision of electric utility service within the corporate limits of the city to all customers within the city. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, municipal corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Provider shall mean any person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls an electric utility system for the provision of electric utility service within the city. 
Public rights-of-way shall mean all of the public streets, alleys, highways, and public thoroughfares of the city, as they now exist or may be hereafter constructed, opened, laid out, or extended within the present limits of the city, or in such territory as may hereafter be added to, consolidated, or annexed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-241. - Franchise required. 
(a)  Any person who desires to occupy public rights-of-way for the purpose of providing electric utility service to any person or area of the city must obtain a franchise from the city hereunder and comply with all provisions of this article and the franchise granted hereunder. The franchise granted by the city shall be granted in accordance with Article XIII of the city Charter, and shall authorize the provider to use and occupy the present and future public rights-of-way for the purpose of constructing, erecting, owning, suspending, installing, extending, renewing, repairing, maintaining, operating and conducting within the city limits of the city, a plant or plants and poles, wires, pipelines, cables, underground conduits, manholes, fiber optic cable solely for the provision, support, or control of the electric utility system, and all other facilities and equipment needed and necessary for the maintenance and operation of an electric utility system. 
(b)  A provider seeking to obtain a franchise shall make application therefor with the city. Such application shall consist of completing the application form provided by the city and filing the completed form with the city, along with the required application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Upon receipt of the completed application form and the application fee, and after reasonable opportunity for review of same, the city shall, by ordinance, grant a franchise to the applicant as provided herein. 
(c)  A franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to the provision by provider of electric utility services. In the event provider desires to use its existing facilities, or construct new facilities, in order to provide telecommunications service, local interconnection, network access service, leased fiber optic capacity, video programming service or any other telecommunications or telephony service to existing or potential customers, provider must obtain additional and separate authorization from the city for such activities to be conducted in the public rights-of-way prior to their commencement, as provided by state law, including the payment of appropriate fees therefor. 
(d)  Franchises granted hereunder shall cover the geographical area of the entire corporate limits of the city, but shall not be construed to expand or limit a provider's service area granted by the public utility commission of Texas. The city limits are subject to expansion or reduction by annexation and contraction of municipal boundaries. In accordance with state law and regulations of the Public Utility Commission of Texas, a franchised provider may provide service to any and all areas that may be annexed to the city under the same terms and conditions of this ordinance as the current areas now included within the city. If the city approves any expansion or reduction of its corporate limits by annexation or contraction, the city will provide written notice to the provider. The provider must revise its payments due to any expansion or reduction by annexation or contraction within a reasonable time after notice by the city, but no later than sixty (60) calendar days after receipt of notice. 
(e)  Franchises may be granted for a fixed term, not to exceed twenty (20) years. 
(f)  A franchise shall not be assignable without the express, advance, written consent of the governing body of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld; such consent to be evidenced by an ordinance that fully recites the terms and conditions, if any, upon which such consent to assign is given. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-242. - Compensation to be paid to the city. 
(a)  As compensation for the rights and privileges conferred by a franchise granted pursuant to this article, provider shall be required to pay to the city, each quarter, a sum of money equal to and no less than five (5) percent of the provider's gross revenues as defined herein or any other legally permissible charge as the city council may determine by ordinance or by contract. 
(b)  Each quarterly payment required by this article and the franchise shall be equal to and no less than five (5) percent of the preceding quarter's actual said gross revenues or any other legally permissible charge as the city council may determine by ordinance or by contract. Each payment shall be due and payable on or before the last business day of the first month following the end of the preceding quarter by electronic funds transfer or by other means that provide immediately available funds to the city on the day the payment is due. These payments (insofar as the city has legal power so to provide and agree) shall be in lieu of, and shall be accepted as payment for all of provider's obligations to pay other charges for the rental of the public rights-of-way, franchise taxes, or other taxes of every kind, save and except ad valorem taxes, sales and use taxes, special taxes and assessments for public improvements, and any fees associated with the use of city-owned poles. 
(c)  The compensation payable to the city by providers as consideration for their use and occupancy of public rights-of-way may change for providers with franchises extending beyond January 1, 2002, in accordance with Section 33.008, Public Utility Regulatory Act of Texas ("PURA") (Tex. Util. Code § 33.008). For "electric utilities," as defined in PURA, the city shall determine the franchise fee to be paid by providers using the criteria set forth in § 33.008, PURA. The new franchise fee shall be effective as of January 1, 2002, and shall replace the calculation of the franchise fee described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. For electric cooperatives, the city shall determine the franchise fee to be paid by such providers, also in accordance with the criteria set forth in § 33.008, PURA, and the new franchise fee shall be effective upon the implementation by the electric cooperative provider of customer choice. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 2011-180, § 2, 10-4-11)  
Sec. 26-243. - Underground conduits; use by city of conduits and poles. 
(a)  Provider shall install underground at no expense to the city all electric power distribution facilities within new residential subdivisions or commercial developments. The city may require facilities to be moved underground at the city's expense. 
(b)  Representatives of both the city and the provider shall meet periodically to:. 
(1)  Consult and plan together regarding projects to be undertaken pursuant to this section. The provider shall provide non-binding "ballpark" cost estimates for planning purposes at no cost to the city. The final decision as to which projects are selected rests with the city, subject to the provisions of this section. The specific scheduling of projects rests with the provider, which shall make every reasonable effort to complete such projects within the time requested by the city; 
(2)  Review the city's undergrounding program, including conversions, public projects and replacements, which have been accomplished or are underway by the provider at the city's expense and request, together with the city's plans for additional undergrounding; 
(3)  Review the status of technology in the field of electric undergrounding; 
(4)  Review the construction and operation and maintenance costs of underground lines versus overhead lines; and 
(5)  Review public projects anticipated by the city. 
(6)  Such meetings shall be held to achieve a continuing program for the orderly undergrounding of electric lines in the city. 
(c)  When undertaking a project of undergrounding pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the city and the provider shall work with other utilities or companies that have their lines overhead to have all lines undergrounded as part of the same project. When other utilities or companies are placing their lines underground, the provider shall cooperate with these utilities and companies and undertake to underground provider's facilities are part of the same project where feasible; provided, however, the provider shall have no such obligation absent reimbursement of the provider's cost by the city. 
(d)  The provider shall use its best efforts to coordinate its installation of new underground facilities with preexisting underground facilities of other companies. 
(e)  If provider, in its sole discretion, determines that it has spare ducts in its underground conduits, or spare pins, crossarms, or space on any of its poles not then necessary for the provision of electric utility service, and not needed for future anticipated load growth or emergencies, provider shall permit the city to use one such duct in each conduit, or reasonable spaces on poles, or both, for the city's police and fire alarm wires, traffic control wires or cable, fiber-optic lines connecting city facilities, or other similar, appropriate non-commercial, governmental uses, provided that such use by the city is in compliance with the national electric safety code and at the expense of the city. If provider constructs or extends additional conduits or erects additional poles, the city may require the provider to provide one such duct in each conduit, or reasonable space on poles, or both, for the city's own use as aforesaid. In either event, the city shall pay provider a fair rental therefor. 
(f)  City shall not sell, lease or otherwise make available its rights to use provider's facilities as set forth herein to any third party for commercial purposes. Such rights are provided solely for the non-commercial use of the city for governmental purposes. However, this restriction shall not prevent the city from using the services of a third party commercial entity to manage or operate the city's facilities on behalf of the city, so long as no resale or other commercial use of such facilities shall occur. 
(g)  Provider is not authorized to license or lease to any person or entity or any other public utility, any right to occupy or use the city's public rights-of-way for the conduct of any private business or pursuit. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-244. - Construction and maintenance; excavation. 
(a)  The construction, maintenance, and operation of provider's electric utility system shall be subject to lawful police regulations and ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, sections 25-71, et seq., Denton Code of Ordinances. The placement of poles, excavations, and other construction in the streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way, shall interfere as little as practicable with the use of the streets, sidewalks, and alleys, and with the use of private property. The city shall have the right and power, at any time to order and require provider to remove and abate any pole, wire, cable, or other structure that is unnecessarily dangerous to life or property. In the event the provider, after notice, fails or refuses to act within a reasonable time, the city shall have the power to remove or abate the same at the expense of the provider, all without compensation or liability for damages to provider. 
(b)  Whenever the provider shall cause any opening or alteration to be made in any of the public rights-of-way for the purpose of installing, maintaining, operating or repairing its electric utility system, the provider must obtain a permit as required in sections 25-71, et seq., Denton Code of Ordinances. The work shall be completed at no expense to the city within a reasonable time. The provider shall, upon the completion of such work, restore such portion of the public rights-of-way to as good or better condition as it was before the opening or alteration was so made and will promptly remove any debris. Should the provider fail to complete restoration after ten (10) calendar days' notice provided in writing by the city to provider, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way that may have been disturbed by the provider, and the cost shall be charged to the provider. 
(c)  The provider shall be responsible for the payment of all repair or maintenance costs incurred as a result of any defects, impairments, or substandard condition in the public rights-of-way caused by the work of the provider for two (2) years after the city's acceptance of the completed work; provided however, that the provider remains responsible for repair and maintenance costs beyond the two year period when it has been notified by the city in writing of a defect, impairment, or substandard condition within the two-year period. 
(d)  On or before the effective date of a franchise granted hereunder, and as a condition precedent to the effectiveness of the franchise, the provider shall deposit with the city finance director a surety bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), payable to the city and securing the payment of repair or maintenance costs incurred as a result of any defects, impairments, or substandard condition in the public rights-of-way caused by the work of the provider or resulting from provider's activities in the public rights-of-way. The required surety bond must be with good and sufficient sureties, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state, and satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance. 
(e)  No provisions of this article shall be construed to prohibit city from imposing inspection or permitting charges and fees for excavation, maintenance and restoration projects by provider, and requiring adequate security therefor, to assure appropriate planning, construction, inspection, completion and restoration of such projects. 
(f)  Engineering plans for those projects involving significant construction in public rights-of-way shall be submitted to the city for approval no later than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the commencement of construction, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed by the city. 
(g)  Except for emergency repairs or emergency paving cuts, a permit shall be obtained from the city prior to the initiation of any construction, repair, replacement, paving cuts, or other excavation within public rights-of-way. All reasonably practical alternatives to making paving cuts will be required before paving cuts will be permitted. In addition to any other permit requirement, the provider shall submit a plan that provides for compliance with all federal, state, and city requirements, including, but not limited to, construction and restoration standards, stormwater quality regulations, traffic control regulations, and the Texas Professional Engineering Practices Act. Any plans submitted shall be detailed to the satisfaction of the city's director of engineering and transportation. If any work is to be done by an independent contractor or subcontractor, the provider must identify, in writing, that contractor and any subcontractors to the city before a permit is issued. For the permit, the city may require information as necessary so that adequate notification, communication, and points of contact for the provider or its contractor may be established. 
(h)  In the event provider undertakes emergency repairs, excavations, or paving cuts for which a permit has not been obtained that result in any disruptions to the public's or the city's use of public rights-of-way, the provider shall deliver notice to the city of such repairs, excavations, or paving cuts no later than the end of the next working day following initiation of the work. In the event such emergency repairs, excavations, or paving cuts are required on an arterial street during peak traffic periods, i.e., 7-9 a.m. or 4-6 p.m. Monday through Friday, the provider shall verbally notify the Denton Police Department at the time of commencement of such work. 
(i)  Erosion and sedimentation during construction or repair work shall be controlled in accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the city generally applicable to excavations within the city, as amended or revised from time to time. Permanent erosion control shall be required upon completion of all work. Effective environmental and pollution control measures shall be maintained in accordance with city, state, and federal requirements. 
(j)  When provider shall make or cause to be made excavations or shall place obstructions in any public rights-of-way, the provider shall place, erect, and maintain barriers and lights to identify the location of such excavations or obstructions, consistent with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and as further directed by the city and the [State of] Texas Department of Transportation. 
(k)  Work done in the public rights-of-way shall be planned and executed to minimize time of construction and disruption to traffic and the general public. The work site must be rendered safe to traffic and the general public in accordance with normal utility practice prior to workers leaving the site each day. Once started, work must proceed without interruption to completion, including restoration and clean-up. 
(l)  Except for emergencies as determined by the provider or under special circumstances as determined by the city's director of engineering and transportation, work hours for work in the public rights-of-way will be 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. or darkness, whichever occurs first, for all areas other than along major thoroughfares. Work on or along major thoroughfares will be limited to the hours of 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. unless otherwise specifically permitted by the city. 
(m)  Provider shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging public rights-of-way (including sidewalks and driveways), after providing written notice to affected customers, so as to prevent the branches of the trees from coming into contact with the wires and cables of the provider, provided that all trimming is done in compliance with the National Electric Safety Code and city Code provisions, and at no expense to the city. 
(n)  The city shall have the right to deny a permit for any proposed new or additional facilities within the public rights-of-way if it determines there is insufficient space to accommodate the facilities, or if the provider, or its subcontractors, are not in compliance with existing city ordinances and standards or previously issued permits. 
(o)  Provider and city may agree that city shall perform paving cuts, excavation, or other construction or repairs in the public rights-of-way on behalf of provider, at such reasonable price and upon such reasonable terms as provider and city may agree. In the event of such agreement, then with respect to the work to be done by city pursuant to that agreement, the provisions of this section shall not apply to provider. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-245. - Joint use of poles, trenches, and conduits. 
(a)  In order to reduce the number of poles and to avoid public safety concerns and visual clutter, the provider may be required to attach its wires to poles owned and maintained by another person, or to permit the wires of another public utility to be attached to the poles owned and maintained by the provider, upon reasonable terms and for just compensation for any additional facilities of provider that may be required. 
(b)  In the event that provider and such other public utility are unable to agree on terms and compensation, or if same are not otherwise resolved or determined within a reasonable time, then disputes arising under this section shall be resolved by arbitration in accordance with the commercial arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association. Arbitration shall be by a panel of three arbitrators: one selected by the provider, one selected by the other public utility, and one experienced in the matters at issue and selected by the provider and the other public utility in accordance with the commercial arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding as to any matters submitted under this section. All costs and expenses incurred in connection with any such arbitration proceeding (including reasonable attorneys' fees) shall be borne by the party against which the decision is rendered, or, if no decision is rendered, such costs and expenses shall be borne equally by the provider and the other public utility. If the arbitrator's decision is a compromise, the determination of which party or parties bears the costs and expenses incurred in connection with any such arbitration proceeding shall be made by the arbitrator on the basis of the arbitrator's assessment of the relative merits of each party's position. The parties shall instruct the arbitrator to render its decision no later than ninety (90) calendar days after submission of the dispute. 
(c)  The provider may require such other public utility to furnish evidence of adequate insurance and provide indemnification covering the provider, and adequate bonds covering the performance of such other public utility attaching to the provider's poles, as a condition precedent to giving permission to such other public utility to attach wires to provider's poles. Provider's requirements for such insurance and indemnity must be reasonable. 
(d)  Provider shall not be required to attach its wires to the poles of another public utility or to permit the wires of another public utility to be attached to provider's poles if it can be satisfactorily shown: 
(1)  That provider will be subjected to increased risks of interruption of service or liability for accidents; 
(2)  The poles, wires, and appurtenances of such other public utility are not of the character, design, or construction required by, or are not being maintained in accordance with modern electric utility practice; or 
(3)  Sufficient clearance or space is not available on the pole. Wires shall be located on poles in compliance with applicable safety standards and shall not interfere with the erection, replacement, operation, repair, or maintenance of the wires and appurtenances of any other public utility occupying the poles. 
(e)  Providers distribution feeder lines may be constructed as overhead lines, but such lines shall be designed and constructed in an "armless" manner, to the extent such design and construction is technically feasible, with no more than two (2) such lines per right-of-way. "Armless" type construction means cross-arms up to four (4) feet in length phase to phase, or two (2) feet in length pole to phase. 
(f)  Provider may be required by the city to share trench space with another public utility for the placement of cables, wires, or ducts underground. Compensation to the provider as well as the terms of sharing trench space shall be resolved as provided for in subsection (a) of this section. Also, provider may require insurance and indemnification, as provided in subsection (a) of this section. Ducts, cables, or wires shall be placed in trenches in compliance with applicable safety standards and in a manner that does not interfere with provider's cables or wires, as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(g)  Nothing herein shall modify or abrogate the power of the city to require any holder of a franchise from the city to allow use of its facilities by any other holder of a city franchise under Article XIII of the city Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-246. - Conformance with public improvements. 
Whenever, by reason of any changes, without limitation, of any street, sidewalk, curb, alley, highway or public way, or in the location or manner of constructing any water or wastewater pipe, gas pipe, storm sewer, or other underground or overhead structure for any governmental purpose whatsoever, other than siting of competitive electric facilities owned by the city, it shall be deemed necessary by the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of provider located in the public right-of-way, such alterations or changes shall be made as soon as practicable by provider when ordered in writing by the city, without claim for reimbursement or damages against the city. Provided, however, if said requirements impose a financial hardship upon the provider, the provider shall have the right to present alternative proposals for the city's consideration. The city shall not require provider to remove its facilities entirely from a street, sidewalk, curb, alley, highway, or public way unless suitable alternatives are available for relocation of its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-247. - Provider to maintain and file maps and assist in determining provider's use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  The provider shall cooperate with the city at all times by providing timely and complete information regarding the location of its conduits, poles and facilities, along with such maps, plats, construction documents and drawings as may exist or as may be created from time to time. Provider and city shall cooperate and coordinate their efforts to make the most efficient and economical use of their respective facilities. The provider shall at all times keep on file in the office of the city's director of engineering and transportation ("director"), a current map, in a digital format compatible with the city's geographic information system ("G.I.S."), of the provider's electric utility system within the city. As extensions or modifications of facilities are made from time to time, the provider shall periodically file with the director updated digital maps showing those extensions or modifications so that the city will have current and accurate information regarding the location and characteristics of the system. The digital information shall include the location of the facilities comprising the systems, and all other information maintained by the provider pertaining to the city's administration of the franchise, including the depth of any buried transmission or distribution lines, to the extent such information exists. If such information is not available in digital format, a hard copy shall be provided. A hard copy of the digital maps may be requested by the city and shall be provided by the provider if so requested.. 
(b)  The city will use the information provided by providers pursuant to this section only for the purposes of protection and management of the public rights-of-way. The data base provided by provider in its entirety will be treated as competitive information and will not be disclosed in whole or in part, except that portions of such data may be provided to third parties as necessary for efficient management of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-248. - Work by others. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to lay, and permit to be laid, storm sewer, gas, water, wastewater and other pipelines, cables, and conduits, and to do and permit to be done any underground or overhead work that may be necessary or proper in, across, along, over, or under the public rights-of-way occupied by the provider. The city also reserves the right to change, in any manner, any curb, sidewalk, highway, alley, public way or street. In permitting such work to be done, the city shall not be liable to the provider for any damage so occasioned, but nothing herein shall relieve any other person from responsibility for damages to the facilities of provider. 
(b)  In the event that the governing body of the city authorizes someone other than the provider to occupy space under the surface of the public rights-of-way, such grant shall be subject to the rights herein granted or heretofore obtained by the provider. In the event that the governing body of the city shall close or abandon any public right-of-way that contains existing facilities of the provider, any conveyance of land within such closed or abandoned public right-of-way shall be subject to the rights herein granted or heretofore obtained by provider. Provided, however, that the provider may be ordered to vacate any land so conveyed, if an alternate route is practicable, and if the provider is reimbursed by the person to whom the property is conveyed for the reasonable costs of removal and relocation of its facilities. 
(c)  If the city shall require provider to adapt or conform its electric utility system, or in any way or manner to alter, relocate, or change its property to enable any other person to use, or use with greater convenience, said public right-of-way, provider shall not be bound to make any such changes until such other person (except the city) shall have undertaken, with good and sufficient bond, to reimburse the provider for any cost, loss, or expense which will be caused by, or arise out of such change, alteration, or relocation of provider's property. Provided, however, that the city shall never be liable for such reimbursement due to provider from such person. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-249. - Accounting; audit; inspection. 
(a)  The provider shall maintain, at its local office or principal place of business within the State, adequate books and records relating to the performance of its obligations under this article and its franchise. The provider shall maintain its books and records in a form and with coding sufficient to identify its gross revenues through December 31, 2001 and, beginning on January 1, 2002 and to the extent such information is available to provider under applicable regulatory provisions, the number of kWh of electricity delivered by the provider to each retail customer whose consuming point of delivery is located within the city, intending thereby to separately identify these relevant records of its system in the city in order to facilitate the city's review of the franchise fee payments. The records of the provider applicable to its performance under this article and its franchise shall be made available upon not less than ten (10) working days notice for inspection by the city at any time during normal working hours, subject to statutory and regulatory provisions regarding the confidentiality of customer-specific information. 
(b)  City may cause, upon reasonable written notice, an audit to be made of the books and records of provider relating to provider's performance under this ordinance and its franchise. The omission by the city to exercise its rights to any audit at any time shall not constitute a waiver of such right. City shall have the right to select auditors to make the audit. Provider shall make available to the auditor personnel and such records as are relevant to such audit, and shall make no charge to the city therefor. Provider shall assist the city during any audit conducted under this ordinance, including answering questions and providing any requested records or information. Provider shall endeavor to provide requested records or information within twenty-one (21) calendar days of having received a written request therefor. If the provider cannot so provide such records and information, then on or before such twenty-first day after receiving the request therefor, the provider shall notify the city or its representative that the requested records and information will be made available within an additional fourteen (14) calendar days, and the information and records shall be so provided. The cost of an audit pursuant to this provision shall be borne by the city, unless the audit reveals an underpayment of fees in excess of two (2) percent, in which case the provider shall pay for the audit. 
(c)  Upon request by the city, but no less than annually, the provider will prepare a statement of its estimate of provider's gross revenue and the number of kWh to be delivered in the city for the period covered by the statement signed by an authorized representative of the provider, in such reasonable form and detail as city may from time to time prescribe, sufficient to show the source and method of calculation of provider's gross revenue. The acceptance of any statement or payment shall not estop the city from asserting that the amount paid is not the amount due or from recovering any deficit by any lawful proceeding, including interest. 
(d)  Underpayment of fees. 
(1)  In the event the provider shall be determined to have under-remitted the fee required by this article, the provider shall pay, in addition to the underpayments, interest on the underpayments at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the time of the underpayment until payment is made. 
(2)  In the event of underpayment of fees, the provider shall also pay to the city ten (10) percent of the total underpayment as a penalty for noncompliance with this article. Any penalty of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be waived as a de minimus violation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-250. - Penalties. 
(a)  For the violation of any of the following provisions of this article or of its franchise, penalties shall be paid by provider to the city within fifteen (15) calendar days of written notice of assessment by the city, in addition to any other rights or remedies which the city may have at law or in equity: 
(1)  For failure to complete construction in accordance with agreed plans, unless the city specifically approves the delay, the city shall provide provider notice of the failure as indicated in subsection (b) of this section. then for the second failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day that the failure continues; for the third failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day that the failure continues; and for any subsequent failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day that the failure continues and the franchise shall be subject to termination for material breach at the option of city under section 26-251; or 
(2)  For failure to provide data, documents, reports, or information required to be furnished hereunder to the city, or to reasonably cooperate with the city during an audit required under the terms hereunder, the city shall provide provider of the failure as indicated in subsection (b) of this section. Then for the second failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the violation occurs or continues; for the third failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day that the failure continues; and for any subsequent failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day that the failure continues and the franchise shall be subject to termination for material breach at the option of city under section 26-251; or 
(3)  For failure to comply with any financial obligation required herein, the city shall provide provider notice of the failure as indicated in subsection (b) of this section. Then for the second failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of one fifty dollars ($150.00) per day for each day that such noncompliance continues; for the third failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per day for each day that the failure continues; and for any subsequent failure in any given calendar year, provider shall pay a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day that the failure continues and the franchise shall be subject to termination for material breach at the option of city under section 26-251. 
(b)  Prior to imposing a penalty under subparagraphs (1) through (3) above and/or adopting a resolution under subparagraph (4) above, the city shall give the provider written notice and a period to cure, not to exceed five (5) working days. If the provider fails to cure the alleged problems within the prescribed time period, the provider's alleged failure to comply shall be heard at a public meeting of the city council. The provider shall be given written notice of the public meeting no later than five (5) calendar days prior to the posting date of the agenda for the city council meeting at which such resolution is scheduled to be considered by the council. The notice to the provider shall include a list of the failures complained of. Provider shall have an opportunity to address the council at such public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-251. - Forfeiture and termination. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city under this section or otherwise, the city reserves the right to forfeit and terminate a franchise granted pursuant to the provisions hereof and all rights and privileges of the provider hereunder, in the event of an uncorrected material breach of its terms and conditions. A material breach by provider for purposes of this section, shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Violation of any material provision of this ordinance or a franchise granted hereunder, or any rule, order, regulation or determination of the city made pursuant to this ordinance that is not cured or corrected in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance; or 
(2)  An attempt by provider to evade any provision of this ordinance or its franchise, or to practice any fraud or deceit upon the city or its residents. 
(b)  The foregoing matters described in paragraph (a) above shall not constitute a material breach of this article if the violation occurs without fault of the provider, or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond provider's control which could not have been avoided as a result of the exercise of reasonable care. Provider shall not be excused by mere economic hardship, or by the misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers, agents, or employees. 
(c)  The city shall make a written demand that the provider comply with any such provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to this ordinance or its franchise. If the violation by the provider continues for a period of thirty (30) calendar days following such written demand, without the city receiving written proof and substantiation from provider that the required corrective action has been taken, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may take under consideration the issue of termination of the franchise of provider. The city shall set a hearing, and shall cause to be served upon provider, at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of such hearing, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the hearing. Public notice shall be given of the hearing and the issue or issues which the city is to consider. At said hearing, the governing body of the city shall hear and consider the issue or issues and shall hear any person interested therein. At said hearing, the governing body of the city shall determine, in its sole discretion, whether or not any uncorrected violation by the provider still exists. 
(d)  If the city shall determine that an uncorrected material violation by the provider still exists, and was the fault of the provider, and within its control, and could have been avoided with the exercise of reasonable care, the city may declare the franchise of the provider forfeited and terminated; or in the alternative, the council may grant to provider a further period of time to cure the violation. 
(e)  The failure of the city to insist in any one or more instances upon the strict performance of any one or more of the terms or provisions of this article shall not be construed as a waiver or relinquishment for the future of any such term or provision, and the same shall continue in full force and effect. No waiver or relinquishment shall be deemed to have been made by the city unless said waiver or relinquishment is in writing and signed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-252. - Other legal remedies. 
(a)  Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict any legal rights that the city may possess arising from any alleged violation of this ordinance or its franchise by provider. The city retains all other rights, both legal and equitable, to which it is entitled under the law. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall limit the provider's right to appeal a determination, act, or order of the city as provided for by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including the Public Utility Regulatory Act of Texas, as amended, or its successor statute. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-253. - Legal capacity of provider. 
The provider shall be a legal entity with legal capacity to operate, construct, reconstruct, and maintain an electric transmission and distribution system in the city in its properly certificated service area. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-254. - Governmental immunity. 
All of the provisions contained in this article are hereby declared to be for a public purpose, and are in the interests of the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. Any member of the governing body of the city, or city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for or on behalf of the city in the discharge of his or her official duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable; and he or she is hereby relieved from any and all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to any person or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her said duties. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-255. - Insurance. 
Provider will insure against all the risks undertaken pursuant to its franchise, including the indemnification required in the franchise. Such insurance may be in the form of self-insurance to the extent permitted by applicable law, under a provider-approved formal plan of self-insurance maintained in accordance with sound accounting and risk-management practices. Such insurance coverage or plan of self-insurance is subject to the approval of the risk manager of the city, whose approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the city annually, no later than October 1 for each year during the term of provider's franchise, evidencing such coverage, and additionally within thirty (30) calendar days of any substantial change in the nature of its coverage under this section. Should provider elect to self-insure, its annual notice to the city shall contain information clearly identifying the process for filing a claim against such coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Sec. 26-256. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article, and the city council of the City of Denton, Texas hereby declares it would have enacted such remaining portions of this article despite any such invalidity. 
(Ord. No. 2001-406, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2004-174, § 3, 6-15-04)  
Secs. 26-257—26-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 26-260. - Conflicts. 
This article repeals and replaces any other on-site sewage facility ordinance for the City of Denton. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 26-261. - Chapter 366. 
The City of Denton, Texas clearly understands that there are technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities, and will fully enforce Chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code (H&SC) and Chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code (TWC), and associated rules referenced in Section 1 of Ordinance No. 2006-025. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 26-262. - Area of jurisdiction. 
The rules shall apply to all the area lying within the incorporated limits of the City of Denton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 26-263. - On-site sewage facility rules. 
Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of the City of Denton, Texas must comply with the rules adopted in section 26-264 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 26-264. - On-site sewage facility rules adopted. 
The rules, Title 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) §§ 285.1—-285.91 and TAC 30, attached hereto, promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality for on-site sewage facilities are hereby adopted, and all officials and employees of the City of Denton, Texas having duties under said rules are authorized to perform such duties as are required of them under said rules. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 26-265. - Incorporation by reference. 
The rules, 30 TAC Chapters 30 and 285 and all future amendments and revisions thereto are incorporated by reference herewith and are thus made a part of these rules. A copy of the current rules is attached to these rules as Appendix I*. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06) 
Note— *A copy of Appendix I can be found in the city offices.  
Sec. 26-266. - Amendments to the rules adopted by the City of Denton. 
The City of Denton, Texas, wishing to adopt more stringent rules for its on-site sewage facility ordinance, understands that the more stringent conflicting local rule(s) shall take precedence over the corresponding Texas Commission on Environmental Quality requirement. Listed below are the more stringent rules adopted by the City of Denton, Texas: 
(1)  On-site sewage facility permits: 
a.  A property owner of a residential, commercial or institutional building utilizing an on-site sewage facility that is located on a tract of land, regardless of acreage, shall secure and possess a permit from the City of Denton, Texas to construct, or alter, or repair, or extend an on-site sewage facility. 
(2)  On-site sewage facility planning requirements: 
a.  A professional sanitarian or a professional engineer shall prepare on-site sewage facility plans. 
(3)  Land use requirements for on-site sewage facilities utilizing private water wells: 
a.  Lots or tracts of land platted or created after the effective date of these rules shall have a minimum area of two (2) acres, when a private water well is located on that tract of land. 
(4)  Land use requirements for on-site sewage facility utilizing public water systems: 
a.  Lots or tracts of land that are platted or created after the effective date of these rules shall have a minimum area of one (1) acre. 
(5)  Maintenance of surface irrigation systems: 
a.  Commercial/institutional buildings. 
A maintenance company shall inspect each system and test the effluent after disinfection, at least once every four (4) months, for concentrations of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (mg/l "CBOD") and total suspended solids (mg/l "TSS"). 
(6)  Aerobic treatment tanks: 
a.  Aerobic treatment tanks shall not be installed at a depth greater than two (2) feet measured from the top of the tank lid to the top of the tank excavation. All other requirements adopted by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its successor agency, shall apply. 
(7)  Aerobic system maintenance. 
a.  The owner of a single-family residence using an aerobic treatment system shall maintain the system through a maintenance contract and with a maintenance company that complies with rules and standards promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its successor agency. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 2007-269, § 3, 11-6-07)  
Sec. 26-267. - Duties and powers. 
The OSSF Inspector of the City of Denton, Texas, must be certified by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality before assuming the duties and responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 26-268. - Collection of fees. 
All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the City of Denton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 26-269. - Appeals. 
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision to the City Council of the City of Denton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 26-270. - Penalties. 
This article adopts and incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities, which includes, but is not limited to, those found in Chapters 341 and 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapters 7, 26, and 37 of the Texas Water Code and 30 TAC Chapters 30 and 285. 
(Ord. No. 2006-025, § 6, 1-17-06)  
ARTICLE X. - MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION (MSD) 
 
Sec. 26-271. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Affected community means those persons entitled to notice as defined in section 26-273(b)(6) 
Authorized representative means, for purposes of signing an application, if the applicant is a corporation, the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; if the applicant is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively; and if the applicant is a local government, the chief executive officer or his authorized designee. 
Chemical or contaminant of concern means any chemical that has the potential to adversely affect ecological or human receptors due to its concentration, distribution, and mode of toxicity. 
City attorney means the City Attorney for the City of Denton, or the city attorney's authorized representative. 
Designated groundwater means groundwater that will be or is prohibited from use as potable water, or for all uses, by a municipal setting designation ordinance. 
Designated property means the property that will be or is subject to a municipal setting designation ordinance. The designated property may cover several platted lots or tracts of land. 
Director means the Director of the Planning Department for the City of Denton, or the director's authorized representative. 
Environmental risk assessment means the qualitative and quantitative evaluation performed in an effort to define the risk posed to human health and/or the environment by the presence or potential presence and/or use of pollutants. 
Groundwater means water below the surface of the earth. 
Ingestion protective concentration level means the protective concentration level for human ingestions of contaminants of concern established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction Program, determined as if there was no municipal setting designation. 
Ingestion protective concentration level zone means the area where concentrations of contaminants of concern from sources on or migrating through the designated property are greater than the ingestion protection concentration level, determined as if there was no municipal setting designation. 
Municipal setting designation (MSD) means a designation as provided by V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Ch. 361, Subch. W, which authorizes the Executive Director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality to certify municipal setting designations in order to limit the scope of, or eliminate the need for, investigations or response actions addressing contaminant impacts to groundwater which has been restricted from use by ordinance or restrictive covenant. 
Municipal setting designation ordinance means an ordinance adopted pursuant to this article. 
Noningestion protective concentration level means the protective concentration level for dermal contact or inhalation for contaminants of concern established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction Program. 
Noningestion protective concentration level exceedance zone means the area where concentrations of contaminants of concern from sources on or migrating from or through the designated property are greater than noningestion protection concentration levels for contaminants of concern established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction Program. 
Potable water means water that is used for irrigating crops intended for human consumption, as well as water that is used for drinking, showering, bathing, or cooking purposes. 
Protective concentration level means the lowest concentration level for a contaminant of concern within a source medium determined from all applicable exposure pathways and as defined in the Texas Risk Reduction Program. 
Response action means the control, decontamination, or removal from the environment of a contaminant or hazardous substance pursuant to V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Ch. 361, Subch. W, "Municipal Setting Designation," of "Solid Waste Disposal Act". 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
TCEQ application means the application submitted to the TCEQ for certification of a municipal setting designation. 
To the extent known means information known by an applicant or applicant's agent after review of all public and private records and other information sources available in the exercise of due diligence. 
(Ord. No. 2008-150, § 3, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 26-272. - Use of groundwater in MSD areas prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in designated property as a potable or non-potable water source. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in designated property for any purpose prohibited as a condition of council approval, as specified in section 26-277(d). 
(Ord. No. 2010-003, § 3, 1-12-10)  
Sec. 26-273. - Application for city council approval of MSD. 
(a)  A person seeking city council approval of a MSD for an area within the corporate limits of the City of Denton shall apply in writing to the Planning Department of the City of Denton, with the number and format of copies, as determined by the director. 
(b)  An application shall contain: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address, and the name, address, daytime telephone number, and email address of both the applicant's contact person and the licensed professional who prepared the application; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the proposed outer boundaries of the MSD area for which designation is sought; 
(3)  A statement as to whether a public drinking water supply system exists that satisfies the requirements of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Ch. 341 and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking water to the area for which the MSD is sought, and property within one-half mile of the area for which the MSD is sought; 
(4)  A description of the groundwater sought to be restricted, including the identified chemicals of concern therein and the levels of contamination known to the applicant, and the identified vertical and horizontal extent of the contamination. If the applicant has not documented groundwater contamination offsite that originates from the area for which an MSD is sought, the application shall include a statement as to whether contamination more likely than not exceeds residential assessment levels offsite and the basis for that statement; 
(5)  Identification of the points of origin of the contamination, and identification of the person(s) responsible for the contamination, to the extent known; 
(6)  A listing of: 
a.  All state-registered private water wells within five (5) miles from the boundary of the area for which the designation is sought, including a notation of those wells that are used for potable water purposes (if known); 
b.  Each retail public utility, as that term is defined in the Texas Water Code, that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five (5) miles from the area for which the MSD is sought; 
c.  Each municipality, other than the City of Denton, with a boundary located not more than one-half (½) mile from the area for which the MSD is sought; or that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five (5) miles from the area for which the MSD is sought; and 
d.  All owners of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property, as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. 
(7)  A site map, drawn to scale, including a metes and bounds description of the proposed designated property, the boundary of the proposed MSD area, the location of groundwater on the proposed MSD area, and the extent of groundwater contamination to the limits that it has been defined. The map shall include a statement by a professional land surveyor registered by the Texas Board of Professional Surveying attesting to the accuracy of the metes and bounds description; 
(8)  The location of all soil sampling points and groundwater monitoring wells; 
(9)  For each contaminant of concern found at the site, to the extent known, provide a table displaying the following information: 
a.  The level of contamination, the ingestion protective concentration level and noningestion protective concentration levels, all expressed as mg/L or mg/kg, depending on sampling medium; and 
b.  The critical protective concentration level as defined without the municipal setting designation, highlighting any exceedances; and 
c.  The critical protective concentration level as defined with the municipal setting designation, highlighting any exceedances; and 
d.  A digital file, in a format acceptable to the director, that summarizes this information. 
(10)  A statement as to whether contamination on and off the designated property will exceed a residential assessment level as defined in the Texas Risk Reduction Program, if known, and the basis for that statement; 
(11)  A description of any environmental regulatory actions that have been taken within the last five (5) years in conjunction with the designated property, to the extent known; 
(12)  A listing of all existing TCEQ, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency registrations, permits, and identification numbers that apply to the designated property; 
(13)  A summary of any environmental site assessment reports filed with the TCEQ regarding any site investigation or response actions that are planned, ongoing, or completed related to this designated property; 
(14)  A statement as to whether the designated property has been submitted to the Texas Voluntary Cleanup Program (V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 361.601) or similar state or federal program, and a description of the designated property's status in the program; 
(15)  Any other information that the director deems pertinent. 
(c)  The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant and shall contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in a manner designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(d)  An application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  An electronic file of the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (b)(6) above, in a format acceptable to the director and compatible with city information systems; and 
(2)  A set of printed mailing labels with the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (b)(6) above; and 
(3)  A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by city council; and 
(4)  If an applicant desires to attempt to use the notification requirements of this section to simultaneously address the local and state public notification and public meeting requirements, the applicant must follow the specifications outlined in the current version of the City of Denton Municipal Setting Designation Supplementary Guidance Document. It is the sole responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the language of the public notice, as well as the notification process itself, meets the state requirements. 
(e)  An applicant may withdraw its application only in writing by letter sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the director, and shall forfeit the application fee. If the director has not issued public notice prior to the receipt of the withdrawal letter, the applicant may reapply at any time. If public notice has issued, a new application is subject to the limitations of section 26-278 below. 
(Ord. No. 2008-150, § 3, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2010-003, § 4, 1-12-10)  
Sec. 26-274. - Staff review 
(a)  For purposes of the times stated in this article, an application is deemed to have been received on the date that the application was actually received by the director, as indicated by the file date stamped on the application by the planning department. 
(b)  The application for a MSD shall be forwarded to the development review committee (DRC) for staff review. The purpose of the review is to determine whether the application is complete, and whether any current or future city property or other interests have the potential to be impacted by the proposed MSD. City staff shall not conduct an environmental risk assessment of the application. 
(c)  If the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that it is likely that a source of a contaminant of concern originated on the designated property, and that the ingestion or noningestion protective concentration level exceedance zone for that contaminant of concern extends to the public right-of-way adjacent to the designated property, the director may recommend that the municipal setting designation include a condition that the public right-of-way adjacent to the property be included, at no additional cost to the city, in the TCEQ application for the MSD. 
(d)  If the director determines that the application is incomplete or insufficient, the application will be returned to the applicant, noting the deficiencies in writing. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the deficiency letter to correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application. If the applicant fails to submit a corrected application within the allotted time, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(e)  If the director determines that the application is complete, a public meeting and a public hearing will be scheduled. The public meeting must be held prior to the public hearing. 
(1)  A public meeting will be scheduled approximately forty-five (45) days following the day the application was received; and 
(2)  A public hearing of the city council will be scheduled approximately thirty (30) days following the public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2008-150, § 3, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 26-275. - Notice of public meeting. 
(a)  Notice of the public meeting for an MSD application must include the date, time and location of the public meeting, the identity of the applicant, the location and legal description of the designated property, the purpose of the MSD, the type of contamination identified in the groundwater of the area for which the MSD is sought, and a statement that a copy of the application is available for public viewing at the city secretary's office notice will be made as follows: 
(1)  The director will publish notice of a public meeting for a proposed MSD in the official newspaper of the city, or in a newspaper of general circulation, not less than fifteen (15) days before the public meeting; 
(2)  The director will provide written notice of a public meeting for a proposed MSD, not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the public meeting by properly addressed and regular postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice will be mailed to: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  Those on the list provided by applicant pursuant to section 26-273(b)(6); 
(b)  The applicant is required to post at least one (1) sign upon the area for which a MSD has been requested. Posting shall be in the same manner as zoning amendments. The sign(s) must state that a MSD has been requested for the area and that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the number listed thereon or visiting the web site address listed thereon. The erection and/or the continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public meeting or public hearing or to any official action concerning the MSD application. 
(Ord. No. 2008-150, § 3, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 26-276. - Public meeting. 
(a)  The purpose of a public meeting is for the applicant to present information to the affected community about the MSD process in general, the application specific to the property for which the MSD is being sought, and to obtain input from the affected community prior to a formal action by the city council. 
(b)  The applicant or its representative must appear at the public meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the public meeting either in person or by representative, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(c)  The director will facilitate the meeting, giving the applicant or its representative the opportunity to present its reasons for requesting a MSD, and giving members of the affected community the opportunity to ask the applicant questions or make oral comments on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2008-150, § 3, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 26-277. - City council public hearing. 
(a)  Prior to the public hearing, the director will provide the city council a copy of the application, and a written report summarizing the request for the MSD approval, any staff comments of concerns, and minutes of the public meeting. 
(b)  The applicant or its representative must appear at the public hearing and present the request for a MSD approval. If the applicant fails to appear at the public hearing, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(c)  Persons wishing to speak either in favor of or against the application will be provided the opportunity in accordance with city council guidelines for public hearings. 
(d)  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may approve, conditionally approve, disapprove, or postpone action on the application to a future date. If approving an application, the city council shall: 
(1)  Approve a municipal setting designation ordinance supporting the application to be presented to the TCEQ, and prohibiting the use of designated groundwater from beneath the designated property; and 
(2)  Include in the ordinance other reasonable restrictions, including, but not limited to specification of underground construction materials to be used in the designated property. 
(e)  City council approval of an application shall not be deemed to waive the city's right to comment on a MSD application that has been filed with the executive director of the TCEQ. 
(Ord. No. 2008-150, § 3, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 26-278. - Limitation on reapplication. 
If after public hearing the city council disapproves an application, or if the applicant has withdrawn its application after public notice has been issued, no new MSD applications for the proposed designated property shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a public hearing by the city council within a period of twelve (12) months of the date of disapproval or withdrawal. 
(Ord. No. 2008-150, § 3, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 26-279. - Additional provisions, enforcement, and penalties. 
(a)  A person who has received approval of a MSD from the city, shall, upon issuance from the TCEQ, provide the director with a copy of the certificate of completion or other documentation issued for the MSD area, showing that response actions, if required, have been completed. 
(b)  The applicant shall execute, deliver and file, no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the TCEQ's certification, in the official real property records of Denton County, Texas, a deed restriction approved as to form by the city attorney prohibiting the drilling of wells and the use of designated groundwater for any purpose, including but not limited to any potable purpose, and excepting only: (i) wells used as monitoring wells for the collection of groundwater samples for chemical or biological laboratory analyses; and (ii) wells used for the purposes of remediation of soil or groundwater contamination. 
(c)  A file-stamped and recorded copy of said deed restriction shall be delivered to the city attorney's office and the director's office within three (3) business days after the date of filing. The deed restriction shall be enforceable by the City of Denton and may be amended or terminated only with the prior written consent of the City of Denton after at least thirty (30) days prior written notice to the TCEQ of any pending amendment or termination. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if they fail to provide the city attorney and the director with the documentation required in this section within the specified time frames. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a designated property for a purpose prohibited in the municipal setting designation ordinance. 
(f)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that one or more provisions in this article are violated shall be considered a separate offense. 
(g)  The city attorney is authorized to commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the penalty mentioned in the above subsection (f). Such additional relief may include a civil fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for violations of sections 26-278, and all other damages, costs, remedies and legal processes to which the city may be entitled. 
(h)  This article shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the City of Denton, and this article shall not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances except insofar as the provisions thereof might be inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this article, in which event such conflicting provisions, if any, in such other ordinance or ordinances are hereby repealed. 
(i)  All of the regulations provided in this article are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council or any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for the City of Denton in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable; and he/she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her said duties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-150, § 3, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2010-003, § 5, 1-12-10)  
Secs. 26-280—26-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 1. - LINE EXTENSIONS FOR EXISTING USES 
 
Sec. 26-301. - Applicability. 
(a)  This division applies to: (i) a request by the owner of an existing single-family dwelling or other existing use for a new service connection to a water or wastewater line having sufficient capacity to serve the dwelling or use; or (ii) an owner of an existing use served by a failing on-site sewage disposal system, which cannot be replaced under applicable state rules with a properly functioning system, and the public health, safety and welfare requires connection to a wastewater line. 
(b)  All requests for a new service connection to a water or wastewater line for purposes of serving a new development shall be processed and decided in accordance with the Denton Development Code, Chapter 35, subchapter 21. Except as expressly provided in this division, standards and procedures contained in the Denton Development Code shall also apply to service extension requests to which this division applies. To the extent of a conflict between the provisions of this division and provisions of the Denton Development Code, the provisions of this division shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2009-145, § 2, 6-16-09)  
Sec. 26-302. - Service extension requirements. 
The owner of an existing single-family dwelling or other existing use who requests a new service connection to a city water or wastewater line shall bear the costs of extending such water or wastewater line, together with the costs of any required associated facilities, that are necessary to connect the use with Denton Water Utilities' approved water distribution system and wastewater collection system. All initial costs of installing such facilities, including the costs of oversizing, shall be borne by the owner, subject to oversize participation by or pro rata agreements with the city in accordance with the Denton Development Code, Chapter 35, subchapter 21. Nothing in this division is intended to prevent or discourage the costs of line extension to be shared among a group of owners of existing single-family dwellings or other existing uses. 
(Ord. No. 2009-145, § 2, 6-16-09)  
DIVISION 2. - PRO RATA FEES FOR DENTON WATER UTILITIES PROJECT 
 
Sec. 26-303. - Establish of municipal pro rata fees. 
(a)  Denton Water Utilities may initiate capital projects from time to time for facilities involving construction of water or wastewater lines or associated facilities not identified in the applicable impact fee capital improvements plan, and may seek to recoup its costs through establishment of pro rata fees. 
(b)  The city council shall establish pro rata fees based upon the recommendations of the general manager, with or without modification. 
(Ord. No. 2009-145, § 2, 6-16-09)  
ARTICLE XII. - LIQUID WASTE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-304. - Purpose and policy. 
(1)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for liquid waste generators and liquid waste transporters operating in the City of Denton, Texas and enables the city to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws and regulations, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) 
(2)  The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer overflows resulting from blockages and obstructions due to the accumulation of fats, oils, and greases from commercial and industrial facilities; 
(b)  To promote the proper maintenance of grease interceptors and grit traps; and 
(c)  To ensure the proper handling, disposal, transport and tracking of trap waste and other liquid waste. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
Sec. 26-305. - Applicability and prohibitions. 
(1)  This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in section 26-153 of this chapter. 
(2)  Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(3)  Facilities generating fats, oils, or grease as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps as required in section 26-307 of this chapter. These facilities include but are not limited to restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels, motels, schools, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a user to intentionally or unintentionally allow the discharge of any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or grease of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW in concentrations greater than those promulgated in article V, chapter 26, of the City of Denton Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to discharge trucked or hauled pollutants, except as deemed suitable and at discharge points designated by the city manager. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for a person to create a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
Sec. 26-306. - Definitions. 
The definitions promulgated in section 26-153 of this chapter are hereto applicable. 
Approved means accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the City of Denton. 
Assistant city manager - utilities means the chief executive officer of the utility department of the City of Denton or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Car wash means establishments primarily engaged in cleaning, washing, and/or waxing automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, vans, and trailers and are categorized by North American Industry Classification System number 811192 and by Standard Industrial Classification number 7542. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR § 136.3. 
City manager means the Chief Executive Officer of the City of Denton, or his/her authorized assistant city manager, deputy, agent or representative. 
Director means the Director of Water Utilities of the City of Denton, which may include a person appointed by the director of water utilities or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Disposal. The discharge, deposit, release, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any liquid waste into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment, be emitted into the air or discharged to any sewers or waters, including ground waters. 
Disposal site. A permitted site or part of a site at which liquid waste is processed, treated, and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which the waste will remain after site closure. 
Disposer. A person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid waste. 
Fat, oil, and grease (FOG) means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
Food service facility means every food preparation and food service establishment including, but not limited to bakeries, bars, butcher shops, cafes, clubhouses, delicatessens, ice cream parlors, hospitals, hotels, restaurants, schools, or similar places where meat, poultry, seafood, dairy products, or fried foods are prepared, served, or offered for sale, but shall not apply to any single-family residence or dwelling not used for the commercial preparation and sale of food items. 
Generator means any person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste, or a person who for any reason has a liquid waste removed from his property by a transporter of liquid waste. 
Grease interceptor (or "grease trap") means a device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. 
Grease interceptor waste means any organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes collected by and removed from a grease trap. 
Grit trap/oil separator (or "grit trap") means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
Grit trap waste means oil and grease waste, inorganic solids generated by a commercial facility that are collected by and removed from a grit trap. 
Liquid waste means water-borne solids and liquids containing dissolved or suspended waste material including but not limited to septage and wastes from grease traps and grit traps. 
Hazardous waste means any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes), which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(a)  Have any of the following characteristics; toxic, corrosive, and irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness; 
(b)  Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal "Solid Waste Disposal Act", as amended by the: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976" (RCRA), and as it may be amended in the future. 
Manifest means the written multi-part documentation required to be in the possession of the transporter enabling disposal of hauled grit trap waste, grease trap waste, and septage at a permitted or registered disposal site. 
Manifest system means a system consisting of a five-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
Public nuisance means the discharge or exposure of grease, sewage or other organic waste in such a way as to be a potential instrument or medium in disease transmission to a person or between persons. 
Septage means liquid waste and sludge containing sufficient liquid content, which is removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet, septic tank, or cesspool. Septage does not include non-domestic wastes from commercial or industrial facilities. 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies. 
Transporter. Any person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 312, Subchapter G, Section 312.42. 
Trip ticket means the shipping document originated and signed by the transporter that contains the information required by the approving authority. 
Washwater means the water-borne solids, liquids, gaseous substances or other residue and debris resulting from a washing or cleaning process. Washwater shall not be discharged to the storm sewer, and may require pretreatment before being discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
Washwater operation means any cleaning process generally conducted outdoors, such as washing vehicles, equipment, structures, or paved surfaces for maintenance, safety, aesthetic or stormwater pollution prevention purposes, and which generates washwater. Examples would include cleaning of petroleum products from parking lots or service station drives, mobile washing operations or equipment/vehicle washing, which does not drain to a grit trap. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
DIVISION 2. - LIQUID WASTE GENERATORS 
 
Sec. 26-307. - Installations. 
(1)  New facilities. 
(a)  Food processing facilities or food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease traps shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Facilities which perform washing, cleaning, or servicing of automobiles, trucks, buses, or similar equipment which are newly proposed or constructed with floor drains in areas of operation, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grit trap/oil separator in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances and guidelines as required by the city manager. Grit traps/oil separators shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Existing facilities. 
(a)  Existing grease traps or grit traps/oil separators must be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with these standards referenced herein, unless specified in writing and approved by the POTW. Other commercial users may be required by the city manager to install an approved grease trap, grit trap/oil separator when the concentration of oil, grease waste or suspended solids is greater than concentrations promulgated in article V, chapter 26 of the City of Denton Code of Ordinances or when discharges may cause blockages in the wastewater collection system. 
(b)  Existing food processing or food service facilities that change in ownership, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist or where there is an inadequately sized grease interceptor, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes, or other applicable ordinances. Grease interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and a health permit. 
(c)  Existing facilities which perform washing, cleaning, or servicing of automobiles, trucks, buses, or similar equipment with floor drains in the areas of operation that change in ownership, or are expanded or renovated to include floor drains in areas of operation shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grit trap/oil separator in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes, or other applicable ordinances. Grit traps/oil separators shall be installed and inspected prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  A generator shall install a sample port to allow access to sample the wastestream as close as possible to the connection with the city sanitary sewer main within the bounds of the facility property. The port shall be installed according to the specifications of the city manager. The port shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense. The port shall be installed perpendicular to the effluent flow to allow visual observation and sampling. 
(4)  Grease interceptors and grit traps/oil separators shall be installed pursuant to a single certificate of occupancy. No person or persons shall allow the use of a single interceptor or trap by more than one business as defined by a certificate of occupancy without prior written approval. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
Sec. 26-308. - Responsibilities. 
(1)  A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked up from his premises by a liquid waste transporter who holds a valid permit from the city, and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved site for disposal. 
(2)  Cleaning schedule. 
(a)  Grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease interceptor; that the discharge is in compliance with local wastewater discharge limits; and, to ensure that no visible grease is observed in the discharge. 
(b)  Grease interceptors shall be completely evacuated at a minimum of every ninety (90) days, or more frequently when: 
i.  Twenty-five (25) percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases; 
ii.  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established by the city manager; or, 
iii.  If there is a history of noncompliance. 
(3)  Grit traps/oil separators shall be completely evacuated based on one (1) of the two (2) following schedules: 
(a)  At a minimum of every one hundred eighty (180) days, or 
(b)  At a frequency determined by the owner/operator if all of the following best management practices are employed: 
i.  At a minimum of once per week, all facilities with a grit trap must routinely check and perform preventive maintenance as required on all connections, valves, hoses, chemical storage containers, drains, and other equipment necessary to prevent an accidental release or slug discharge of chemicals. 
ii.  At a minimum of once per month, all facilities with a grit trap must routinely check the level of sediment in each grit trap in order to determine a maintenance schedule that will facilitate consistent compliance with all discharge limits and requirements. 
iii.  All self-service and coin-operated car wash facilities must post and maintain signs, in an area that is clearly visible to the public, directing customers not to dispose of oils or chemical wastes at the facility. 
iv.  All facilities must document the best management practices, including routine checks, preventive maintenance and repair logs, and maintain grit trap maintenance records for a minimum of three years. 
v.  If at any time, the above practices are not being employed or the required documentation is not available for review, the owner/operator will be required to perform maintenance on the grit trap(s) immediately and once every one hundred eighty (180) days thereafter. 
(4)  Any person who owns or operates a grease interceptor may submit to the city manager a request in writing for an exception to the required pumping frequency of the grease interceptor. The city manager may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
(a)  The grease interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific interceptor will produce an effluent with no visible grease, and based on defensible analytical results, can demonstrate consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the POTW; and 
(b)  Less than twenty-five (25) percent of the wetted height of the grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases. 
(5)  The city manager may also require traps to be serviced on a single-event basis or scheduled basis if deemed necessary for the proper operation of the grease interceptor or grit trap/oil separator. 
(6)  In the event that the establishment ceases operation, the establishment is required to pump the interceptor or trap before abandoning the property. If the owner of the business fails to empty the interceptor or trap, it shall become the responsibility of the property owner. 
(7)  A generator of liquid waste shall not have hazardous waste or liquid waste in combination with hazardous waste removed from his premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit. 
(8)  A generator shall verify the accuracy of the trip ticket from the transporter and then legibly complete and sign the trip ticket, to certify the statements on the trip ticket, when a load is picked up by the transporter. The generator shall keep a copy of all trip tickets for a period of three years at the site of generation, unless otherwise approved. The city manager may inspect and copy these records at any time. 
(9)  A generator shall: 
(a)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the city; 
(b)  Locate the interceptor or trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(c)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(d)  Not install or utilize any system, process or pretreatment involving the use of enzymes, bacteria, or other additives, nor alter the design or function of the grease interceptor or grit trap/oil separator unless approved in writing by the city manager. 
(e)  Supervise proper cleaning and complete removal of the contents of the trap. 
(10)  A generator shall maintain the grease interceptor or grit trap/oil separator and its surrounding areas in sanitary conditions, free of litter and odors. 
(11)  A generator shall immediately report spills and accidents involving liquid waste to the city manager. 
(12)  A generator shall clean up all spills and abate all unsanitary conditions immediately, and have material used for abatement, such as absorbent materials, disposed of by approved means and in a timely manner. 
(13)  A generator of washwater or other liquid waste shall: 
(a)  Contain, collect and dispose of liquid waste by approved means; 
(b)  Protect the storm sewer system and the environment from discharges of liquid waste or other contaminants; 
(c)  Use approved methods for on-site or mobile treatment of liquid waste; and 
(d)  Accurately measure, by approved means, the volume of liquid waste collected and disposed of by the transporter. 
(14)  Rates for sampling and/or analysis. Should any sampling and/or analysis be required by city staff pursuant to any provision in this article provided for generators, then the published rate for "sampling/analysis charges" that is contained in the annual City of Denton Wastewater Rate Ordinance, Schedule SEE ("Equipment Services Facilities and Restaurants & Food Services Establishments Wastewater Service") is applicable and will be charged and shall be paid by the generator. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
DIVISION 3. - LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORTERS 
 
Sec. 26-309. - Permit required. 
(1)  Permit required. All persons owning or operating a vacuum truck, cesspool pump truck, liquid waste transport truck or other vehicle shall not service any septic tank, seepage pit, grease interceptor, grit trap/oil separator, or cesspool without first having received a valid transport truck discharge (TTD) permit or as required in section 24-69 of this Code, whichever is applicable. 
(2)  Permit fee. TTD permits shall be issued by the city manager upon proper application and payment of a fee established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. All TTD permits shall be valid for one year. 
(3)  Unloading or discharge of waste or wastewater. It shall be unlawful for any person to unload or discharge waste or wastewater except in a manner and at a place as specified by the city manager. Before discharging under a TTD permit, the city manager may require the person holding such permit to furnish a sample of the contents of the material to be discharged as a prerequisite to discharging into the wastewater system. The city manager may refuse permission to discharge abnormal strength wastewater into the wastewater system. 
(4)  Rates for discharge. Any person discharging waste under a TTD permit under the provisions of this section or under section 24-69 of this Code, will be charged and shall pay disposal fees based on the applicable published rate for disposal contained in the current City of Denton Wastewater Rate Ordinance in Schedule SCH (Schedule for Septage & Chemical Toilet Disposal at the Pecan Creek Water Reclamation Plant Septage Transfer Facility), or under the current City of Denton Solid Waste Rate Ordinance in Schedule SWP (Collection and Transportation Services Permit). 
(5)  Rates for sampling and/or analysis. Should any sampling and/or analysis be required by city staff for any service provided for in a TTD permit, then the published rate for "Sampling/Analysis Charges" that is contained in the annual City of Denton Wastewater Rate Ordinance, Schedule SEE (Equipment Services Facilities and Restaurants & Food Services Establishments Wastewater Service") is applicable and will be charged and shall be paid by the holder of the TTD permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
Sec. 26-310. - Manifest requirements. 
(1)  Persons who generate, collect, and transport grease interceptor and grit trap/oil separator waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include: 
(a)  Name, address, telephone, and TCEQ registration number of transporter; 
(b)  Name, signature, address, and telephone of the person who generated the waste and the date collected; 
(c)  Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported; 
(d)  Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste; 
(e)  Date and place where the waste was deposited; 
(f)  Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited; 
(g)  Name and signature of the facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste; 
(h)  The volume of the waste received; 
(i)  A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease transported. 
(2)  Transporters shall obtain manifests from the City of Denton. 
(3)  Manifests shall be divided into five (5) parts and records shall be maintained as follows. 
(a)  One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and is given to the generator at the time of waste pickup. 
(b)  The remaining four (4) parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest. One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility. One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste. One part of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within fifteen (15) days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. One part of the manifest shall go to the City of Denton Pollution Control Abatement Officer. 
(4)  Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for three (3) years and be readily available for review. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
Sec. 26-311. - Responsibilities. 
(1)  Each grease interceptor or grit trap/oil separator that is pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a twenty-four-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 312, Section 312.143. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
DIVISION 4. - ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 26-312. - Enforcement actions. 
(1)  Notice of violation. When the city manager finds that a generator or transporter has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may serve upon that generator or transporter a written notice of violation. Within the timeframe specified in this notice, which is usually but not always ten (10) days, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the generator or transporter of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(2)  Administrative orders. 
(a)  Compliance orders. When the city manager finds that a generator or transporter has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may issue an order to the generator or transporter responsible for the discharge directing that the generator or transporter come into compliance within a specified time. If the generator or transporter does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the generator or transporter of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the generator or transporter. 
(b)  Cease and desist orders. When the city manager finds that a generator or transporter has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the generator's or transporter's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue an order to the generator or transporter directing it to cease and desist all such violations and: 
i.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
ii.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(3)  Service of notice or order. Any notice or order issued under this article shall be in writing and served in person or by registered or certified mail on the generator or transporter of the liquid waste or other persons determined to be responsible for such violation. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the generator or transporter. 
(4)  Appeals. Any person may appeal an order of the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager on forms provided by the City of Denton Utilities Administration Office. Such notice of appeal shall be filed with the city secretary within ten (10) days of service of the order. 
(5)  Termination of service and revocation of permit. If no timely appeal is filed, the city manager may, if a violation is continuing or reoccurring or may reoccur, terminate wastewater service or revoke the permit of the person ordered to correct or abate such violation if such violation has not been corrected or abated within the time specified in such order. 
(6)  Emergency suspension of service. 
(a)  Suspension. The city manager may, without prior notice, suspend water service, sanitary sewer service and/or storm sewer access to a user or to a person discharging to the sanitary sewer or storm sewer when such suspension is necessary in the opinion of the city manager to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
i.  Presents or may present imminent substantial danger to the environment or to provided by the health or welfare of persons; 
ii.  Presents or may present imminent substantial danger to the POTW, storm sewer or waters of the state; or 
iii.  Will cause pass through or interference of the POTW. 
(b)  Notice of suspension. As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the city manager shall notify the user or the person discharging to the wastewater or storm sewer of the suspension, and order such person to cease the discharge immediately. 
(c)  Reinstating service. The city manager shall reinstate suspended services to the wastewater user or to the person discharging to the storm sewer: 
i.  Upon proof by such person that the non-complying discharge has been eliminated; 
ii.  Upon payment by such person of its outstanding water, sewer and stormwater utility charges; 
iii.  Upon payment by such person of all costs incurred by the city in responding to the discharge or threatened discharge; and 
iv.  Upon payment by such person of all costs incurred by the city in reconnecting service. 
(d)  Written statement. Within five (5) days of the day of suspension of services, the wastewater user or the person discharging to the storm sewer shall submit to the city manager a detailed written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 
(7)  Right to hearing. A person whose service has been suspended under this section may apply to the department which suspended service for a hearing on the issue of the suspension. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with subsection (9) of this section. 
(8)  Other steps. If a person fails to comply with a notice or order issued under this section, the city manager shall take such steps as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer, POTW or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons. Such steps may include immediate severance of a person's sanitary sewer connection. 
(9)  Hearing and determination. 
(a)  An environmental appeals committee is hereby established and authorized to hear and decide appeals from any order issued by the city manager pursuant to this article. The committee shall be composed of three (3) members appointed by the city manager. No individual appointed to the committee shall be employed in the chain of command of the assistant city manager - utilities. 
(b)  The committee may call and hold hearings, administer oaths, receive evidence at the hearing, and make findings of fact and decisions with respect to administering its powers in this chapter. 
(c)  Upon the hearing, the committee shall determine if there is substantial evidence to support the city manager's determination and order. The decision of the committee shall be in writing and contain findings of fact. If the committee, determines that there is substantial evidence to support the determination and order of the city manager, the committee shall, in addition to its decision, issue an order: 
i.  Requiring discontinuance of such violation or condition; 
ii.  Requiring compliance with any requirement to correct or prevent any condition or violation; or 
iii.  Suspending or revoking any permit issued under this article. 
iv.  In any decision and order issued by the committee, the order shall specify the time in which the compliance with the order must be taken. A copy of the decision and order shall be delivered to the appellant or person to whom the order is directed in person or sent to him by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  Should the appellant fail to comply with the order of the committee within the time specified therein, if any, the city manager, in addition to any other remedy provided for in this article, may terminate sewer service to the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
Sec. 26-313. - Penalties. 
(1)  A person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction by the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the "general provisions" chapter of this Code. 
(2)  The city attorney is authorized to commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such relief may include, without limitation: 
(a)  An injunction to prevent a violation of this chapter; 
(b)  Recovery for damages to the POTW or storm sewer resulting from a violation of this chapter; 
(c)  Recovery for expenses incurred by the city in responding to a violation of this chapter; 
(d)  A daily civil fine of up to the maximum provided by Texas Local Government Code 54.017(b) for a violation of sections 26-304 through 26-311; and all other damages, costs and remedies to which the city may be entitled. 
(Ord. No. 2012-176, § 3, 8-21-12)  
Chapter 27 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic generally, Ch. 18; police-initiated towing services, § 23-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate vehicles for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.029. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 27-1—27-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PASSENGER BUSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 27-26. - Definition. 
When used in this article, "bus" means and includes any vehicle operating within the corporate limits of the city and carrying passengers for hire along certain designated routes within such city. 
(Code 1966, § 26-23) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-27. - Specifications for buses. 
All buses licensed or permitted to operate under this article shall be of modern and up-to-date type, shall be fully enclosed and built upon a chassis no heavier than that of a three-ton truck and shall be so constructed that each will comfortably seat not less than fourteen (14) passengers at a time. 
(Code 1966, § 26-27)  
Sec. 27-28. - Routes of buses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any bus to operate for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire within the corporate limits of the city, except along the routes approved by the city council upon the granting of a permit to operate such buses. 
(b)  Such route must be fully described upon the face of the permit issued in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1966, § 26-28)  
Sec. 27-29. - Bus stops designated. 
Except in case of emergency or obedience to traffic-control devices, buses shall stop or park only in zones designated and marked for the parking and stopping of buses by the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1966, § 26-29) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking generally, § 18-91 et seq.  
Sec. 27-30. - Fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any bus to charge a fare of more than that established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, per passenger transported from point to point within the city, provided that the person owning or operating such bus may sell tokens representing fares of such bus, provided that the sale of such token shall not make the fare for riding such bus more than that established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, per passenger transported per ride. 
(Code 1966, § 26-30)  
Sec. 27-31. - Term of franchise. 
A franchise to operate buses on the streets of the city for a period of not more than ten (10) years may be granted by the city council; provided, however, that such franchise shall be subject to the terms and provisions of this article and shall be terminated by any violation of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 26-32) 
Charter reference— Franchises, § 13.01 et seq.  
Secs. 27-32—27-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 27-41. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated within the corporate limits of the city any bus without having applied for and obtained a permit to do so, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1966, § 26-24)  
Sec. 27-42. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit to operate any bus within the city shall be addressed to the city council and filed with the city secretary. 
(b)  The application shall contain and include the name of the applicant, together with his present address and telephone number or, if the applicant is a firm, corporation or association, the name of such firm, corporation or association, together with the names and addresses of its principal officers and the address of the main office of such firm, association or corporation. 
(c)  The application shall also contain the address of the proposed place, building or lot from which such buses shall be operated, together with a brief description of the buses proposed to be operated and a map or plat and description of the proposed route of such buses. 
(d)  The city council shall determine whether or not the permit shall be granted to such application within fifteen (15) days after the application is filed with the city secretary. 
(e)  If the city council decides that the public welfare can best be served by granting the permit, it shall instruct the city secretary to issue the permit upon the completion of all other requirements necessary to the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1966, § 26-25)  
Sec. 27-43. - Bond. 
(a)  Before any permit to operate a bus within the city is issued, the applicant must make and execute a good and sufficient surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the mayor or his successors in office, in which such applicant, as principal, and some surety company licensed to do business in the state or two (2) financially responsible property owners who reside and own property in the state, as sureties, promise to pay to the mayor or to his successors in office such amount for the use and benefit of anyone entitled thereto, conditioned that such principal will in all things obey the traffic rules and regulations of the city and the traffic laws of the state and that such principal will use ordinary care in transporting and delivering all passengers to their destinations. 
(b)  Such bond may be sued upon by the city or by any person having a cause of action against the principal in the bond arising out of an injury or damages received by reason of the operation of such bus or buses. 
(c)  If the bond is sued upon and becomes exhausted or materially decreased, such permittee shall at once enter into a new bond under like conditions and in sufficient amount to cover fully the decrease or exhaustion or forfeit his right to operate such buses. 
(Code 1966, § 26-26)  
Sec. 27-44. - Revocation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person owning or operating any bus within the corporate limits of the city to render good, courteous and satisfactory service, and at any time and for any reasonable cause the city council may hold a public hearing to determine if such is being done. 
(b)  If the council finds that such is not the case or that such buses have been so operated as to violate any provision of this article, the council may revoke any and all permits issued under this article. 
(c)  The city council shall be the sole and final judge as to whether or not such permit shall be revoked. 
(Code 1966, § 26-31)  
Secs. 27-45—27-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-094, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 2001, deleted former art. III, §§ 27-66—27-80, in its entirety and enacted new provisions set out as art. VI, §§ 27-151—27-224. Prior to amendment, §§ 27-66—27-80, pertained to Taxicabs and derived from 1966 Code §§26-43—26-52.1, 26-53—26-56; Ord. No. 89-102, §§ I—III, adopted Aug. 15, 1989; Ord. No. 90-166, § I, adopted Oct. 23, 1990; Ord. No. 90-180, § I, adopted Nov. 20, 1990; and Ord. No. 95-145, § I, adopted Aug. 18, 1995. 
 
Secs. 27-66—27-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMBULANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems generally, Ch. 4. 
 
Sec. 27-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attendant/driver means a person who is qualified to care for a patient transported by a transfer ambulance and who is also qualified to drive a transfer ambulance. 
Charity care assistance means the reduction of ambulance service charges assessed to a transported patient or the payment-responsible party on behalf of a transported patient approved by the city manager or his or her designee. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
Director of public health means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director's authorized representative. 
Emergency means any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Such circumstances include but are not limited to accidents generally, traffic accidents, acts of violence resulting in personal injury and sudden illness. 
Emergency ambulance means any motor vehicle especially designed, constructed, equipped and used for transporting the injured or sick in answer to an emergency call. 
Emergency call means any request for ambulance service that is made by telephone or other means of communication in circumstances which are or have been represented to be an emergency and requiring immediate ambulance service. 
Emergency run means the emergency ambulance trip to the place where the emergency exists or from the place of such emergency to a hospital, medical clinic or other appropriate destination for the patient. 
Fire department means the fire department of the city. 
Operator means any individual, firm or corporation engaged in the business of transporting the injured, wounded, sick or dead and using the streets of the city for such purpose. 
Street means any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive or highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the corporate limits of the city. 
Transfer ambulance means any motor vehicle constructed, equipped and used for transferring the injured or sick under circumstances which do not constitute an emergency and which have not been represented as an emergency. 
(Code 1966, § 26-65; Ord. No. 2019-2291 , § 3, 9-24-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-102. - Emergency service provided by fire department; fee. 
(a)  The fire department shall provide emergency ambulance service within the city. 
(b)  The city shall charge fees for emergency ambulance services in the city provided in response to a call received by the fire department requesting the services, and such fees shall be established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  The person receiving emergency ambulance service and any person contracting for the service shall be responsible for payment of the fee, less any reduction in fees received from charity care assistance. In the case of service received by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be responsible for payment of the fee, less any reduction in fees received from charity care assistance on behalf of the qualifying minor. 
(d)  The city manager or his or her designee shall adopt and administer an ambulance charity care assistance policy. 
(Code 1966, § 26-66; Ord. No. 90-145, § I, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 2019-2291 , § 3, 9-24-19) 
Cross reference— Fire department generally, § 11-26 et seq.  
Sec. 27-103. - Private emergency service regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, other than a member of the fire department, an agency of the United States or the state, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the operation of emergency ambulance service upon the streets, alleys or any public way or place within the city for the purpose of picking up patients within the city, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  It shall not be unlawful for a person operating a transfer ambulance in the city, upon responding to a direct call for nonemergency transfer ambulance service, to operate such ambulance under emergency conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the fire alarm dispatcher and requesting permission to make an emergency run, when a determination is made by the transfer ambulance attendant that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all practical speed to a hospital. 
(2)  It shall not be unlawful for any person operating a transfer ambulance in the city who is performing the service of maintaining an ambulance at a particular location for a sporting event to operate such ambulance under emergency conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the fire alarm dispatcher and requesting permission to make an emergency run when a determination is made by the transfer ambulance attendant that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all practical speed to a hospital. 
(3)  It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate an emergency ambulance to a hospital within the city, if the place of emergency at which the sick or injured person was picked up by such ambulance is outside the city limits and the ambulance making the emergency run is licensed and operated in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.041 et seq., provided that the operator first notifies the fire alarm dispatcher of the route over which the emergency run will be made. 
(4)  It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate a transfer ambulance in the city on an emergency run when fire department ambulances are not available and the fire alarm dispatcher requests the operator to furnish backup emergency ambulance service for the fire department. 
(b)  Any person operating a transfer ambulance in the city who makes an emergency run under the provisions of subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section shall, within ten (10) days of each such emergency run, submit to the director of public health a report on a form provided by him which shall describe the circumstances requiring the emergency run. 
(Code 1966, § 26-67)  
Sec. 27-104. - Transfer ambulance regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated for patient pickup in the city any transfer ambulance without first having complied with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each vehicle shall be supplied with a first-aid kit and emergency equipment required by the state department of public health and approved by the local trauma committee of the American College of Surgeons. 
(2)  Each vehicle must be accompanied by two (2) attendants/drivers who are currently certified by the state as emergency care attendants or emergency medical technicians. 
(3)  Safety mechanisms of the vehicle must be operative and in good repair, including but not limited to headlights, taillights, turn signals, brakes, brakelights, emergency lights, windshield wipers, wiper blades, handles opening doors and windows, tires and spare tire. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of a transfer ambulance on any emergency run or in response to any emergency call nor with the use of emergency lights and siren, unless requested to do so by the fire alarm dispatcher in case of a major catastrophe. 
(Code 1966, § 26-68)  
Sec. 27-105. - Attendant and driver regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a transfer ambulance or act as an attendant of a transfer ambulance without first having complied with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each driver or attendant shall currently hold a valid state chauffeur's license. 
(2)  Each attendant shall currently be registered by the state as an emergency care attendant or emergency medical technician. 
(3)  No driver or attendant shall have a record of final conviction of a felony or a crime involving use or possession of narcotics or operating a vehicle under the influence of drugs or intoxicating liquor or driving while his license has been suspended within the five-year period immediately preceding his or her employment. 
(Code 1966, § 26-69)  
Sec. 27-106. - False statement of emergency. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully inform the fire alarm dispatcher, police dispatcher or other fire or police official that an ambulance or more than one (1) ambulance is needed at a location or address when such person knows that such statement is false. 
(Code 1966, § 26-70)  
Secs. 27-107—27-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES MEMBERSHIP PROGRAM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-129, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 1992, enacted provisions designated as Art. V, §§ 27-107—27-112, pertaining to emergency medical services membership program. These provisions have been redesignated at the discretion of the editor and codified herein as Art. V, §§ 27-130—27-135. 
 
Sec. 27-130. - Emergency medical services membership program. 
(a)  Purpose and authority. This article establishes a medical emergency subscription program, as authorized by Chapter 773 of the Health and Safety Code, to be known as the "Denton Fire Department Emergency Medical Services Membership Program", hereafter known as "Denton Emergency Medical Services (DEMS)". The purpose of DEMS is to offer a program to members of residential households that would cap their emergency medical service and ambulance transportation costs while reducing the loss of life and disability. 
(b)  Administration. The fire chief shall be responsible for the development of written rules, policies and procedures relating to the implementation and the administration of DEMS not inconsistent with this section. The fire chief shall report on a yearly basis to the city manager and the city council on the status of DEMS. Each report shall include a full financial statement of the financial status of DEMS. 
(Ord. No. 92-129, § I, 8-4-92)  
Sec. 27-131. - Eligibility and enrollment. 
DEMS shall be open to any person or any household of any city or area served with emergency ambulance services by the City of Denton. Members receiving utilities from the City of Denton may be charged the annual fee through the utility billing. 
(Ord. No. 92-129, § I, 8-4-92)  
Sec. 27-132. - Member benefits. 
Members who join DEMS shall receive the following benefits offered by the Denton fire department: 
(1)  For insured members, the payment of the uninsured costs, i.e. the deductible or co-pay portion or any exclusions under medicare or medicaid of prehospital emergency medical services, including: 
a.  Basic life support (BLS) services; 
b.  Advance life support (ALS) services; and 
c.  Ambulance transportation services. 
(2)  For uninsured members, the payment of one-half of the regular charge of prehospital emergency medical services, including: 
a.  Basic life support (BLS) services; 
b.  Advance life support (ALS) services; and 
c.  Ambulance transportation services. 
(3)  For members, upon request, maintain a medical information file which may contain: 
a.  Medical information to responding paramedic unit; 
b.  Minor child treatment release; and 
c.  Member's physician designation. 
(4)  For members, upon request, maintain emergency contact file (optional): 
a.  Notification of parents at work; 
b.  Notification of other family members; and 
c.  Senior citizen family contact. 
Additional member benefits may be added at the discretion of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 92-129, § I, 8-4-92)  
Sec. 27-133. - DEMS membership fees. 
The DEMS membership fee charged to each household shall be an annual fee in an amount established by the city council, and kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Payment of the fee shall entitle any individual or permanent resident of the household to receive DEMS benefits. Guests and visitors or others not a permanent resident shall be charged directly for ambulance services. 
(Ord. No. 92-129, § I, 8-4-92)  
Sec. 27-134. - Duty to respond. 
Under no circumstances will delivery and application of available emergency medical services or ambulance transportation services be delayed or refused based upon whether or not a person is a member of DEMS or can demonstrate an ability to pay for the services. 
(Ord. No. 92-129, § I, 8-4-92)  
Sec. 27-135. - Termination. 
DEMS may be cancelled by a majority vote of the City of Denton city council. If the council chooses to terminate the program prior to the new program year, the city may, at its option, refund membership fees on a prorated basis. The city shall be obligated to provide thirty (30) days written notice to members prior to program termination. 
(Ord. No. 92-129, § I, 8-4-92)  
Secs. 27-136—27-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TAXICABS, LIMOUSINES, AND SHUTTLES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— See editor's note following art. III. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PART A—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 27-151. - Statement of policy. 
It is the policy of the city to provide for and to promote adequate and efficient taxicab, limousine, and shuttle service in the city. To this end, this article provides for the regulation of taxicab, limousine, and shuttle rates and services, to be carried out in a manner that protects the public health and safety, promotes the public convenience and necessity, and respects the concept of free enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-152. - General authority and duty of director. 
The director shall implement and enforce this article as he determines necessary to discharge his duty under, or to effect the policy of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-153. - Exclusions. 
This article does not apply to: 
(1)  The transportation of a person by taxicab, limousine, or shuttle licensed by another governmental entity from a point outside the city to a destination inside the city, if the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle leaves the city without receiving a passenger inside the city; 
(2)  A taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service operated under state or federal authority unless the service is subject to the city's regulatory authority; or 
(3)  A motor vehicle used to transport persons for hire that is regulated by other city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-154. - Definitions. 
The definition of a term in this section applies to each grammatical variation of the term. In this article, unless the context requires a different definition: 
Alternative fuel means natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, electricity, methanol or methanol/gasoline blends of eighty-five (85) percent or greater, or ethanol or ethanol/gasoline blends of eighty-five (85) percent or greater. 
Annual permit means permission granted by the city to a person to operate a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service inside the city for a period of one year, renewable under the provisions of this article. 
Conviction means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. 
Department means the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article and includes representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director. 
Dispatching facility means a fixed facility: 
(1)  At which requests for taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service are received; 
(2)  From which drivers are notified, by radio or any other electronic communication system, of requests for taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service; and 
(3)  To which drivers communicate, by radio or any other electronic communication system, their availability to provide the requested taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service. 
Except when being operated from the permanent and established place of business required under section 27-159, of this article, the term does not include any facility from which the primary administrative operations of the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service are conducted or at which taxicabs are parked, stored, repaired, or maintained. 
Driver means an individual who drives or operates a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle. 
Holder means a person who is granted an annual permit under this article. If the context in which the term is used applies to operations under a temporary permit or reciprocal agreement the term "holder" includes a person who is granted a temporary permit or reciprocal agreement. 
Legal resident means a citizen of the United States or a person residing in the United States in accordance with federal immigration laws. 
Limousine means a motor vehicle that is a luxury sedan with a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of not more than fifteen (15) passengers that is used for the transportation of persons from a location in the city to another location either inside or outside the city. 
Operate means to drive or to be in control of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle. 
Operating authority means an annual permit, temporary permit, or reciprocal agreement granted under this article. 
Operator means the driver of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle; the owner of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle; or the holder of a taxicab, limousine, and shuttle operating authority. 
Owner means the person to whom state license plates for a vehicle were issued. 
Person means an individual; corporation; government or governmental subdivision; or agency, trust, partnership, or two or more persons having a joint or common economic interest. 
Reciprocal agreement means an agreement between the city and one or more political subdivisions to provide reciprocal operation of taxicabs, limousines, or shuttles. 
Shuttle means a van-type motor vehicle that has a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of not less than seven passengers and not more than fifteen passengers and is used for the transportation of persons from a location in the city to another location either inside or outside the city. 
Taxicab means a chauffeured motor vehicle with a rated passenger capacity of eight or less, used to transport persons for hire that typically operates on irregular routes, irregular schedules, and a call and demand basis, but not including limousines or special service vehicles. 
Taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license means a license issued to an individual by the director authorizing that person to operate a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle in the city. 
Taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service means a passenger transportation service operated for hire that uses taxicabs, limousines, or shuttles in the operation of the service and includes (but is not limited to) a facility from which the service is operated; taxicabs, limousines, or shuttles used in the operation; and a person who owns, controls, or operates the service. 
Taxicab stand means a public place reserved exclusively for use by taxicabs. 
Taximeter means a device that mechanically or electronically computes a fare based upon the distance traveled, the time the taxicab is engaged, and any other basis for charges which are specified in the operating authority or rate ordinance pertaining to the holder. 
Temporary permit means permission granted by the city to a person to operate a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service inside the city for a specified period of time less than one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
DIVISION 2. - PART B—OPERATING AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 27-155. - Operating authority required. 
(a)  A person may not operate a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service inside the city without operating authority granted under this article, nor may a person transport a passenger for hire inside the city by taxicab, limousine, or shuttle unless the person driving the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle or another who employs or contracts with the driver has been granted operating authority under this article. 
(b)  A person shall not engage or hire a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle which he knows does not have operating authority from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-156. - Transferability of operating authority. 
(a)  An annual permit may not be transferred to another unless the holder files a written application for the transfer in the manner and containing the information prescribed by the director, and the transfer application is approved by the director. 
(b)  A temporary permit or reciprocal agreement is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-157. - Annual permit required; service requirements. 
(a)  Before an annual permit is granted, the application for the annual permit must be approved by the director. The granting of an annual permit is in the discretion of the director, but will not be granted unless: 
(1)  The proposed taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service is required by the public convenience and necessity; and 
(2)  The applicant qualifies for operating authority under section 27-158 of this article and is otherwise fit, willing, and able to operate the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service in accordance with the requirements of this article, rules and regulations of the director, provisions of the annual permit, and other applicable law. 
(b)  The holder of an annual taxicab permit must provide taxicab service as specified in the permit with a minimum of three (3) taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-158. - Qualification for operating authority. 
(a)  To qualify for operating authority, an applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least 19 years of age; 
(2)  be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States; 
(3)  be able to communicate in the English language; and 
(4)  Not have been convicted or placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Criminal homicide as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 19; 
2.  Kidnapping as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 20; 
3.  A sexual offense as described in V.T.C.A Penal Code, Chapter 21; 
4.  An assaultive offense as described in V.T.C.A Penal Code, Chapter 22, other than a Class C misdemeanor; 
5.  Robbery as described in the V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 29; 
6.  Burglary as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 30; 
7.  Theft as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 31, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony; 
8.  Fraud as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 32; 
9.  Tampering with a governmental record as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 37; 
10.  Public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 43; 
11.  The transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in violation of V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 46, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony; 
12.  A violation of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 483, Dangerous Drugs that is punishable as a felony; 
13.  A violation of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 481 of the Controlled Substances Act that is punishable as a felony; or 
14.  Criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in subsection (4)(a)1.—13., [of this section]. 
(b)  For which: 
1.  If the applicant was convicted for a misdemeanor offense, less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date; 
2.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a misdemeanor offense, less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
3.  If the applicant was convicted for a felony offense, less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction or the date of release from parole, whichever is the later date; 
4.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a felony offense, less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
5.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any twenty-four (24) month period, the applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses; or 
6.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication for the last offense, whichever is the later date, if, within any twenty-four (24) month period, the applicant has been placed on probation or deferred adjudication two (2) or more times for any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses. 
(b)  An applicant who has been sentenced for an offense listed in subsection (a)(4), [above,] for which the required time period listed above has elapsed, may qualify for operating authority only if the director determines that the applicant is presently fit to provide a public transportation service and only if the offense or offenses the applicant was sentenced for was not a felony offense listed in subsection (a)(4)1.—6., [above]. In determining present fitness under this section, the director shall consider the following: 
(1)  The extent and nature of the applicant's past criminal activity; 
(2)  The age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the crime; 
(3)  The amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant's last criminal activity; 
(4)  The conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and following the criminal activity; 
(5)  Evidence of the applicant's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and 
(6)  Other evidence of the applicant's present fitness, including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present fitness under subsection (b), of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-159. - Application for annual permit. 
(a)  To obtain an annual permit, a person shall make application to the director in the manner prescribed by this section. The applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service. An applicant shall file with the director a written, verified application statement, to be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), containing the following: 
(1)  The form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business and the name, address, and citizenship of each person with a direct interest in the business; 
(2)  The name, address, and verified signature of the applicant; 
(3)  An actual or pro forma statement and balance sheet showing the liabilities, and equity of the business; 
(4)  A description of any past business experience of the applicant, particularly in providing passenger transportation services, and an identification and description of any revocation or suspension of a permit held by the applicant or business before the date of filing the application. 
(5)  the number of vehicles and a description of the vehicles the applicant proposes to use in the operation of the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service, and a description of the operations of the proposed taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service and the location of the fixed facilities to be used in the operation; 
(6)  If the applicant is seeking a taxicab annual permit, a description of the proposed insignia and color scheme for the applicant's taxicabs and a description of the distinctive item of apparel or item placed on the apparel to be worn by the applicant's taxicab drivers; 
(7)  Documentary evidence from an insurance company, authorized to do business in the state, indicating a willingness to provide liability insurance required by this article; 
(8)  Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service; 
(9)  Proof of a local phone number or a toll-free number from which the proposed taxi cab, limousine, or shuttle service may be contacted; 
(10)  Such additional information as the applicant desires to include to aid in the determination of whether the requested operating authority should be granted; and 
(11)  Such additional information as the director considers necessary to assist or promote the implementation or enforcement of this article or the protection of the public safety. 
(b)  A holder shall notify the director in writing of any change of address or change in ownership or management of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service not less than ten (10) days prior to the change. 
(c)  The local or toll-free phone access required by subsection (a)(9), of this section, must be available from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, other than recognized holidays, and must be staffed and equipped to receive telephone calls during all business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 2004-249, §§ 1, 2, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 27-160. - Annual permit—Investigation of application and approval. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for an annual permit the director shall conduct an investigation and make findings of fact concerning public convenience and necessity and other relevant factors, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The number of taxicabs, limousines, or shuttles presently in operation in the city; 
(2)  The public transportation needs of the city and the adequacy of existing transportation services, including existing holders, to meet those needs; 
(3)  Whether existing holders can render the proposed additional taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service more efficiently or effectively than the applicant; 
(4)  The effect of the proposed additional taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service on traffic conditions, taxicab driver's working conditions and wages, and existing holders and public mass transportation services; and 
(5)  The character, experience, and fiscal responsibilities of the applicant. 
(b)  The applicant for an annual permit has the burden of proving that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service and that the applicant is qualified and financially able to provide the service proposed in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-161. - Temporary permit; application; purposes. 
(a)  To obtain a temporary permit, a person shall make application to the director. Upon receipt of an application for a temporary permit, the director shall give reasonable notice to all holders of his consideration of the application. 
(b)  After the director considers the application, the director may issue a temporary permit for the purposes of: 
(1)  Providing supplemental services during periods of extraordinary demand; or 
(2)  To assess the feasibility of new technology or services. 
(c)  A temporary permit is not renewable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-162. - Reciprocal agreement. 
Upon approval of the city council, the city manager may enter into a reciprocal agreement with one or more political subdivisions to provide reciprocal operation and mutual regulation of taxicab, limousine, or shuttle services between the city and other political subdivisions. The director shall give all holders reasonable notice of when a reciprocal agreement is to be considered by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-163. - Grant of permit. 
Upon approval of an application for an annual or temporary permit by the director, the director shall promptly issue the permit and incorporate in the permit the duration of the permit and such other terms or conditions as the director determines are necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-164. - Renewal of annual permit. 
(a)  An annual permit is automatically renewed unless the director notifies the holder, before the renewal date, of an intention to recommend denial of the permit renewal based on a determination that: 
(1)  The holder is not in compliance with the permit or applicable provisions of this Code, department regulations, or other law; or 
(2)  The holder does not qualify for operating authority under section 27-158, of this article or is otherwise not fit, willing, or able to continue to operate the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service in accordance with the permit and applicable provisions of this Code, department regulations, and other law; or 
(3)  Public convenience and necessity do not require the continued operation of the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service. 
(b)  A holder desiring a change in the terms or conditions of the permit must file with the director, not fewer than sixty (60) days before the permit expires, a written request stating reasons for the requested changes. 
(c)  Minor changes may be made in a permit by the director. 
(d)  If the director determines that a denial of a permit renewal or material change in the terms or conditions of the permit is required by public convenience and necessity, then he may deny renewal of the permit or make changes in the terms or conditions of the permit. A holder may request a change in the terms or conditions of his permit and the director may grant the change if the change is required by public convenience and necessity. 
(e)  If the permit expires at no fault of the holder before a ruling on the approval or denial of the renewal, the holder may continue to operate the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service pending a final decision. The holder shall cease operation of the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service immediately upon denial of the request for renewal by the director. 
(f)  A holder may file an appeal of the director's decision not to renew a permit in accordance with section 27-181, of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-165. - Amendment, suspension, and revocation of operating authority. 
(a)  Suspension and revocation of permit. The following regulations apply to the suspension or revocation of a temporary or annual permit. 
(1)  The director may suspend or revoke a permit if the director determines that the holder: 
a.  Failed to comply with a correction order issued to the holder by the director, within the time specified in the order; 
b.  Intentionally or knowingly impeded the department or other law enforcement agency in the performance of its duty or execution of its authority; 
c.  Failed to comply with this article; 
d.  Does not qualify for operating authority under section 27-158, of this article; 
e.  Has been convicted of a violation of another city, state, or federal law, which violation reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to perform a public transportation service; 
f.  Is under indictment for or has been convicted of any felony offense while holding taxicab, limousine, or shuttle operating authority; 
g.  Substantially breached the terms of the permit; 
h.  Failed to pay city ad valorem taxes on any property of the holder used directly or indirectly in connection with the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service; or 
i.  Failed to pay a permit fee at the time it was due. 
(2)  A suspension of a permit does not affect the expiration date of the permit. 
(3)  After revocation of a permit, a holder is not eligible for a permit for a period of two years. 
(b)  Reinstatement. After suspension of a permit, a holder may file an appeal in accordance with section 27-181, of this article. The director shall inspect the operation of the suspended holder to determine if the deficiency causing the suspension has been corrected by the holder. After inspection, the director shall submit his recommendation together with supporting facts to the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-166. - Permit fees. 
(a)  A holder of an annual permit shall pay the city a permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) a year for each taxicab, limousine, or shuttle authorized by the permit or an amount stated in the permit. The fee for a temporary permit is that which is stated in the permit. A permit fee is payable in the manner and at the time prescribed by the permit. 
(b)  If a holder of an annual permit is licensed by another governmental entity, the permit fee shall be reduced to one hundred dollars ($100.00) a year for each taxicab, limousine, or shuttle. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-167. - Number of taxicabs authorized. 
The director may make studies and surveys concerning the public convenience and necessity and may, from time to time, prescribe the number of taxicabs authorized for, and operated by a holder in order to adequately provide taxicab service in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-168. - Special provisions of operating authority. 
This article governs the operation of taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service under each form of operating authority. This article, however, is not a limitation on the power of the city council to incorporate in a grant of operating authority special provisions relating to the operation of the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service under the grant. To the extent that a special provision conflicts with this article, the special provision controls. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
DIVISION 3. - PART C—TAXICAB, LIMOUSINE, AND SHUTTLE DRIVER'S LICENSE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 27-169. - Taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license required. 
(a)  A person may not operate a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle inside the city without a valid taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license issued to the person under this article, except when authorized in a reciprocal agreement. 
(b)  A holder or taxicab, limousine, or shuttle owner may not employ or contract with a driver or otherwise allow a person to drive for hire a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle owned, controlled, or operated by the holder or taxicab, limousine, or shuttle owner unless the person has a valid taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license issued under this article, except when authorized in a reciprocal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-170. - Qualification for taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license. 
(a)  To qualify for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license, an applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least nineteen (19) years of age; 
(2)  Be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States; 
(3)  Hold a valid driver's license issued by the State of Texas; 
(4)  Be able to communicate in the English language; 
(5)  Not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability that is likely to prevent the applicant from exercising ordinary and reasonable control over a motor vehicle or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public health or safety; 
(6)  Not have been convicted of more than four moving traffic violations arising out of separate transactions, or involved in more than two (2) automobile accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant was at fault, within any twelve (12) month period during the preceding thirty-six (36) months; 
(7)  Not have been convicted or placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Criminal homicide as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 19; 
2.  Kidnapping as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 20; 
3.  A sexual offense as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 21; 
4.  An assaultive offense as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 22, other than a Class C misdemeanor; 
5.  Robbery as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 29; 
6.  Burglary as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 30; 
7.  Theft as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 31, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony; 
8.  Fraud as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 32; 
9.  Tampering with a governmental record as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 37; 
10.  Public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 43; 
11.  The transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in violation of V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 46, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony; 
12.  A violation of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 483 Dangerous Drugs, that is punishable as a felony; 
13.  A violation of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 481 Controlled Substances Act, that is punishable as a felony; or 
14.  Criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in subsection (7)(a)1.—13., [of this subsection]; 
b.  For which: 
1.  If the applicant was convicted for a misdemeanor offense, less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date; 
2.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a misdemeanor offense, less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
3.  If the applicant was convicted for a felony offense, less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction or the date of release from parole, whichever is the later date; 
4.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a felony offense, less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
5.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any twenty-four (24) month period, the applicant has two (2) or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses; or 
6.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication for the last offense, whichever is the later date, if, within any twenty-four (24) month period, the applicant has been placed on probation or deferred adjudication two or more times for any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses; 
(8)  Not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or deferred adjudication for, driving while intoxicated: 
a.  Within the preceding twelve (12) months; or 
b.  More than one (1) time within the preceding ten (10) years; 
(9)  Not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics; 
(10)  Be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest; 
(11)  Be sanitary and well-groomed in dress and person in compliance with section 27-188(a), of this article; 
(12)  Have a valid contract with or be currently employed by a holder; and 
(13)  Have successfully completed within the preceding twelve (12) months a defensive driving course approved by the National Safety Council and be able to present proof of completion. 
(b)  An applicant who has been sentenced for an offense listed in subsection (a)(7) or (8), for which the required time period provided by this ordinance has elapsed, may qualify for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license only if the director determines that the applicant is presently fit to engage in the occupation of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver. In determining present fitness under this section, the director shall consider the following: 
(1)  The extent and nature of the applicant's past criminal activity; 
(2)  The age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the crime; 
(3)  The amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant's last criminal activity; 
(4)  The conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and following the criminal activity; 
(5)  Evidence of the applicant's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and 
(6)  Other evidence of the applicant's present fitness, including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present fitness under subsection (b), of this section and under section 27-176(a), of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-171. - Application; fee. 
To obtain a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license or renewal of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license, a person must file with the department a nonrefundable application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) and a completed written application on a form provided for the purpose. The director shall require each application to state such information as he considers necessary to determine whether an applicant is qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-172. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining qualification under section 27-170(a)(5), [of this article,] the director may require an applicant to submit to a physical examination at applicant's expense conducted by a licensed physician and to furnish to the director a statement from the physician which certifies that the physician has examined the applicant and that in the physician's professional opinion the applicant is qualified under section 27-170(a)(5), [of this article]. 
(b)  Upon request of the director, the police department shall investigate each applicant and furnish the director a report concerning applicant's qualification under section 27- 170(a)(7), [of this article]. The municipal court shall furnish the director a copy of the applicant's motor vehicle driving record and a list of any warrants of arrest for the applicant which might be outstanding. 
(c)  The director may conduct such other investigation as he considers necessary to determine whether an applicant for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license is qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-173. - Issuance and denial. 
(a)  If the director determines that an applicant is qualified, the director shall issue a license to the applicant. 
(b)  The director shall delay until final adjudication the approval of the application of any applicant who is under indictment for or has charges pending for: 
(1)  Any offense listed in section 27-170(a)(7)a., [of this article], or criminal attempt to commit any of those; or 
(2)  Any offense involving driving while intoxicated. 
(c)  The director may deny the application for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license if the applicant: 
(1)  Is not qualified under section 27-170, [of this article]; 
(2)  Refuses to submit to or does not pass a medical or written examination authorized under section 27-172, [of this article]; 
(3)  Makes a false statement of a material fact in his application for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license. 
(d)  If the director determines that a license should be denied the applicant, the director shall notify the applicant in writing that his application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement informing the applicant of his right of appeal in accordance with section 27-181, of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-174. - Expiration of taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license; voidance upon suspension or revocation of state driver's license. 
(a)  Except in the case of probationary and provisional licenses, a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license expires two years from the date of issuance. 
(b)  If a licensee's state driver's license is suspended or revoked by the state, his taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license automatically becomes void. A licensee shall notify the director and the holder for whom he drives within three days of a suspension or revocation of his driver's license by the state and shall immediately surrender his taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license to the director. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-175. - Provisional license. 
(a)  The director may issue a provisional taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license if he determines: 
(1)  That the number of taxicab, limousine, or shuttle drivers is inadequate to meet the city's need for taxicab service, in which case he may issue the number necessary to meet the need; or 
(2)  That it is necessary pending completion of investigation of an applicant for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license. 
(b)  A provisional taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license expires on the date shown on the license, not to exceed forty-five (45) days from the date of issuance, or upon the applicant's being denied a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  The director shall not issue a provisional license to a person who has been previously denied a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license. 
(d)  The director may issue a provisional license to a person holding a state driver's license.  
Sec. 27-176. - Probationary license. 
(a)  The director may issue a probationary taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license to an applicant who is not qualified for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license under section 27-170, [of this article,] if the applicant: 
(1)  Could qualify under section 27-170, [of this article,] for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license within one year from the date of application; 
(2)  Holds a valid state driver's license or occupational driver's license; and 
(3)  Is determined by the director, using the criteria listed in section 27-170(b), of this article, to be presently fit to engage in the occupation of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver. 
(b)  A probationary taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license may be issued for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(c)  The director may prescribe appropriate terms and conditions for a probationary taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license as he determines are necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-177. - Duplicate license. 
If a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license is lost or destroyed, the director shall issue the licensee a duplicate license upon payment to the city of a duplicate license fee of ten ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-178. - Display of license. 
A taxicab driver shall at all times conspicuously display a taxicab driver's license on the clothing of the driver's upper body. A taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver shall allow the director or a peace officer to examine the driver's taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-179. - Suspension by designated representative. 
(a)  If a representative designated by the director to enforce this article determines that a licensee has failed to comply with this article (except section 27-170) or a regulation established under this article, the representative may suspend the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license for a period of time not to exceed three days by personally serving the licensee with a written notice of the suspension. The written notice must include the reason for suspension, the date the suspension begins, the duration of the suspension, and a statement informing the licensee of his right of appeal in accordance with subsection (b) and (c), of this section. 
(b)  A suspension under this section may be appealed to the director or his assistant if the licensee requests an appeal at the time the representative serves notice of suspension. When appeal is requested, the suspension may not take effect until a hearing is provided by the director or his assistant. 
(c)  The director may order an expedited hearing under this section, to be held as soon as possible after the licensee requests an appeal. The director may affirm, reverse, or modify the order of the representative. The decision of the director is final. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-180. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  If the director determines that a licensee has failed to comply with this article (except section 27-170) or a regulation established under this article, the director may suspend the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license for a definite period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(b)  If at any time the director determines that a licensee is not qualified under section 27-170, [of this article,] or is under indictment or has charges pending for any offense involving driving while intoxicated or any offense involving a crime described in section 27-170(a)(7)a., [of this article] or criminal attempt to commit any of those offenses, the director shall suspend the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license until such time as the director determines that the licensee is qualified or that the charges against the licensee have been finally adjudicated. 
(c)  A licensee whose taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license is suspended shall not drive a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle inside the city during the period of suspension. 
(d)  The director shall notify the licensee and the holder in writing of a suspension under this section and include in the notice the reason for the suspension; the date the director orders the suspension to begin, the duration of suspension or if it is under subsection (b), and a statement informing the licensee of a right of appeal. The period of suspension begins on the date specified by the director or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal hearing officer. 
(e)  The director may revoke a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license if the director determines that the licensee: 
(1)  Operated a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle inside the city a period in which the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license was suspended; 
(2)  Made a false statement of a material fact in an application for a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license; 
(3)  Engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension under subsection (a), and received either a suspension in excess of three (3) days or a conviction for violation of this article, two (2) times within the twelve (12) month period preceding the occurrence of the conduct or three times within the twenty-four (24) month period preceding the occurrence of the conduct; 
(4)  Engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be detrimental to the public safety; 
(5)  Failed to comply with a condition of a probationary permit; or 
(6)  Was convicted of any felony offense while holding a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license. 
(f)  A person whose taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license is revoked shall not: 
(1)  Apply for another taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license before the expiration of twelve (12) months from the date the director revokes the license or, in the case of an appeal, the date the appeal hearing officer affirms the revocation; or 
(2)  Drive a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle inside the city. 
(g)  The director shall notify the licensee in writing of a revocation and include in the notice the reason for the revocation, the date the director orders the revocation, and a statement informing the licensee of his right of appeal. 
(h)  After receipt of notice of suspension, revocation, or denial of license renewal, the licensee shall, on the date specified in the notice, surrender his taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license to the director and discontinue driving a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle inside the city. 
(i)  Notwithstanding subsections (c) and (h), if the licensee appeals the suspension or revocation under this section, the licensee may continue to drive a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle pending the appeal unless: 
(1)  The taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license of the licensee is suspended pursuant to subsection (b) or revoked pursuant to subsection (e)(6), of this section; or 
(2)  The director determines that continued operation by the licensee would impose an immediate threat to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-181. - Appeal. 
(a)  A person may appeal the following decisions of the director if he requests an appeal in writing and delivers it to the city manager not more than ten (10) business days after receiving notice of the director's action: 
(1)  A denial of an application for a permit; 
(2)  A suspension or revocation of a permit; 
(3)  A denial of renewal of annual permit; 
(4)  Denial of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license application; 
(5)  Suspension of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license under section 27-180, [of this article]; or 
(6)  Revocation of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license. 
(b)  The city manager or his designated representative shall act as the appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make argument in his behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this section, and the hearing officer shall make his ruling on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is final. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-182. - Falsifying of a license. 
A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Forges, alters, or counterfeits a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license, badge, sticker, or emblem required by law; or 
(2)  Possesses a forged, altered, or counterfeited taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license, badge, sticker, or emblem required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-183. - Current mailing address of licensee. 
An individual issued a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license shall maintain a current mailing address on file with the director. The licensee shall notify the director of any change in this mailing address within five business days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
DIVISION 4. - PART D—MISCELLANEOUS HOLDER AND DRIVER REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 27-184. - Holder's and driver's duty to comply. 
(a)  Holder. In the operation of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service, a holder shall comply with the terms and conditions of the holder's operating authority and, except to the extent expressly provided otherwise by the operating authority, shall comply with this article, regulations established under this article, and other law applicable to the operation of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service. 
(b)  Driver. While on duty, a driver shall comply with this article, regulations established under this article, other law applicable to the operation of a motor vehicle in this state, and orders issued by the holder employing or contracting with the driver in connection with the holder's discharging of its duty under its operating authority and this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-185. - Holder's duty to enforce compliance by drivers. 
(a)  A holder shall establish policy and take action to discourage, prevent, or correct violations of this article by drivers who are employed by or contracting with the holder. 
(b)  A holder shall not permit a driver who is employed by or contracting with the holder to drive a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle if the holder knows or has reasonable cause to suspect that the driver has failed to comply with this article, the rules and regulations established by the director or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-186. - Driver as independent contractor. 
(a)  A holder may contract with a driver on an independent-contractor basis, but only if the contract: 
(1)  Provides that the holder shall indemnify the city and hold the city harmless for a claim or cause of action against the city arising from conduct of the driver; 
(2)  Provides that the driver is insured under the holder's fleet insurance policy; and 
(3)  Imposes a condition that the driver must comply with this article and provides that failure to comply may be considered by the holder as a material breach of the contract. 
(b)  The form of the contract between a holder and driver must be approved by the director. The director may disapprove a contract form if he determines that the contract is inconsistent with this article, regulations established under this article, or other applicable law. A holder may not use a contract that has been disapproved by the director.  
Sec. 27-187. - Insurance. 
(a)  A holder shall procure and keep in full force and effect automobile liability insurance written by an insurance company that: 
(1)  Is approved by the State of Texas; 
(2)  Is acceptable to the city; 
(3)  Is rated A- or better, with a financial size of Class VI or higher, by A. M. Best or has an equivalent rating from another insurance rating service approved by the city, unless the insurance company is reinsured for the full insurance required under this section by another insurance company that meets all of the rating requirements of this paragraph and all other requirements of subsections (1), (2), and (4), of this subsection (a), and provides a right of direct action against the reinsurer by any person entitled to claimed insurance benefits against the primary insurance company in the event the primary insurance company does not pay any valid claim; and 
(4)  Does not violate operational control prohibition described in subsection (i), of this section. 
(b)  The insurance must be issued in the standard form approved by the state department of insurance, and all provisions of the policy must be acceptable to the city. The insured provisions of the policy must name the city and its officers and employees as additional insurers, and the coverage provisions must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service by the holder. 
(c)  The automobile liability insurance must provide combined single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each occurrence, or the equivalent, for each motor vehicle used by the holder. Aggregate limits of liability are prohibited. 
(d)  If a vehicle is removed from service, the holder shall maintain the insurance coverage required by this section for the vehicle until the director receives satisfactory proof that all evidence of operation as a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle has been removed from the vehicle. 
(e)  Insurance required under this section must include: 
(1)  A cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the director in writing not fewer than thirty (30) days before canceling or making a material change to the insurance policy; 
(2)  A provision to cover all vehicles, whether owned or not owned by the holder, operated under the holder's operating authority; and 
(3)  A provision requiring the insurance company to pay every claim on a first (1st) dollar basis. 
(f)  Insurance required by this section may be obtained from an assigned risk pool if all of the policies and coverages are managed by one agent, and one certificate of insurance is issued to the city. 
(g)  Operating authority will not be granted or renewed unless the applicant or holder furnishes the director with such proof of insurance as the director considers necessary to determine whether the applicant or holder is adequately insured under this section. 
(h)  If the insurance of a holder lapses or is canceled and new insurance is not obtained, the director shall suspend the operating authority until the holder provides evidence that insurance coverage required by this section has been obtained. A person shall not operate a passenger transportation service while operating authority is suspended under this section whether or not the action is appealed. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee must be paid before operating authority suspended under this section will be reinstated. 
(i)  No person with any direct or indirect ownership interest in the holder's taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service may have any operational control, direct or indirect, in any insurance company that provides insurance required by this section to the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service. For purposes of this subsection, "operational control" means holding any management position with the insurance company (including, but not limited to, the chief executive officer, the president, any vice-president, or any person in a decision-making position with respect to insurance claims) or having the right to control the actions or decisions of any person in such a management position in the insurance company. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-188. - Apparel to be worn by drivers. 
(a)  Each holder shall have company dress standards for drivers employed by or contracting with the holder. These standards must be kept on file with the director and must include the following: 
(1)  A driver may not wear: 
a.  Cut-offs; 
b.  Apparel with offensive or suggestive language; 
c.  Tank tops or halter tops; or 
d.  Outer apparel made of fishnet or undergarment material. 
(2)  Only shorts commonly referred to as walking shorts or Bermuda shorts with a finished hem are permitted. 
(3)  Shoes must be worn at all times in the manner for which they were designed. A driver may not wear shoes or sandals without socks or hosiery and may not wear beach or shower thongs. 
(4)  A driver and the driver's clothing must conform to basic standards of hygiene and be neat, clean, and sanitary at all times. 
(5)  A driver's hair must be clean and neatly groomed. Facial hair must be neatly trimmed. 
(b)  While on duty, a driver shall wear the item specified by the holder who employs or contracts with the driver and shall comply with such other identification regulations prescribed by the holder's operating authority. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-189. - Driver's daily manifest. 
(a)  Each holder shall provide its drivers with forms, approved by the director, for maintaining a daily manifest. The form must include appropriate spaces for recording: 
(1)  Vehicle number, driver's name, date, hours of operation, total miles, paid miles, units, trips, extras, and if the vehicle is a taxicab, the meter number; 
(2)  Time, place, origin, and destination; 
(3)  Number of passengers and amount of fare and other charges; and 
(4)  Other information required by the director to aid in the discharge of his duties. 
(b)  Each driver shall complete a manifest on a separate form for each tour of duty. The driver shall provide the information required by the form and shall record the information with regard to trips at the end of each trip. The holder shall maintain the manifest forms and allow the director to inspect the forms upon request. The holder shall provide copies of the manifest forms to the director if requested. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-190. - Holder's records and reports. 
(a)  Each holder shall maintain at a single location business records of its taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service. The method used in maintaining the records must be approved by the director, and the director may require maintenance of certain records which he determines are necessary for monitoring the activities, operations, service, and safety record of a holder. A holder shall make its records available for inspection by the director at reasonable times upon request. 
(b)  Each holder shall submit to the director such annual and monthly reports concerning its taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service as the director determines necessary to evaluate the holder's operations. A holder shall submit a monthly report of gross receipts in a form approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-191. - Taxicabs monthly summary of meter readings. 
(a)  A holder, owner, or driver shall obtain forms from the director for maintaining a monthly summary of meter readings for each taxicab operating under a holder's authority. The form must include appropriate spaces for recording: 
(1)  Taxicab number; 
(2)  Driver's name; 
(3)  Date; 
(4)  Meter number; 
(5)  Total miles; 
(6)  Paid miles; 
(7)  Units; 
(8)  Trips; 
(9)  Extras; and 
(10)  Other information required by the director. 
(b)  A holder, owner or driver of a taxicab shall provide all information required by the form. A separate form must be completed for each taxicab. A holder, owner, or driver shall return completed forms to the director once a month, or as otherwise required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
DIVISION 5. - PART E—SERVICE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 27-192. - City-wide taxicab service required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by the holder's operating authority, a holder shall: 
(1)  Provide taxicab service to the general public to and from any point inside the city that is accessible by public street, except that this provision does not require a holder to subject a taxicab to mob violence or destruction; 
(2)  Answer each call received for service inside the city as soon as practicable, and if the service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, the holder shall inform the caller of the reason for the delay and the approximate time required to answer the call; and 
(3)  Maintain a single station for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching taxicabs that is operational eighteen (18) hours each day. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-193. - Representation of availability of taxicab. 
A driver may not represent that his taxicab is engaged when it is in fact vacant or vacant when it is in fact engaged. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-194. - Refusal to convey passengers by taxicabs. 
(a)  While operating a taxicab a driver shall not refuse to convey a person who requests service unless: 
(1)  The person is disorderly; 
(2)  The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service; 
(3)  The driver has reason to believe that the person is engaged in unlawful conduct; or 
(4)  The driver is in fear of his personal safety. 
(b)  While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse service requested by a radio dispatch when the location for pick up is within a reasonable distance from the location of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-195. - Passenger limitations of taxicabs. 
(a)  While operating a taxicab a driver on duty may carry only a person who is a paying passenger, unless the passenger is an employee of the taxicab service that employs or contracts with the driver, a governmental inspector acting in an official capacity, or unless it is authorized by the holder's operating authority. 
(b)  A driver may not carry at the same time more passengers than the designed seating capacity of the taxicab. 
(c)  The director may establish rules governing passenger limitations, as illustrated by, but not limited to, cab-sharing, cab-pooling, and numbers of passengers with different destinations. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-196. - Carry passengers by direct route. 
A driver shall carry a passenger to his destination by the most direct and expeditious route available unless otherwise directed by the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-197. - Solicitation of passengers by taxicabs. 
A driver may not solicit passengers: 
(1)  From a location other than the driver's compartment or the immediate vicinity of the driver's taxicab; 
(2)  In a way that annoys or obstructs the movement of a person; 
(3)  By paying an employee of another business to solicit passengers for or give preferential treatment in directing passengers to the driver's taxicab; or 
(4)  Without using a taxicab stand at a location where a taxicab stand exists. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-198. - Regulations for use of taxicab stands. 
(a)  While using a taxicab stand, a driver shall not: 
(1)  Go beyond twenty-five (25) feet of his taxicab except to assist a passenger as reasonably necessary after being engaged; 
(2)  Interfere with the orderly progression of taxicabs from the rear to the front of the taxicab stand; 
(3)  Perform or allow to be performed repairs or maintenance on a taxicab while parked on the taxicab stand; 
(4)  Assign or sell his position in a taxicab stand to another; or 
(5)  Interfere with a taxicab entering a taxicab stand on which there is a vacant space. 
(b)  A person shall not park a taxicab on a taxicab stand unless the taxicab is for hire. 
(c)  A taxicab left unattended in a taxicab stand is illegally parked and may be removed from the taxicab stand and impounded as provided in chapter 18 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-199. - Conduct of drivers. 
A driver shall: 
(1)  Act in a reasonable, prudent, and courteous manner; 
(2)  Maintain a sanitary and well-groomed appearance in compliance with section 27- 188(a), of this article; 
(3)  Not respond to a radio dispatch call assigned to another driver; 
(4)  Not consume an alcoholic beverage, drug, or other substance that could adversely affect the driver's ability to drive a motor vehicle; 
(5)  Not monitor the radio frequency of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle company other than the driver's own nor respond to a call for service dispatched to another taxicab, limousine, or shuttle; 
(6)  Not possess a radio capable of receiving the frequency of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle company, other than the driver's own; 
(7)  Not interfere with the director in the performance of the director's duties; and 
(8)  Comply with lawful orders of the director issued in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-200. - Return of passenger's property. 
(a)  Upon finding property in a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle, left by a passenger, the driver shall immediately return the property to the owner. However, if the driver is unable to locate the owner or if the driver does not know the identity or whereabouts of the owner, the driver shall, within a reasonable time, deliver the property to the holder who employs or contracts with the driver. 
(b)  Upon return of property to the owner or delivery of property to the holder, the driver shall prepare a written report stating the description of the property, the identity of the owner if known, the date the property was left in the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle, the circumstances relating to the loss, and the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle number. The holder shall keep the report on file for at least one (1) year and shall hold the property for not less than three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-201. - Establishment of taxicab stands. 
(a)  Subject to the approval of the director, the traffic engineer may establish taxicab stands of such character, number, and location as he determines are required by the public convenience and necessity. 
(b)  A holder desiring the establishment of a taxicab stand must file a written request with the director and the traffic engineer.  
Sec. 27-202. - Service regulations for business establishments requesting taxicabs for customers. 
An employee of a business establishment, other than a taxicab service, who acts as an agent in obtaining taxicab service for prospective taxicab passengers shall not: 
(1)  Solicit nor accept payment from a driver in return for giving preferential treatment in directing passengers to a driver's taxicab; or 
(2)  Interfere with the orderly progression of taxicabs from the rear to the front of a taxicab stand. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
DIVISION 6. - PART F—TAXICAB FARES 
 
Sec. 27-203. - Rates of taxicab fares. 
(a)  A holder of a taxicab permit may charge only rates of fare which have been approved by the city council. A holder of a taxicab permit may propose a change in its rates of fare by filing the proposal with the city secretary and the director for consideration by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall hold a hearing to consider the proposed change in rates of fare. After the hearing the city council may approve, disapprove, or modify the proposed change. 
(c)  The city secretary shall maintain on file a current schedule of the rates of fare charged by each holder of taxicab permits. 
(d)  A driver shall not charge a fare for operating a taxicab in the city that is inconsistent with the rates on file with the city secretary for the holder under whose operating authority the taxicab is operated. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-204. - Display of rate card by taxicabs. 
(a)  A holder shall provide the driver for each taxicab operating under its authority, a printed card or sticker containing the approved rates of fare of the holder. The form and content of the card or sticker are subject to regulation by the director. 
(b)  While operating a taxicab for hire, a driver shall, in a manner approved by the director, prominently display two rate cards or stickers inside the taxicab and two rate cards or stickers outside the taxicab so that they can be easily read by passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-205. - Computation of fares for taxicabs. 
Unless a holder's approved rates of fare or operating authority provide otherwise, a holder shall equip each taxicab with a taximeter, and a driver shall charge only a fee as computed by the taximeter. However, a holder may authorize a driver to make a flat rate charge for a trip to a destination which is not covered in the holder's approved rates of fare, if the taximeter is kept in operation while the taxicab has a passenger within the scope of the area designated in the approved rates of fare. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-206. - Design and testing of taximeters; fees. 
(a)  A taximeter must accurately register in legible figures total miles, paid miles, number of fare units, number of trips, extras, and total fare for a trip. Figures denoting the fare must be illuminated when the meter is activated. 
(b)  A taximeter must be mounted in a conspicuous location in the taxicab in a manner approved by the director. A taximeter must be equipped to indicate whether the taxicab is engaged or vacant. 
(c)  If the taximeter employs a flag, the flag must project at least four inches above the dashboard when in the non-earning position. 
(d)  The taximeter or its drive system must be sealed at all points at which components, if manipulated, could affect the function or accuracy of the taximeter. 
(e)  The design of a taximeter is subject to approval by the director to assure that it complies with this section. 
(f)  A holder shall cause each taximeter in taxicabs operating under its authority to be maintained in good operating condition and to be tested and sealed at least once each year in accordance with state and city weights and measures laws. The director may establish a schedule of regular testing days and times for purposes of this section. 
(g)  The owner of the taxicab shall be responsible for paying the taximeter testing fee. 
(h)  A person commits an offense if he operates a taxicab that is: 
(1)  Not equipped with a taximeter; or 
(2)  Equipped with a taximeter that: 
a.  Does not have a current decal and lead seal authorized by the director; 
b.  Has been tampered with or altered; or 
c.  Incorrectly registers or computes taxicab fares because of alterations to the taxicab odometer, including, but not limited to, changes in the gears, tires, or wheels of the taxicab. 
(i)  The following persons shall be responsible and subject to the penalty for a violation of subsection (h), [of this section]: 
(1)  The driver of the taxicab. 
(2)  The owner of the taxicab. 
(3)  The holder under whose authority the taxicab is being operated. 
(j)  Proof of taxicab ownership for purposes of this section may be made by a copy of the registration of the vehicle with the state showing the name of the person to whom the state license plates for the vehicle were issued. The person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be prima facie the owner of the vehicle. If the vehicle is not currently registered, the person in whose name the vehicle was last registered shall be prima facie the owner of the vehicle.. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-207. - Taxicab fare collection procedures. 
(a)  Before changing the taximeter to indicate that the taxicab is vacant, a driver shall call the attention of the passenger to the amount of fare registered on the taximeter. 
(b)  Upon request by a person paying a fare, a driver shall give the person a legible receipt showing: 
(1)  The name of the holder under whose authority the taxicab is operated; 
(2)  The taxicab number; 
(3)  An itemized list of charges; 
(4)  The total amount of fare paid; 
(5)  The date of payment; and 
(6)  The driver's signature. 
(c)  A holder shall provide each driver operating a taxicab under its authority with printed receipt forms adequate for providing the information required in subsection (b), [of this section]. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
DIVISION 7. - PART G—VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 27-208. - False representation as taxicab. 
(a)  A person may not represent that a vehicle is a taxicab if the vehicle is not in fact a taxicab authorized by operating authority granted under this article. 
(b)  A person may not drive a vehicle in the city that is not a taxicab if the vehicle is marked, painted, or equipped in a way that is likely to result in mistaking the vehicle for a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-209. - Vehicle requirements and inspections. 
(a)  The director may by regulation establish requirements for size, condition, and accessories of taxicabs used by a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle holder, owner, or driver. 
(b)  The director shall inspect each taxicab, limousine, or shuttle for compliance with this article and regulations of the director, before it is placed in service, twice a year for regular inspections, and once during the year for a random inspection. 
(c)  A holder, owner, or driver shall make a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle available for inspection when ordered by the director. If, upon inspection, the director determines that a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle is not in compliance with this article or regulations of the director, the director shall order the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle to be brought into compliance within a reasonable period of time and require it to be reinspected. The owner shall pay to the director ten dollars ($10.00) for each reinspection of a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle that is required before it is brought into compliance. 
(d)  If a holder, owner, or driver fails to make a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle available for inspection or if the director determines that a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle is not in compliance with this article or regulations of the director, the director may order the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle removed from service until it is made available for inspection and brought into compliance. 
(e)  If the director determines that inspection of the mechanical condition or safety equipment of a taxicab by an expert mechanic or technician is necessary, the holder, owner, or driver shall pay the cost of the inspection. 
(f)  When a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle is removed from service and placed back in service within fifteen (15) days by the same owner, the owner shall pay to the director sixty dollars ($60.00) for reinspection. 
(g)  Before any taxicab, limousine, or shuttle will be approved for service, the director shall be provided with a copy of the registration for the vehicle with the state, or a bill of sale if the vehicle is new and has not yet been registered, showing the name of the individual or holder owning the vehicle. The owner shown on the registration or bill of sale provided to the director shall notify the director of any change in ownership of the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle within ten (10) business days. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-210. - Taxicab age limits. 
(a)  A holder, owner, or driver commits an offense if he operates any vehicle as a taxicab in the city that is older than: 
(1)  Seventy-two (72) months (six (6) years) of age for a vehicle not equipped to use only alternative fuel; or 
(2)  One hundred eight (108) months (nine (9) years) of age for a vehicle equipped to use only alternative fuel, if the equipment was on the vehicle when the vehicle was purchased new or added to the vehicle within thirty (30) days after the vehicle was purchased new. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, vehicle age, for a vehicle purchased used, will be calculated from January 1 of the model year of the vehicle. If the vehicle is purchased new, age will be calculated from the date of purchase and the holder, owner, or driver shall present to the director: 
(1)  A certified copy of the vehicle's title stating the date of purchase and an odometer reading of no more than one thousand (1,000) miles at the time of purchase; and 
(2)  A manufacturer's certificate, as defined in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Ch. 501, certifying that the vehicle has not been previously titled and has not been previously subject to retail sale. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-211. - Required equipment for taxicabs. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in the operating authority under which a taxicab is operated or by regulation of the director, and in addition to other equipment required by this article, a holder, owner, or driver shall provide and maintain in good operating condition the following equipment for each taxicab, limousine, or shuttle: 
(1)  Seat belts for each passenger, the number of which is determined by the designed seating capacity of the taxicab; 
(2)  Heater and air conditioner; 
(3)  Chemical-type fire extinguisher, of at least one quart capacity, conveniently located in the same compartment of the taxicab as the driver so that it is readily accessible for immediate use; 
(4)  Equipment to indicate when a taxicab is operating for hire and when it is not for hire; 
(5)  Top light; 
(6)  Two-way radio on the holder's dispatch frequency; 
(7)  Map of the city; 
(8)  Decal complying with section 27-215 of this article; 
(9)  Taxicab display receptacle; 
(10)  Rates of fare cards or stickers; and 
(11)  Taximeter. 
(b)  No equipment listed in subsection (a)(4)—(6), and (9)—(11), [above,] may be placed on a vehicle to be operated as a taxicab unless the equipment is owned by the holder. 
(c)  A taxicab in operation on the date this article is adopted which is not equipped with safety belts or the required number of safety belts, is not required to comply with subsection (a)(1), [of this section]. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-212. - Taxicab color scheme and distinctive markings. 
(a)  A holder shall develop the design of a color scheme and distinctive markings for taxicabs operating under its authority, and shall submit the design to the director for approval to insure that the design is readily distinguishable from the design used by other holders. 
(b)  After a design is approved by the director, the holder shall submit to the director a color photograph of a completely equipped taxicab using the approved design. 
(c)  The holder shall use only the approved design, as depicted in the submitted photograph, for taxicabs operated under its authority unless written approval of a change is obtained from the director. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-213. - Required taxicab identification. 
A holder shall cause each taxicab operating under its authority to be provided with the following uniform vehicle identification: 
(1)  The name of the holder's company printed in letters not less than three inches high with one-half (½) inch stroke; and 
(2)  The taxicab number assigned to each vehicle by the director in numbers and letters not less than three inches high with one-half (½) inch stroke and so that it is clearly visible from the front, rear, and both sides of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27- 214. - Taxicab display receptacle. 
(a)  Every taxicab must have a display receptacle approved by the director securely affixed to a conspicuous place on the dashboard. A display receptacle shall be at least six and one-fourth inches by ten inches (6¼" x 10") in area, constructed of a rigid material, and designed to accommodate the following information in accordance with the required dimensions: 
(1)  At least a two-inch by two-inch (2" x 2") colored passport-quality photograph of the driver, with the driver's name as it appears on the driver's state driver's license and the taxicab driver's license number placed under the photograph in block letters and numbers not less than three-sixteenths ( 3/16 ) inch high with at least a one-sixteenths ( 1/16 ) inch stroke, must be laminated as a single unit not less than two and one-fourth inches by three and one-half inches (2¼" x 3½"). 
(2)  The company name in block letters not less than one-half (½) inch high with at least a one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch stroke, with the taxicab number placed under it in block numbers and letters not less than three-fourths (¾) inch high with at least a three-sixteenths ( 3/16 ) inch stroke, must be laminated as a single unit not less than three inches by 2-1/2 inches (3" x 2½"). 
(3)  Taxi rates in block numbers at least nine-sixteenths inch high with at least a three-sixteenths inch stroke and in block letters at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch high with at least a one and thirty-two ( 1/32 ) inch stroke must be laminated as a single unit not less than 6-1/2 by six inches (6½" x 6"). 
(b)  A holder, owner, or driver of a taxicab commits an offense if he operates or allows operation of a taxicab that is equipped with: 
(1)  No required display receptacle; 
(2)  A display receptacle that does not contain required information; or 
(3)  A display receptacle that contains insufficient or incorrect information. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-215. - Taxicab decals. 
(a)  The holder, owner, or driver of a taxicab shall obtain a decal, indicating the taxicab's authority to operate, from the director each month, or other period to be determined by the director. A decal must be attached to the lower right corner of the front windshield of the taxicab in a manner approved by the director. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Operates a taxicab with an expired decal or with no decal affixed to it; 
(2)  Attaches a decal to a vehicle not authorized to operate as a taxicab; 
(3)  Forges, alters, or counterfeits a taxicab decal required by this section; 
(4)  Possesses a forged, altered, or counterfeited taxicab decal required by this section; or 
(5)  Displays more than one taxicab decal issued by the city on a vehicle at the same time. 
(c)  A taxicab decal assigned to one person is not transferable to another without consent of the director . 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-216. - Not-for-hire status of taxicabs. 
(a)  Each taxicab is presumed to be on duty and ready to serve the general public for hire. If a driver is not for hire and does not intend to provide taxicab service, the driver shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  The driver shall place a sign, to be provided by the holder, in the taxicab indicating the words "NOT FOR HIRE" printed in letters not less than three inches in height with a stroke of not less than three eights ( 3/8 ) inch. The letters shall be on a backing of sufficient thickness to not easily bend. 
(2)  When a driver is not for hire, the driver shall display the sign in an upright position in the front window on the right side of the taxicab so as to be easily seen and read from outside of the taxicab. 
(b)  A driver who is not for hire shall not park or stand a taxicab on a taxicab stand or on a public street or public property within five hundred (500) feet of a taxicab stand unless it is parked at a metered parking space. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-217. - Removal of equipment from taxicabs. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is removed from service or is no longer authorized to operate as a taxicab, the holder, owner, or driver shall remove from the vehicle all taxicab signs, markings, and equipment that would distinguish the vehicle as a taxicab, including, but not limited to, radios, top lights, meters, and decals. 
(b)  A holder, owner, or driver of a taxicab shall not sell or transfer to a driver any radio, top light, meter, or other equipment that would distinguish a vehicle as a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
DIVISION 8. - PART H—ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 27-218. - Authority to inspect. 
The director may inspect a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service operating under this article to determine whether the service complies with this article, regulations established under this article, or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-219. - Removal of evidence of authorization. 
Whenever a holder's operating authority or a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver's license is suspended, revoked, or denied or whenever a vehicle fails to pass inspection as a taxicab, limousine, or shuttle, the director may remove or require the surrender of all evidence of authorization as a holder, taxicab, limousine, or shuttle driver, or taxicab, limousine, or shuttle, including, but not limited to, removal or surrender of operating authority, licenses, decals, signs, insignia, radios, top lights, and meters if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-220. - Enforcement by police department. 
Officers of the police department shall assist in the enforcement of this article. A police officer upon observing a violation of this article or the regulations established by the director, shall take necessary enforcement action to insure effective regulations of taxicab, limousine, or shuttle service. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-221. - Correction order. 
(a)  If the director determines that a holder violates this Code, terms of its operating authority, a regulation established by the director, or other law, the director may notify the holder in writing of the violation and by written order direct the holder to correct the violation within a reasonable period of time. In setting the time for correction the director shall consider the degree of danger to the public health or safety and the nature of the violation. If the violation involves equipment that is unsafe or functioning improperly, the director shall order the holder to immediately cease use of the equipment. 
(b)  If the director determines that a violation constitutes an imminent and serious threat to the public health or safety, the director shall order the holder to correct the violation immediately, and, if the holder fails to comply, the director shall promptly take or cause to be taken such action as he considers necessary to enforce the order immediately. 
(c)  The director shall include in a notice issued under this section an identification of the violation, the date of issuance of the notice and the time period within which the violation must be corrected, a warning that failure to comply with the order may result in suspension or revocation of operating authority or imposition of a fine or both, and a statement indicating that the order may be appealed to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-222. - Service of notice. 
(a)  A holder shall designate and maintain a representative to receive service of notice required under this article to be given a holder and to serve notice required under this article to be given a driver employed by a holder. 
(b)  Notice required under this article to be given: 
(1)  A holder must be personally served by the director on the holder or the holder's designated representative; or 
(2)  A driver licensed by the city under part C, must be personally served or sent by certified United States mail, five day return receipt requested, to the address, last known to the director, of the person to be notified, or to the designated representative for drivers. 
(c)  Notice required under this article to be given a person other than a driver licensed under part C or a holder may be served in the manner prescribed by subsection (b)(2), [of this section]. 
(d)  Service executed in accordance with this section constitutes notice to the person to whom the notice is addressed. The date of service for notice that is mailed is the date received. 
(e)  This section does not apply to notice served under section 27-179(a), [of this article]. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-223. - Appeal. 
(a)  A holder may appeal a correction order issued under section 27-221, [of this article,] or any other action of the director if an appeal is requested in writing not more than ten (10) days after notice of the order or action is received. 
(b)  The city manager or his designated representative shall act as the appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make argument in his behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this section, and the hearing officer shall make his ruling on the basis of a preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or a part of the order of the director. The decision of the hearing officer is final. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 27-224. - Criminal offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he violates or attempts to violate a provision of this article applicable to him. A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article unless the provision defining the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state. A separate offense is committed each day in which an offense occurs. An offense committed under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  Prosecution for an offense under subsection (a), [of this section] does not prevent the use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person charged with or the conduct involved in the offense. 
(Ord. No. 2001-094, § 2, 2-20-01)  
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE  
Chapter 28 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Building permits, use and occupancy certificates, § 10.10. 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 4; cable television generally, Ch. 8; fire prevention generally, Ch. 11; housing generally, Ch. 15; inspection and abatement warrants generally, § 19-86 et seq.; mixing concrete on paved streets, § 25-1; cleaning vehicles or equipment containing concrete streets, § 25-2; construction and building debris on streets, § 25-8; house numbering, § 25-9 et seq.; utilities generally, Ch. 26; fire prevention code, Ch. 29; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 30; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicles, Ch. 32; signs and advertising devices, Ch. 33. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-26. - Short title. 
This article may be known and cited as the Denton Building Code. 
(Code 1966, § 5-1)  
Sec. 28-27. - Adoption of the building code. 
The International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and available for public inspection, is hereby adopted and designated as the building code for other than 1 & 2 family dwellings for the city, the same as though the edition of such code were copied at length herein subject to the deletions and amendments enumerated in section 28-28. 
(Code 1966, § 5-2; Ord. No. 93-059, § I, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 97-053, § I, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 98-433, § I, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 2, 7-21-15 )  
Sec. 28-28. - Deletions and amendments. 
Amendments to the 2012 International Building Code 
(1)  Section 101.4; change to read as follows: 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.6 and referenced elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(2)  Section 101.4.7; add the following: 
101.4.7 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(3)  Section 103 amend to insert the Department Name as follows: 
SECTION 103 
Building Inspections Division of the City of Denton 
(4)  Section 103.1 changed to read as follows: 
Creation of enforcement agency. The Building Inspections Division of the City of Denton is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official. 
(5)  Section 105.2 under the sub-title entitled "Building" delete items 1, 2, 10 and 11 and re-number as follows: 
Building: 
1.  …provided the floor area does not exceed 120-square feet (11 m2). 
2.  Delete this exemption. 
3.  (Unchanged) 
4.  (Unchanged) 
5.  (Unchanged) 
6.  (Unchanged) 
7.  (Unchanged) 
8.  (Unchanged) 
9.  (Unchanged) 
10.  Delete this exemption. 
11.  (Unchanged) 
12.  (Unchanged) 
13.  (Unchanged) 
(6)  Section 109; add Section 109.7 to read as follows: 
109.7 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  City approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site. 
7.  Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before the final inspection is made on that job site. 
(7)  Section 109; add Section 109.8, 109.8.1, 109.8.2 and 109.9 to read as follows: 
109.8 Work without a permit. 
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law. 
109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required inspection in violation of Section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee schedule. This fee shall be in addition to any citations issued as a result of work being concealed without proper inspections. 
(8)  Section 110.3.5 is amended to delete the exception. 
(9)  Section 202; amend the following definitions as underlined and to read as follows: 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis centers 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
[F]FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories other than enclosed stairways, elevators, hoistways, escalators, plumbing, electrical, air-conditioning or other equipment, which is closed at the top and not defined as a mall. Stories, as used in this definition, do not include balconies within assembly groups or mezzanines that comply with Section 505. 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
(10)  Section 303.1.3; add a sentence to read as follows: 
303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy except when applying the assembly requirements of Chapter 10 and 11. 
(11)  Section 304.1; add the following to the list of occupancies: 
Fire stations 
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or fewer detainees 
(12)  Section 307.1; add the following sentence to Exception 4: 
4.  Cleaning establishments… {text unchanged} …with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 or both. See also IFC Chapter 12, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions. 
(13)  Section 310.1; amend second paragraph under R-3 as follows: 
Adult care and child care facilities with 5 or fewer unrelated persons that are within a single-family home are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code. 
(14)  Section 404.5 is amended to delete the exception. 
(15)  Section 406.3.2; add item 3 to read as follows: 
3.  A separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3048 mm). 
(16)  Section 406.8; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
This occupancy shall also excludes garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
(17)  Section 712.1.8. change item 5 to read as follows: 
5.  Is not open to a corridor in Group I and H occupancies. 
(18)  Section 713.14.1 Elevator Lobby. Exceptions: 4.3 change to read as follows: 
Elevators serving floor levels over 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access in high rise buildings. 
(19)  Chapter 9; change International Fire Code to replace with the 2012 International Fire Code as amended by the City of Denton, except for Sections 909 and 910. 
(20)  Section 910.1; change Exception 2 to read as follows: 
[F] 2. Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers, only manual smoke and heat vents shall be required within these areas. Automatic smoke and heat vents are prohibited. 
(21)  Section 910.2 where required to read as follows: 
[F] {Text unchanged} …Sections 910.2.1 through 910.2.4 
(22)  Add Section 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows: 
[F] 910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet (1394 m 2 ) in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
(23)  Add subsections 910.2.4 to read as follows: 
[F] 910.2.4 Exit access travel distance increase. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group F-1 or S-1 occupancy where the maximum exit access travel distance is increased in accordance with Section 1016.2.2. 
(24)  Table 910.3; Change the title of the first row of the table from "Group F-1 and S-1" to include "Group H" and to read as follows: 
Group H, F-1 and S-1 
(25)  Section 1007.1; add the following Exception 4: 
Exceptions: 
{previous exceptions unchanged} 
4.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1007. 
(26)  Section 1007.5; Platform lifts, amend to read as follows: 
1007.5 Platform lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts …required accessible route in Section 1109.8, Items 1 through 10. Standby power …{remainder unchanged} 
(27)  Section 1008.1; add the following paragraphs to read as follows: 
1008.1 Doors. 
(Previous text unchanged) 
Exterior door openings more than 30 inches from the top of the threshold to the surface or ground on the exterior side of the door, that are not part of a means of egress, shall be protected by an engineered guard designed for a live load equal to the occupancy served. 
The means of attachment of the guard to the structure shall be designed and stamped by a registered professional engineer. The design of the guard shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements of sections 1013.2 and 2308.12.7 of this code; otherwise the exterior operating door shall be fixed in a closed position with all operating hardware removed. 
(28)  Section 1008.1.4.4; add changes to read as follows: 
1008.1.4.4 Access-controlled egress doors. The entrance doors in a means of egress in buildings…{text unchanged}…R-1 and R-2 shall allow for free egress at all times without the use of keys, special knowledge, or effort. {delete rest of section}. 
(29)  Section 1008.1.9.4; amend exceptions 3 and 4 as follows: 
Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy. {Remainder unchanged} 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy. {Remainder unchanged} 
(30)  Section 1008.1.9.9; {Previous text unchanged}; Delete exceptions 4 & 5. {Remainder of section unchanged} 
(31)  Section 1008.1.9.3; Locks and Latches; add condition as follows: 
1008.1.9.3, Locks and latches. Locks and latches shall…{text unchanged}…any of the following exists: 
{text of conditions 1 through 3 unchanged} 
3.1  Where egress doors are used in pairs and positive latching is required, approved automatic flush bolts may be permitted, provided that both leaves achieve positive latching regardless of the closing sequence and the door leaf having the automatic flush bolts has no doorknobs or surface mounted hardware. {text of conditions 4 and 5 unchanged} 
(32)  Section 1008.1.9.9; change to read as follows: 
1008.1.9.9 Electromagnetically locked egress doors. Doors in the means of egress in buildings with an occupancy in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, M, R-1 or R-2 and doors to tenant spaces in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, M, R-1 or R-2 shall be permitted to be electromagnetically locked if equipped with listed hardware that incorporates a built-in switch and meet the requirements below: {remaining text unchanged} 
(33)  Section 1015; add new section 1015.7 to read as follows: 
1015.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the electrical code as adopted. 
(34)  Section 1016; add new section 1016.2.2 to read as follows: 
1016.2.2 Group F-1 and S-1 increase. The maximum exit access travel distance shall be 400 feet (122 m) in Group F-1 or S-1 occupancies where all of the following are met: 
1.  The portion of the building classified as Group F-1 or S-1 is limited to one story in height; 
2.  The minimum height from the finished floor to the bottom of the ceiling or roof slab or deck is 24 feet (7315 mm); and 
3.  The building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
(35)  Section 1018.1; add exception 6 to read as follows: 
{previous text unchanged} 
6.  In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings within single tenant spaces need not be of fire-resistive construction when the tenant space corridor is provided with system smoke detectors tied to an approved automatic fire alarm. The actuation of any detector shall activate alarms audible in all areas served by the corridor. 
(36)  Section 1026.6; amend exception 4 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: {Exceptions 1 through 3 unchanged} 
4.  Separation from the open-ended corridors of the building… {remaining text unchanged} 
(37)  Section 1028.1.1.1; delete. 
(38)  Section 1029.1; amend to read as follows: 
1029.1 General. In addition to the means of egress required by this chapter, provisions shall be made for emergency escape and rescue openings in Group R and I-1 occupancies. {Remainder unchanged} 
Exceptions: 
{Exceptions 1 through 3 unchanged.} 
4.  In other than Group R-3 occupancies, buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
(39)  Section 1101.2; add exception to read as follows: 
Exceptions: Projects registered with the Architectural Barriers Division of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(40)  Section 1203.1; amend to read as follows: 
1203.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with Section 1203.4, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with the International Mechanical Code. 
Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is 5 air changes or less per hour when tested with a blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section 402.4.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical means in accordance with Section 403 of the International Mechanical Code. 
(41)  Table 1505.1; delete footnote c and replace footnote b with the following: 
b.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of U occupancies having not more than 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area. When exceeding 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area, buildings of U occupancies may use non-rated non-combustible roof coverings. 
c.  [delete] 
(42)  Section 1505.7; delete the section. 
(43)  Section 1510.1; add a sentence to read as follows: 
1510.1 General. Materials and methods of applications used for recovering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15. All individual replacement shingles or shakes shall be in compliance with the rating required by Table 1505.1. 
{text of exception unchanged} 
(44)  Section 2901.1; add a sentence to read as follows: 
[P] 2901.1 Scope. {existing text to remain} The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of Chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Building Official shall determine which provision applies. 
(45)  Table 2902.1; change footnote f to read as follows: 
f.  Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments. 
(46)  Section 3006.1; change to read as follows: 
3006.1, General. Elevator machine rooms shall be provided. {Remainder unchanged} 
(47)  Section 3006.4; add a sentence to read as follows and delete exceptions 1 and 2: 
[F] 3006.5. Machine Rooms and Machinery Spaces: {text unchanged}… Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Provide approved signage at each entry door to the elevator machine room stating "Elevator Machinery—No Storage Allowed." 
(48)  Section 3109.1; change to read as follows: 
3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of sections 3109.2 through 3109.5 and other applicable sections of this code and comply with applicable state laws. 
(49)  Section 3401.5 Alternative Compliance. Work performed in accordance with the International Existing Building Code shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of this chapter with prior approval from the Building Official. 
(50)  Section 3401.6 Dangerous Conditions. {Remainder unchanged} 
(Code 1966, § 5-3; Ord. No. 89-076, §§ I—III, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 90-024, § I, 2-20-90; Ord. No. 90-161, § I, 10-16-90; Ord. No. 91-065, § I, 4-30-91; Ord. No. 91-194, §§ I, II, 12-17-91; Ord. No. 92-009, § I, 1-7-92; Ord. No. 93-059, § II, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 97-053, § II, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 98-269, §§ I—V, XI, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 98-433, § II, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 2, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 3, 7-21-15 )  
Sec. 28-29. - Issuance of building permit where flood hazard exists. 
A building permit shall be issued only after the building official has determined that the proposed building site is reasonably safe from flooding or, if a flood hazard exists, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement, including prefabricated and mobile homes, shall: 
(1)  Be designed or modified and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and 
(3)  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(Code 1966, § 5-4) 
Cross reference— Flood prevention and protection, Ch. 30.  
Sec. 28-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-30, which pertained to water capacity and derived from Ord. No. 91-065, § II, 4-30-91.  
Sec. 28-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-31, which pertained to violations and derived from Ord. No. 91-065, § III, 4-30-91.  
Sec. 28-32. - Exemptions from fees. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or the building code, the City of Denton and any other political subdivision or agency of the State of Texas or the United States Government shall be exempt from payment of any fees required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-269, § X, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 28-33. - Adoption of the residential code. 
The International Residential Code with Appendix G, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and available for public inspection, is hereby adopted and designated as the residential code for one- and two-family dwellings for the city, the same as though the edition of such code were copied at length herein subject to the deletions and amendments enumerated in section 28-34. 
(Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 4, 7-21-15 )  
Sec. 28-34. - Deletions and amendments. 
Amendments to the 2012 International Residential Code 
(1)  Section R101.1; insert as follows: 
R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Denton hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section R102.4; change to read as follows: 
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(3)  Section R105.2; make changes to this section as follows: 
R105.2 Work exempt from permits. 
No changes in first paragraph. 
Building: 
1.  …provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet... 
2.  Delete this exemption 
3.  No changes 
4.  No changes 
5.  No changes 
6.  No changes 
7.  No changes 
8.  No changes 
9.  No changes 
10.  Decks not exceeding 120 square feet in area... 
(4)  108.7 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  Approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site and/or, 
7.  Violations exist on the property including failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
8.  Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
(5)  Section R110 (R110.1 through R110.5); delete the section. 
(6)  Section R112.2.1 & R112.2.2; delete the sections. 
(7)  Section R202; change definition of "Townhouse" to read as follows: 
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. 
(8)  Table R301.2(1); fill in as follows: 
GROUND SNOW LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY f 
	SPEED d (mph) 	Topographic Effects k 	
5 lb/ft 2 	90 (3-sec-gust)/76 fastest mile 	No 	A 
 
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM 
Weathering a 	Frost line depth b 	Termite c 
moderate 	6" 	very heavy 
 
WINTER DESIGN TEMP e 	ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED h 	FLOOD HAZARDS g 	AIR FREEZING INDEX i 	MEAN ANNUAL TEMP j 
22°F 	No 	local code 	150 	64.9°F 
 
{No change to footnotes} 
(9)  Section R302.1; add exception #6 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: {previous exceptions unchanged} 
6.  Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within adopted ordinances. 
(10)  Section R302.2, Exception; change to read as follows: 
Exception: A common two-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly, or one-hour fire- resistance-rated wall assembly when equipped with a sprinkler system… {remainder unchanged} 
(11)  Section R302.2.4, Exception 5; change to read as follows: 
Exception: {previous exceptions unchanged} 
5.  Townhouses separated by a common fire-resistance-rated wall as provided in Section R302.2. 
(12)  Section R302.3; add Exception #3 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  {existing text unchanged} 
2.  {existing text unchanged} 
3.  Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated as required for townhouses. 
(13)  Section R302.5.1; change to read as follows: 
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. Delete remainder and add: 
Pull down ladders installed in the ceiling of an attached garage, where the garage attic is open to the attic of the house, shall have a minimum 20 minute fire rating or have an approved covering of fire retardant materials. 
(14)  Section R302.7; change to read as follows: 
R302.7 Under stair protection. Enclosed accessible space under stairs shall have walls, under stair surface and any soffits protected on the enclosed side with 5/8-inch (15.8 mm) fire-rated gypsum board or one-hour fire-resistive construction. 
(15)  R303.4 Mechanical Ventilation; change to read as follows: 
Every dwelling unit shall be provided with whole-house mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3. 
(16)  Section R315.3, amend and add exceptions as follows: 
Where required in existing dwellings. Where work requiring a permit for an addition or an alteration that occurs in existing dwellings, that have attached garages or in existing dwellings within which fuel-fired appliances exist, carbon monoxide alarms shall be provided in accordance with Section R315.1: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of roofing or siding, or the addition or replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck, are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
2.  Installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing or mechanical systems are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(17)  Section R401.2, amended by adding a new paragraph following the existing paragraph to read as follows: 
Section R401.2. Requirements. {existing text unchanged} … 
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer. 
Section R401.2.1. Engineered design. Every foundation and/or footing which exceeds 400 square feet in area, or any addition to an existing post tensioned foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer. 
(18)  Section 602.6.1; amend the following: 
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1½ inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1. {remainder unchanged} 
(19)  Figure R602.6.1; delete the figure and insert the following figure: 
 
(20)  Section R703.7.4.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to studs as follows: 
1.  When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in (737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or 
2.  When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in (483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in (254 mm) from the foundation. 
(21)  Reserved. 
(22)  Reserved. 
(23)  Section R902.1; amend and add exception #3 to read as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed. {remainder unchanged} 
Exceptions: 
1.  {text unchanged} 
2.  {text unchanged} 
3.  {text unchanged) 
4.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 SF, and there shall be a minimum of 6 feet between detached accessory structures and a residential dwelling unit. 
(24)  Sections N1101 through N1103 shall conform to the requirements of the 2012 International Energy Conservation Code as amended by the City of Denton. 
(25)  Section M1305.1.3; change to read as follows: 
M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided … {bulk of paragraph unchanged} … sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  (Delete) 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is unobstructed... {remaining text unchanged} 
(Add the following) 
Water heaters of any type shall not be installed within attics; with the exception of replacement of existing water heaters. 
(26)  Section M1411.3; change to read as follows: 
M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means of a direct or indirect drain unless otherwise approved by a building official... {remaining text unchanged} 
(27)  M1503.4 Makeup Air Required amend and add exception as follows: 
M1503.4 Makeup air required. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic feet per minute (0.19 m3/s) shall be provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet per minute. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with a means of closure and shall be automatically controlled to start and operate simultaneously with the exhaust system. 
Exception: Where all appliances in the house are of sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented, or electric, the exhaust hood system shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) without providing makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be provided with a makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 600 cubic feet per minute. 
(28)  Section M2005.2; change to read as follows: 
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required. Water heaters of any type shall not be installed within attics; with the exception of replacement of existing water heaters. 
(29)  Section G2408.3 (305.5); delete. 
(30)  Section G2415.2.1 (404.2.1); add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
½ to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
(31)  Section G2415.2.2 (404.2.2); add an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of ½" (18 EDH). 
(32)  Section G2415.7 Protection from physical damage. 
(Previous verbiage unchanged) 
(Add the following) 
CSST pipe shall not be installed within insulated exterior walls or within 12 inches of the connection between the top plate of an insulated exterior wall and roof rafters. 
(33)  Section G2415.12 (404.12); change to read as follows: 
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade, except as provided for in Section G2415.12.1. 
(34)  Section G2417.4; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. Gauges used to measure... {remainder unchanged} 
(35)  Section G2417.4.1; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Building Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diaphragm diameter of three and one half inches (3½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi 
For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (½ psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
(36)  Section G2417.4.2; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
(37)  Section G2420.1 (406.1); add Section G2420.1.4 to read as follows: 
G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
(38)  Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1); add text to read as follows: 
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve … {bulk of paragraph unchanged} … in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox. 
(39)  Section G2421.1 (410.1); add text and Exception to read as follows: 
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be … {bulk of paragraph unchanged} … approved for outdoor installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section M1305. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
(40)  Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3); delete Exception 1 and Exception 4. 
(41)  Section G2445.2 (621.2); add Exception to read as follows: 
(42)  Section G2445.2 (621.2); change to read as follows: 
Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Building Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas Code Section 108.7 of the Fuel Gas Code. 
(43)  Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1); change to read as follows: 
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code. Water heaters shall not be installed within attics. 
(44)  Section P2801.6; add Exception to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Electric Water Heater. 
(45)  Section P2903.7; change to read as follows: 
The minimum size water service pipe shall be 1 inch. (Remainder of section unchanged) 
(46)  Section P3005.2.1; add text to the end of this section to read as follows: 
G3005.2.1 Materials. {existing section with no changes} … All building cleanouts subject to vehicular damage shall be cast iron. 
(47)  Section P3005.2.6; change to read as follows: 
P3005.2.6 Upper Terminal. Each horizontal drain shall be provided with a cleanout at its upper terminal. 
Exception: Cleanouts may be omitted on a horizontal drain less than five (5) feet (1524 mm) in length unless such line is serving sinks or urinals. 
(48)  Section G3005.2.7; change to read as follows: 
P3005.2.7 Building drain and building sewer junction. There shall be a cleanout near … Back to back combination fittings shall be installed to serve as the required cleanouts for both the building drain and the building sewer, unless other fittings are approved by the Building Official. The cleanout at the … 
(49)  Section P3111; delete. 
(50)  Section P3112.2; delete and replace with the following: 
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drainboard height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (¼) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drainboard shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 
(51)  Chapters 34 through 43; delete. Except for additional amendment that follows, replace chapters 34 through and including chapter 43 of the International Residential Code with the National Electrical Code as amended and adopted. 
(52)  Section E3301.1; add amendment to read as follows: 
Electricians holding a State Electrical Apprentice license shall be directly supervised by an electrician holding a State Residential Wireman license. 
(53)  Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. Adopt as part of this code with the amendment as follows: 
Section AG105.2; changed to read as follows: 
AG105.2 Outdoor swimming pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with the following: 
1.  The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. 
(54)  Appendix H Patio Covers. Adopt as part of this code. 
(55)  Appendix J Existing Buildings and Structures. Adopt as part of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 3, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 5, 7-21-15 )  
Secs. 28-35—28-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section I of Ord. No. 99-098, adopted March 23, 1999, repealed §§ 28-41 and 28-42 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 28-41 and 28-42 pertained to the building code board and derived from § 5-3(1) of the 1966 Code. 
 
Secs. 28-41—28-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical utility service, § 26-76 et seq.; electrical distribution system in mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, § 32-88. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-61. - Adoption of electrical code. 
The 2011 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association, a copy of which shall be filed with the office of the city secretary and available for public inspection, is hereby adopted and designated as the electrical code of the city, the same as though that edition of such code were copied at length herein, subject to deletions and amendments enumerated in section 28-62. 
(Code 1966, § 9-1; Ord. No. 87-166, § I, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 90-109, § I, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 93-060, § I, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 97-069, § I, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 99-466, § 1, 12-7-99; Ord. No. 2006-039, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2012-227, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 28-62. - Deletions and amendments. 
The National Electrical Code adopted by section 28-61 is amended as follows: 
Amendments to the 2011 National Electrical Code 
(1)  Article 100, Part I; amend the following definition: 
Intersystem Bonding Termination. A device that provides a means for connecting bonding conductors for communication systems and other systems such as metallic gas piping systems to the grounding electrode system. 
(2)  Article 110.5; change the following to read as follows: 
110.5 Conductors. Conductors normally used to carry current shall be of copper, or may be of aluminum if 2 AGW or larger and may be used only for service panelboards or sub-panelboard service feeders. Where conductor material is not specified, the material and the size… (the rest of the paragraph as written.) 
(3)  Article 110.2; change the following to read as follows: 
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is field modified is subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Manufacturer's self-certification of any equipment shall not be used as a basis for approval by the AHJ. 
Informational Note: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3, Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed. 
(4)  Article 210.8(A)(1); change to read as follows: 
210.8(A)(1) Dwelling units. Bathroom, the Ground-Fault Circuit-Interruption device shall be located in the bathroom served. 
(5)  Article 230.2; add sentence to end of section to read as follows: 
230.2 Number of Services. {no changes to current section} … The height of the meter, measured from finish grade, shall be between a minimum height of 4 feet to a maximum of 6 feet measured to the center of the glass. 
(1)  Readily Accessible Location. The service disconnection means shall be installed at a readily accessible location on the outside of a building or structure nearest the service. 
(6)  Article 230.70(A)(1); change to read as follows: 
(1)  Readily Accessible Location. The service disconnection means shall be installed at a readily accessible location on the outside of a building or structure nearest the service. 
(7)  Article 240.91; delete the Article. 
(8)  Article 310.15(B)(7); change to read as follows: 
(7)  120/240-Volt, 3-Wire, Single-Phase Dwelling Services and Feeders. For dwelling units, conductors, as listed in Table 310.15(B)(7), shall be… {text unchanged} …provided the requirements of 215.2, 220.61, and 230.42 are met. This Article shall not be used in conjunction with 220.82. 
(9)  Article 500.8(A)(3); change to read as follows: 
500.8 Equipment. Articles 500 through 504 require equipment construction and installation standards that ensure safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to installation and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 2: Since there is no consistent relationship between explosion properties and ignition temperature, the two are independent requirements. 
Informational Note No. 3: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Explosion proof or dust-ignition proof equipment may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -25°C (-13°F) unless they are identified for low-temperature service. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified as Class I, Division 1 at normal ambient temperature. 
(A)  Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by one of the following: 
(1)  Equipment listing or labeling. 
(2)  Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory or inspection agency concerned with product evaluation. 
(3)  Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's self-evaluation or an engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified Licensed Professional Engineer. 
Informational Note: Additional documentation for equipment may include certificates demonstrating compliance with applicable equipment standards, indicating special conditions of use, and other pertinent information. Guidelines for certificates may be found in ANSI/ISA 12.00.02, Certificate Standard for AEx Equipment for Hazardous (Classified) Locations. 
(10)  Article 505.7(A) changed to read as follows: 
505.7 Special Precaution. Article 505 requires equipment construction and installation that ensures safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in hazardous (classified) locations. 
Informational Note No. 2: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Electrical equipment depending on the protection techniques described by 505.8(A) may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -20°C (-4°F) unless they are identified for use at lower temperatures. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified Class I, Zones 0, 1, or 2 at normal ambient temperature. 
(A)  Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and design, selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be performed by a qualified Licensed Professional Engineer. 
(11)  Article 680.25(A) changed to read as follows: 
680.25 Feeders. These provisions shall apply to any feeder on the supply side of panelboards supplying branch circuits for pool equipment covered in Part II of this article and on the load side of the service equipment or the source of a separately derived system. 
(A)  Wiring Methods. 
(1)  Feeders. Feeders shall be installed in rigid metal conduit or intermediate metal conduit. The following wiring methods shall be permitted if not subject to physical damage: 
(1)  Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit. 
(2)  Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit. 
(3)  Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit. 
(4)  Electrical metallic tubing where installed on or within a building. 
(5)  Electrical nonmetallic tubing where installed within a building. 
(6)  Type MC cable where installed within a building and if not subject to corrosive environment. 
(7)  Nonmetallic-sheathed cable. 
(8)  Type SE cable. 
Exception: An existing feeder between an existing remote panelboard and service equipment shall be permitted to run in flexible metal conduit or an approved cable assembly that includes an equipment grounding conductor within its outer sheath. The equipment grounding conductor shall comply with 250.24(A)(5). 
(Code 1966, § 9-1; Ord. No. 87-166, § I, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 90-109, § I, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 97-069, § II, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 99-466, § 2, 12-7-99; Ord. No. 2006-039, § 2, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2012-227, § 2, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 28-63. - Minimum standards of work. 
(a)  In all new work or revisions of old work, new knob and tube wiring systems shall not be used for interior wiring in the city. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  All exterior wiring shall be in approved raceway except that underground residential 120-volt, 20-ampere ground-fault circuit-interrupter protected circuits and circuits for control of irrigation and landscape lighting limited to not more than 30 volts may be installed with Type UF or other approved cable or raceway. 
(d)  Aluminum wire and copper-clad aluminum wire smaller than No. 2 AWG shall be prohibited. Aluminum wire and copper-clad aluminum wire No. 2 AWG and larger may be used only with approved connectors and terminals. 
(e)  Service lateral conductors shall not be installed in conduits smaller than two (2) inches when serving permanent one- and two-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings. 
(Code 1966, § 9-6; Ord. No. 87-166, § II, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 90-109, § II, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 93-060, § II, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 95-071, § I, 4-11-95)  
Sec. 28-64. - Authority to suspend service for noncompliance. 
If the electrical inspector determines that any inspected wiring, installation, repair or alteration does not comply in every respect with the provisions of this article, or that any such work is done or supervised by a person who is not a holder of a current master electrician's license, it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to immediately notify the executive director of utilities of such fact in writing. Upon such written notice being given, it shall be unlawful for any person or any employee of the city to connect any part of such wiring, installation, repair or alteration with any electric power line operated or used by the city. If such connection has been previously made, the executive director of utilities shall cause the connection to be disconnected, and no connection or reconnection shall be made until all violations have been corrected to the satisfaction of the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3)  
Sec. 28-65. - Hazardous wiring or conditions endangering public safety. 
If the electrical inspector discovers any electric apparatus, device, wire or condition which is constructed or maintained so as to constitute a hazard to the public safety, he shall immediately notify the executive director of utilities who shall cause electrical service to be discontinued to the affected installation, room, building, premises or area until the condition has been corrected. 
(Code 1966, § 9-2)  
Sec. 28-66. - Liability. 
No provision of this article shall be construed so as to lessen the liability of any person installing, changing, altering or repairing any electrical wiring or apparatus or causing such to be done for damages to anyone injured thereby, nor shall the city be held to assume any liability by reason of the inspections authorized in this article or any certificate or license issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 9-4)  
Sec. 28-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-67, which pertained to concealed wiring and derived from § 9-5 of the 1966 Code.  
Secs. 28-68—28-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Inspection and abatement warrants generally, § 19-86 et seq.; electrical inspector of underground utilities, § 26-92 et seq. 
 
Sec. 28-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-81, which pertained to office created; qualifications and derived from § 9-17 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 96-192, § I, 9-17-96.  
Sec. 28-82. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to enforce the provisions of this article and to keep a record of all electrical wiring and apparatus inspected by him. 
(Code 1966, § 9-17; Ord. No. 96-192, § I, 9-17-96; Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, 5-11-10)  
Secs. 28-83—28-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed §§ 28-96, 28-97, which pertained to National Electrical Safety Code and derived from Ord. No. 2004-125, §§ 2, 3, 4-20-04. 
 
Secs. 28-96—28-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LICENSES, PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
 
Secs. 28-111—28-119. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed §§ 28-111—28-119, which pertained to licenses—required, examination, fees, issuance, term, revocation, recognition of licenses or certificates of registration from other cities, contractor's license, chief electrician for businesses, vehicle identification and derived from §§ 9-29—9-36 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 96-192, § II, 9-17-96; Ord. No. 2002-309, § 1, 9-17-02.  
Sec. 28-120. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, change, alter or repair any electric wiring or apparatus in the city, except the routine replacement of fuses and lamps and the alleviation of short circuits, unless such person has obtained a permit in writing from the chief building official to perform such work; provided, however, that only a building permit shall be required for the construction of new one- and two-family dwellings of four thousand five hundred ninety-nine (4,599) square feet or less in floor area and new multifamily complexes. Electrical permits shall be issued only to holders of a valid city electrical contractor's license. 
(Code 1966, § 9-46; Ord. No. 89-077, § I, 6-20-89)  
Sec. 28-121. - Inspection fees. 
The applicant shall submit the applicable electrical inspection fees as set by city council by separate ordinance before the issuance of any permit required by this division. The fee schedule shall be available for public inspection at the offices of the building official and the city secretary. 
(Code 1966, § 9-47; Ord. No. 89-077, § II, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 91-189, § I, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 93-060, § III, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 98-269, § VI, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 28-122. - Certificate of inspection. 
Whenever the electrical inspector has inspected and approved any electrical installation, he shall issue a certificate of satisfactory inspection. 
(Code 1966, § 9-48)  
Sec. 28-123. - Adoption of the fuel gas code. 
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition as published by the International Code Council, a copy which shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and available for public inspection, is hereby adopted and designated as the fuel gas code for the city, the same as though the edition of such code were copied at length herein subject to the deletions and amendments enumerated in section 28-124. 
(Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 6, 7-21-15 )  
Sec. 28-124. - Deletions and amendments. 
Amendments to the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code 
(1)  Section 102.2; add an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with Section 621.2. 
(2)  Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(3)  Section 304.10; change to read as follows: 
304.10 Louvers and grilles. The required size of openings for combustion, ventilation and dilution air shall be based on the net free area of each opening. Where the free area through a design of louver, grille or screen is known, it shall be used in calculating the size opening required to provide the free area specified. Where the design and free area of louvers and grilles are not known, it shall be assumed that wood louvers will have 25-percent free area and metal louvers and grilles will have 50-percent free area. Screens shall have a mesh size not smaller than ¼ inch (6.4 mm). Nonmotorized louvers and grilles shall be fixed in the open position. Motorized louvers shall be interlocked with the appliance so that they are proven to be in the full open position prior to main burner ignition and during main burner operation. Means shall be provided to prevent the main burner from igniting if the louvers fail to open during burner start-up and to shut down the main burner if the louvers close during operation. 
(4)  Section 304.11; change #8 to read as follows: 
304.11 Combustion air ducts. Combustion air ducts shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  Ducts shall be constructed of galvanized steel complying with Chapter 6 of the International Mechanical Code or of a material having equivalent corrosion resistance, strength and rigidity. 
Exception: Within dwellings units, unobstructed stud and joist spaces shall not be prohibited from conveying combustion air, provided that not more than one required fireblock is removed. 
2.  Ducts shall terminate in an unobstructed space allowing free movement of combustion air to the appliances. 
3.  Ducts shall serve a single enclosure. 
4.  Ducts shall not serve both upper and lower combustion air openings where both such openings are used. The separation between ducts serving upper and lower combustion air openings shall be maintained to the source of combustion air. 
5.  Ducts shall not be screened where terminating in an attic space. 
6.  Horizontal upper combustion air ducts shall not slope downward toward the source of combustion air. 
7.  The remaining space surrounding a chimney liner, gas vent, special gas vent or plastic piping installed within a masonry, metal or factory-built chimney shall not be used to supply combustion air. 
Exception: Direct-vent gas-fired appliances designed for installation in a solid fuel-burning fireplace where installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
8.  Combustion air intake openings located on the exterior of a building shall have the lowest side of such openings located not less than 12 inches (305 mm) vertically from the adjoining ground level or the manufacturer's recommendation, whichever is more restrictive. 
(5)  Section 306.3; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided … {bulk of paragraph unchanged} … side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one or more of the following are required: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  (Delete) 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is not less than … {bulk of section to read the same}. 
Water heaters shall not be installed within attics. 
(6)  Section 306; add Section 306.7 with exception and subsection 306.7.1 to read as follows: 
306.7 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. Water heaters shall not be installed within attics. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger when approved by the code official) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
306.7.1. Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with Section 306.3.1. 
(7)  Section 401.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
½ to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
(8)  Section 402.3; add an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of ½" (18 EHD). 
(9)  Section 404.2; add a sentence to read as follows: 
… CSST pipe shall not be installed within insulated exterior walls or within 12 inches of the connection between the top plate of an insulated exterior wall and roof rafters. 
(10)  Section 404.12; change to read as follows: 
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (458 mm) top of pipe below grade. 
(11)  Section 406.1; change to read as follows: 
406.1 General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the code official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
(12)  Section 406.4; change to read as follows: 
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
(13)  Section 406.4.1; change to read as follows: 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge, For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (3½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (½ psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
(14)  Section 406.4.2; change to read as follows: 
406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. (Delete remainder of section.) 
(15)  Section 409.1; add Section 409.1.4 to read as follows: 
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
(16)  Section 410.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as follows: 
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section 306. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
(17)  Section 621.2; add exception as follows: 
621.2 Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Code Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in Section 108.7. 
(18)  Section 624.1.1; change to read as follows: 
624.1.1 Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-31, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 4, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 7, 7-21-15 )  
Secs. 28-125—28-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Gas utility connections, § 26-36; water and sewer utility service generally, § 26-126 et seq.; water supply and sewage disposal systems in mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, §§ 32-86, 32-87. 
State Law reference— Plumbing, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-141. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the Denton Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1966, § 17-1)  
Sec. 28-142. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-142, which pertained to purpose, intent and scope and derived from § 17-3 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 28-143. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-143, which pertained to applicability and derived from § 17-4 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 28-144. - Adoption of the plumbing code. 
The International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition as published by the International Code Council, a copy which shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and available for public inspection, is hereby adopted and designated as the plumbing code for the city, the same as though the edition of such code were copied at length herein subject to the deletions and amendments enumerated in section 28-145. 
(Code 1966, § 17-2(a); Ord. No. 99-119, § I, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 8, 7-21-15 )  
Sec. 28-145. - Deletions and amendments. 
Amendments to the 2012 International Plumbing Code 
(1)  Table of Contents, Chapter 7, Section 714; change to read as follows: 
714 Engineered Drainage Design .....67 
(2)  Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 13 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(3)  Sections 106.6.2 and 106.6.3; change to read as follows: 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by resolution of the governing body of the jurisdiction. 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees. {Delete balance of section} 
(4)  Section 109; Delete entire section and insert the following: 
SECTION 109 
MEANS OF APPEAL 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) established by ordinance. The ZBA shall be governed by the applicable provisions of the Texas Local Government Code and local ordinance. 
(5)  Section 305.6.1; change to read as follows: 
305.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
(6)  Section 305.9; change to read as follows: 
305.9 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which they would be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner. 
(7)  Section 314.2.1; change to read as follows: 
314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. … {text unchanged} … Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance. 
(8)  Section 314.2.2; change to read as follows: 
314.2.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate disposal system shall be cast iron, galvanized steel, copper, cross-linked polyethylene, polyethylene, ABS, CPVC, or schedule 80 PVC pipe or tubing when exposed to ultra violet light. All components shall be selected for the pressure, temperature and exposure rating of the installation. Joints and connections shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7 relative to the material type. Condensate waste and drain line size shall not be less than ¾-inch (19 mm) internal diameter and shall not decrease in size from the drain pan connection to the place of condensate disposal. Where the drain pipes from more than one unit are manifolded together for condensate drainage, the pipe or tubing shall be sized in accordance with Table 314.2.2. 
(9)  Section 401.1; add a sentence to read as follows: 
401.1 Scope. This chapter shall govern the materials, design and installation of plumbing fixtures, faucets and fixture fittings in accordance with the type of occupancy, and shall provide for the minimum number of fixtures for various types of occupancies. The provisions of this Chapter coordinate with the provisions of the Building Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Code Official shall determine which provision applies. 
(10)  Section 405.6; delete. 
(11)  Section 409.2; change to read as follows: 
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. 
(12)  Section 410.1; change to read as follows: 
410.1 Approval. {existing text unchanged} … In other occupancies, where drinking fountains are required, water coolers or bottled water dispensers shall be permitted to be substituted for all required drinking fountains. Drinking water shall be provided at no cost. 
(13)  Section 412.4; change to read as follows: 
412.4 Required location. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas. 
1.  In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter. 
2.  Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may accept floor sinks. 
3.  Public restrooms. 
(14)  Section 419.3; change to read as follows: 
419.3 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal lip and 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be waterproofed with a smooth, readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material. 
(15)  Section 502.6; Add Section 502.6 to read as follows: 
502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Water heaters of any type shall not be installed within attics; with the exception of replacement of existing water heaters. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
502.6.1 Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with Section 502.1. 
(16)  Section 504.6; change to read as follows: 
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. Where discharging to the outdoors in areas subject to freezing, discharge piping shall be first piped to an indirect waste receptor through an air gap located in a conditioned area. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
10.  Not terminate less than 6 inches or more than 24 inches (152 mm) above grade nor more than 6 inches above the waste receptor. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of CPVC, Copper, Ductile iron, Galvanized steel, or Stainless steel. 
(17)  Section 604.4; add Section 604.4.1 to read as follows: 
604.4.1 State maximum flow rate. Where the State mandated maximum flow rate is more restrictive than those of this section, the State flow rate shall take precedence. 
(18)  Section 604.8; add Section 604.8.3 to read as follows: 
604.8.3 Thermal expansion control. An expansion tank or approved device shall be installed for the water heater with the addition of a pressure reducing valve or regulator creating a closed system. 
(19)  Section 606.1; delete items #3, #4, and #5. 
(20)  Section 606.2; change to read as follows: 
606.2 Location of shutoff valves. Shutoff valves shall be installed in the following locations: 
1.  On the fixture supply to each plumbing fixture other than bathtubs and showers in one- and two-family residential occupancies, and other than in individual sleeping units that are provided with unit shutoff valves in hotels, motels, boarding houses and similar occupancies. 
2.  On the water supply pipe to each appliance or mechanical equipment. 
(21)  Section 608.1; change to read as follows: 
608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, Table 608.1, and as specifically stated in Sections 608.2 through 608.16.10. 
(22)  Section 608.17; change to read as follows: 
608.17 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with Sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8. 
(23)  Section 610.1; add exception to read as follows: 
610.1 General. New or repaired potable water systems shall be purged of deleterious matter and disinfected prior to utilization. The method to be followed shall be that prescribed by the health authority or water purveyor having jurisdiction or, in the absence of a prescribed method, the procedure described in either AWWA C651 or AWWA C652, or as described in this section. This requirement shall apply to "on-site" or "inplant" fabrication of a system or to a modular portion of a system. 
1.  The pipe system shall be flushed with clean, potable water until dirty water does not appear at the points of outlet. 
2.  The system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least 50 parts per million (50 mg/L) of chlorine, and the system or part thereof shall be valved off and allowed to stand for 24 hours; or the system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least 200 parts per million (200 mg/L) of chlorine and allowed to stand for 3 hours. 
3.  Following the required standing time, the system shall be flushed with clean potable water until the chlorine is purged from the system. 
4.  The procedure shall be repeated where shown by a bacteriological examination that contamination remains present in the system. 
Exception: With prior approval the Code Official may wave this requirement when deemed un-necessary. 
(24)  Section 708.3.5 and 708.3.7; add new sections to read as follows: 
708.3.5 Building drain and building sewer junction. {Existing section with no changes} … All building cleanouts subject to vehicular damage shall be cast iron. 
708.3.7 Materials. All building cleanouts subject to vehicular damage shall be cast iron. 
(25)  Section 712; change to read as follows: 
712.3.3.1 Materials. Pipe and fitting materials shall be constructed of brass, copper, CPVC, ductile iron, stainless steel, galvanized iron, PE, or PVC. 
(26)  Section 712.5; add Section 712.5 to read as follows: 
712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any "public use" occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see Section 1113. 
(27)  Section 714, 714.1; change to read as follows: 
SECTION 714
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN
714.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be permitted to be designed by approved design methods. 
(28)  Section 802.4; add a sentence to the end of the paragraph to read as follows: 
802.4 Standpipes. Standpipes shall be … {text unchanged} ...drains for rodding. No standpipe shall be installed below the ground. 
(29)  Section 903.1; change to read as follows: 
903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least six (6) inches (152 mm) above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof. 
(30)  Section 1002.10; delete. 
(31)  Section 1003.1; added to read as follows: 
1003.1 Minimum construction standards for food service establishments are required when: 
1.  A new building with a food service establishment is constructed and occupied; 
2.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a new food service establishment in an existing structure which has not been previously used as a food service establishment within the last six (6) months, or has been used as a food service establishment without an adequately sized grease interceptor; or 
3.  When a change to a more restrictive class of food service establishment occurs. 
Heavy Food Preparation: shall mean any area in which foods are prepared utilizing a grill, griddle, deep-fat fryer, commercial type ovens, and/or any similar food preparation equipment; or any area subject to flooding type of wet cleaning procedures due to the cutting or processing of meat, poultry, fish or pork. Heavy food preparation includes but is not limited to: cafeterias, fast food restaurant, full service restaurants, pizza preparation, donut preparation, and meat and fish markets, etc. either a minimum 750-gallon grease interceptor is required for heavy food preparation establishments with *seating capacity for 50 or more; or a minimum 250-gallon grease interceptor is required for heavy food preparation establishments with a *seating capacity for less than 50 or take-out food service establishments; or the minimum size shall be established by the currently adopted International Plumbing Code; whichever is more stringent. 
Light Food Preparation: shall mean any area in which foods are prepared exclusive of the use of fryers, grills or similar equipment. Light food preparation is usually limited to the preparation of hot dogs, sandwiches, salads or other similar foods and fountain-type cold drinks. Light food preparation includes, but is not limited to, sandwich shops, limited menu concession stands, etc. Either a minimum 250-gallon grease interceptor is required for light food preparation establishments with *seating capacity for 50 or more; or a minimum 20 gpm flow-through rating or 40-pound retention capacity grease trap is required for light food preparation establishments with a *seating capacity for less than 50 or take-out food service establishments; or the minimum size shall be established by the currently adopted International Plumbing Code; whichever is more stringent. 
No Food Preparation: shall mean any area in which foods are provided pre-wrapped, from an approved source, with microwave oven type heating being the maximum handling involved. No food preparation is limited to pre-packaged sandwiches or similar foods, candies and containerized beverages. A grease interceptor is not required for "no food preparation" establishments. 
Food service establishments shall not share grease interceptors unless specifically authorized by the Building Official. 
*Seating Capacity is measured using Section 1004.7 Fixed Seating and Table 1004.1.1 Maximum Floor Area Allowances per Occupant found in the currently adopted version of the International Building Code. 
(32)  Section 1106.1; change to read as follows: 
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour rainfall rate. 
(33)  Section 1107.3; change to read as follows: 
1107.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1106. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system. 
(34)  Section 1202.1; delete Exception 2. 
(Code 1966, § 17-2(a); Ord. No. 87-218, § I, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 88-095, § I, 6-7-88; Ord. No. 92-147, § I, 9-18-92; Ord. No. 99-119, § II, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 5, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 9, 7-21-15 )  
Secs. 28-146—28-149. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed §§ 28-146—28-149, which pertained to compliance; violations; administrative authority; installation regulations; dangerous and unsanitary construction and derived from §§ 17-2(b), 17-5, 17-11, 17-12 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 87-218, § I, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 88-095, § I, 6-7-88.  
Sec. 28-150. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, and, upon conviction for any violation, such person shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(b)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit or an approval of any violation of any provision of this article. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel any provision of this article shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the plumbing inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of error in the plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this article or of any other ordinance or from revoking any certificate of approval when issued in error. 
(Code 1966, § 17-13)  
Secs. 28-151—28-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBING INSPECTOR 
 
Sec. 28-166. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-166, which pertained to qualifications and derived from § 17-6 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 28-167. - Conflict of interest. 
It shall be unlawful for the person performing plumbing inspections to engage in the business of selling, installing or maintaining plumbing fixtures, devices, services, equipment or materials, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business at any time while in the employ of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 17-8) 
Charter reference— Personal interest of officers or employees, § 14.04.  
Sec. 28-168. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-168, which pertained to duties and derived from § 17-7 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 28-169. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-169, which pertained to tags and seals and derived from § 17-16 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 28-170. - Authority for enforcement. 
(a)  The plumbing inspector shall have the authority to issue citations to any person who violates any provision of this article. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon being issued a citation to intentionally or knowingly give the plumbing inspector other than his true name and address. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally or knowingly fail to appear in accordance with the terms of a citation issued by the plumbing inspector. 
(b)  With the approval of the building official and upon advice of the city attorney, a plumbing inspector may call upon the police department for aid and assistance in stopping the work or arresting persons who violate any provisions of this article, and if proper cause exists it shall be the duty of the police department to make such arrests and render such aid and assistance promptly. 
(c)  A plumbing inspector, upon presentation of proper credentials during usual business hours, shall have the right to enter any building or premises of public accommodation in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test required by this article, subject to prevailing law. 
(d)  Each plumbing inspector shall have the authorization to: 
(1)  Inspect and reinspect plumbing; 
(2)  Prevent the connection of plumbing to city mains and sewers; 
(3)  Prevent the covering up of plumbing which has not been approved; 
(4)  Issue notices or affix them to plumbing or structures; 
(5)  Condemn plumbing; 
and shall have such other powers as are provided in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 17-10)  
Sec. 28-171. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-171, which pertained to liability of inspectors and derived from § 17-9 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 28-172. - Appeals from decisions of inspectors. 
Any person aggrieved by and interpretation of this article or by any ruling or decision by a plumbing inspector may within five (5) days file with the building official a petition in writing requesting a review of the plumbing inspector's decision. The building official shall personally determine the facts, and, within a reasonable period thereafter, he shall make a ruling in accordance with his findings. His ruling shall be final and binding on all parties, provided, however, that appeal may be taken to the construction advisory and appeal board as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 17-14; Ord. No. 99-098, § III, 3-23-99)  
Secs. 28-173—28-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Section I of Ord. No. 99-098, adopted March 23, 1999, repealed §§ 28-186—28-190 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 28-186—28-190 pertained to the plumbing and mechanical board and derived from §§ 17-15, 17-26—17-29(a)—(c)(7) and (8) of the 1966 Code. 
 
Secs. 28-186—28-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 28-206. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, remove, alter, repair or replace any plumbing, gas or drainage piping work or any fixture or water heating or treating equipment in a building or premises, swimming pool, lawn sprinkling system or installation where cross connection might occur, without first obtaining a permit to do such work. 
(b)  A separate plumbing permit shall be obtained for each building or structure, except that only a building permit shall be required for each new one- and two-family dwelling of four thousand five hundred ninety-nine (4,599) square feet or less in floor area and for each new multifamily complex. 
(c)  No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured under this division except persons in his employ. 
(Code 1966, § 17-17; Ord. No. 89-079, § I, 6-20-89)  
Sec. 28-207. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-207, which pertained to work not requiring permit and derived from § 17-18 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 28-208. - Persons to whom permits may be issued. 
Plumbing permits may be issued to the following: 
(1)  Any master plumber currently licensed by the state board of plumbing examiners, registered with the city as a contractor or in the employ of a registered plumbing contractor; 
(2)  A homeowner to make repairs or modifications to a single-family dwelling owned and occupied by him as his home and when all materials are purchased by him and all labor performed by him or by a person not employed as a plumber for the general public; 
(3)  Any appliance dealer or employee of an appliance dealer who is acting as an appliance installation man or appliance service man in connecting appliances to existing piping properly installed to service an appliance; 
(4)  Any maintenance man or maintenance engineer for work incidental to and in connection with the business in which he is employed and who does not engage in the occupation of plumbing for the general public. 
(Code 1966, § 17-19)  
Sec. 28-209. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-209, which pertained to application and derived from § 17-21 of the 1966 Code.  
Sec. 28-210. - Fees. 
(a)  Every applicant for a permit to do work regulated by this article shall state in writing, on the application form provided for that purpose, the character of work proposed to be done and the amount and kind in connection therewith, together with such information pertinent thereto as may be required. 
(b)  Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this article without first having obtained a permit therefor shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by this section for such work; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the plumbing inspector that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor before the commencement of the work. In all such cases a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there is an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee as provided in this subsection shall be charged. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, a sanitary plumbing outlet on or to which a plumbing fixture or appliance may be set or attached shall be construed to be a fixture. The fee for reconnection of existing plumbing fixtures, gas systems, water heaters, etc., which require testing shall be the same as indicated in the plumbing fee schedule. 
(d)  When interceptor traps or manufactured housing or mobile home site traps are installed at the same time as a building sewer on any lot, no sewer permit shall be required for the connection of any such trap to an appropriate inlet fitting provided in the building sewer by the permittee constructing such sewer. 
(e)  When a permit has been obtained to connect an existing building or existing work to the public sewer or to connect a new private disposal facility, backfilling of private sewage disposal facilities abandoned consequent to such connection is included in the building sewer permit. 
(f)  The applicant shall pay for each permit issued, at the time of issuance, a plumbing permit fee as set by city council by ordinance and the fee schedule shall be available for public inspection at the offices of the building official and the city secretary. 
(g)  The fee schedule in subsection (f) of this section shall not apply to the construction of the following: 
(1)  New one- and two-family dwellings of four thousand five hundred ninety-nine (4,599) square feet or less in floor area; and 
(2)  New multifamily complexes. 
(Code 1966, § 17-22; Ord. No. 89-079, § II, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 91-189, § II, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 98-269, § VII, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 28-211. - Notice for inspections. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit required by this division to notify the plumbing inspector orally or in writing that the work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the work is to be inspected. Inspections shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours, Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to make sure that the work will stand the tests prescribed in this article before giving the notification provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 17-20)  
Sec. 28-212. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 28-212, which pertained to time limitations and derived from § 17-13 of the 1966 Code.  
Secs. 28-213—28-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed §§ 28-231—28-233, which pertained to alternate types of materials or construction and derived from §§ 17-23—17-25 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 99-098, § IV, 3-23-99. 
 
Secs. 28-231—28-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Gas utility connections, § 26-36. 
 
Sec. 28-251. - Adoption of the mechanical code. 
The International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition as published by the International Code Council, a copy which shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and available for public inspection, is hereby adopted and designated as the mechanical code for the city, the same as though the edition of such code were copied at length herein subject to the deletions and amendments enumerated in section 28-252. 
(Code 1966, § 13½-1; Ord. No. 89-142, § I, 10-17-89; Ord. No. 96-160, § I, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 99-120, § I, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 10, 7-21-15 )  
Sec. 28-252. - Deletions and amendments. 
Amendments to the 2012 International Mechanical Code 
(1)  Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(2)  Section 306.3; change to read as follows: 
306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided … {bulk of paragraph unchanged} … side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  (Delete) 
Water heaters of any type shall not be installed within attics; with the exception of replacement of existing water heaters. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed... {remainder of section unchanged} 
(3)  Section 306; add Section 306.6 to read as follows: 
306.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
306.6.1 Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with Section 306.3.1. 
(4)  Section 307.2.3; amend item 2 to read as follows: 
2.  A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment. Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance. 
(Code 1966, § 13½-2; Ord. No. 89-142, § I, 10-17-89; Ord. No. 96-160, § II, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 98-269, § VIII, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 99-120, § II, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-038, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-031, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-226, § 6, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-199, § 11, 7-21-15 )  
ARTICLE V.5. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 28-253. - Adoption of the energy conservation code. 
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted and designated as the energy conservation code for the city subject to the deletions and amendments enumerated in section 28-254. A copy of this code shall be maintained in the office of the city secretary and be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-040, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-032, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2010-112, § 1, 5-4-10; Ord. No. 2014-095, § 1, 4-1-14; Ord. No. 2016-298 , § 1, 9-20-16)  
Sec. 28-254. - Amendments to the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code. 
(1)  Section C102/R102; add Section C102.1.2 and R102.1.2 to read as follows: 
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. 
R102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in Sections R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively. 
(2)  Section C202 and R202; add the following definition: 
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device. 
(3)  Section R202; add the following definition: 
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT). 
(4)  Section R402.3.2 Glazed fenestration SHGC; amend by adding a paragraph and table following the exception to read as follows: 
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections. 
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections* 
Projection Factor 	SHGC Multiplier (all Other Orientation) 	SHGC Multiplier (North Oriented) 
0—0.10 	1.00 	1.00 
>>0.10—0.20 	0.91 	0.95 
>0.20—0.30 	0.82 	0.91 
>0.30—0.40 	0.74 	0.87 
>0.40—0.50 	0.67 	0.84 
>0.50—0.60 	0.61 	0.81 
>0.60—0.70 	0.56 	0.78 
>0.70—0.80 	0.51 	0.76 
>0.80—0.90 	0.47 	0.75 
>0.90—1.00 	0.44 	0.73 
 
*North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north. 
(5)  Section R402.4.1.2 Testing; Add a last paragraph to read as follows: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
(6)  Section R402.4.1.2; add the following exception. 
Structures meeting limitations 1. thru 5. below as well as all of the requirements under Option 1 or Option 2 of table 402.4.1 shall be deemed to be in compliance with this code. 
1.  Limited to one- and two-family residences with a conditioned floor area between 1,000 and 6,000 square feet. 
2.  Limited to one- and two-family residences containing between 2 to 6 bedrooms. 
3.  Assumes all ductwork and mechanical equipment is located in the unconditioned attic. 
4.  Assumes typical wood framing in the walls and roof. 
5.  Assumes one of the following heating/cooling systems: 
a.  All electric system with a heat pump for heating, or 
b.  A system with electric cooling and natural gas heating. 
(Note: Electric resistance strip heating does not qualify for this tradeoff.) 
Table 402.4.1 
Envelope Component 	Option #1 	Option #2 
R402.4 Air Leakage 	=4ACH 50 	=4ACH 50 
Wall Insulation R-value 	R13+R3 b 	R13+R3 b 
Fenestration U-factor 	=0.32 	=0.32 
Fenestration SHGC 	=0.25 	=0.25 
Ceiling R-value 	=R49 	=R49 
Duct Insulation R-value 	R8 	R6 
Radiant Barrier Required 	No 	Yes 
 
a Except for the values listed in the table, all other mandatory code provisions are applicable. 
b The first value listed is the R-value of cavity insulation, the second value is the R-value of the continuous insulation or insulated siding. 
(7)  R403.3.3 Duct Testing (Mandatory); Add a last paragraph to read as follows: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing leakage testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
(8)  Section C402.2.7/R402.2; Add Section C402.2.9 and R402.2.14 to read as follows: 
Section C402.2.7/R402.2.14 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, or other equivalent material approved by the building official. 
(9)  Section R405.4.2.1 add the following: 
5.  Name, phone number, and certification number of the individual completing the compliance report. The preparer of the compliance report shall possess one of the following certifications: ICC (International Code Council) Commercial Energy Plans Examiner, ICC (International Code Council) Residential Energy Inspector/Plans Examiner, HERS (Home Energy Rating) rater, or may be a Texas Registered Architect or Texas Licensed Professional Engineer. 
(10)  Section R405.4.2.2 add the following: 
4.  (Remainder unchanged) … attached to a City of Denton Energy Compliance form. 
(11)  Section R405.6.2; add the following sentence to the end of paragraph: 
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate™, Energy Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official. 
(12)  TABLE R406.4 MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX; amend to read as follows: 
TABLE R406.41 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	65 
 
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019. 
TABLE R406.42 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	63 
 
2 The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022. 
TABLE R406.43 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	59 
 
3 The table is effective from September 1, 2022. 
(13)  C407.4.2 Additional Documentation; add the following: 
6.  Compliance reports, all additional documentation, and a final compliance and commissioning verification report shall be prepared by a qualified third party energy verifier. The third party energy verifier shall include his name, phone number, and certification number on each document provided to the city. The third party verifier shall be certified with one of the following certifications: ICC (International Code Council) Commercial Energy Plans Examiner, ICC (International Code Council) Commercial Energy Inspector, HERS (Home Energy Rating) rater, or may be a Texas Registered Architect or Texas Licensed Professional Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2001-447, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2006-040, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-032, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 2010-112, § 1, 5-4-10; Ord. No. 2012-225, § 1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2014-095, § 2, 4-1-14; Ord. No. 2016-298 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
Secs. 28-255—28-295. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed §§ 28-296—28-299, which pertained to swimming pool code and derived from §§ 5-175—5-177, 5-185 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 90-149, § I, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 91-189, § III, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 94-223, § I, 12-6-94; Ord. No. 98-269, § IX, 9-8-98. 
 
Secs. 28-296—28-325. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed §§ 28-326—28-329, 28-346—28-350 which pertained to moving buildings and derived from §§ 5-7—5-15 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 90-152, § I, 10-2-90. 
 
Secs. 28-326—28-375. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed §§ 28-376—28-382, which pertained to fence construction and derived from §§ 5-25—5-27, 5-29, 5-31—5-33 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 90-152, § II, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 99-098, § V, 3-23-99. 
 
Secs. 28-376—28-382. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed §§ 28-383—28-388, 28-401—28-408, 28-421—28-437 which pertained to minimum housing and building standards and derived from §§ 5-44—5-74 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 99-098, §§ VI—XV, 3-23-99. 
 
Secs. 28-383—28-437. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-132, § 4, adopted May 11, 2010 and Ord. No. 2010-133, § 2, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed the former Art. X, §§ 28-438—28-440, and enacted a new Art. X in Chapter 2. The former Art. X pertained to construction advisory and appeals board and derived from Ord. No. 99-098, § II, 3-23-99. 
 
Secs. 28-438—28-440. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 28-441. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Air gap means a complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel. 
Atmospheric vacuum breaker means an assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
Backflow prevention means the mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of nonpotable water from an irrigation system into the potable water source. 
Backflow prevention assembly means any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition. 
Completion of irrigation system installation means when the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly. 
Consulting means the act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems. 
Cross-connection means an actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process. 
Design means the act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan. 
Design pressure means the pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source. 
Double check valve means an assembly that is composed of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
Emission device means any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters. 
Employed means engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, § 3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks. 
Head-to-head spacing means the spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head. 
Health hazard means a cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
Hydraulics means the science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system. 
Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. 
Inspector means a licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor. 
Installer means a person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who is licensed according to V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
Irrigation inspector means a person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
Irrigation plan means a scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system. 
Irrigation services means selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply. 
Irrigation system means an assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A. Agricultural Code § 251.002. 
Irrigation technician means a person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
Irrigation zone means a subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control. 
Irrigator means a person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 30. 
Irrigator-in-charge means the irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system. 
Landscape irrigation means the science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf. 
License means an occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 30 to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 30. 
Mainline means a pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves. 
Maintenance checklist means a document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed. 
Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service means any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere. 
Master valve means a remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline. 
Matched precipitation rate means the condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate. 
New installation means an irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist. 
Pass-through contract means a written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system. 
Pervious surface means a surface that is existing or covered with a layer of material so that it will admit the passage, entrance, or infiltration by water. 
Potable water means water that is suitable for human consumption. 
Pressure vacuum breaker means an assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a pressure vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
Reclaimed water means domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation. 
Records of landscape irrigation activities means the irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means an assembly containing two (2) independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and below the first check valve. 
Static water pressure means the pressure of water when it is not moving. 
Supervision means the on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system. 
Water conservation means the design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion. 
Zone flow means a measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure. 
Zone valve means an automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-442. - Valid license required. 
Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, commonly referred to as the ETJ, must hold a valid license, as defined by V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 30 and required by V.T.C.A. Occupations Code Ch. 1903, or as defined by V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Title 22, Ch. 365, and required by V.T.C.A. Occupations Code Ch. 1301. 
Exemptions: 
A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with V.T.C.A. Occupations Code, Title 12, § 1903.002(c)(1) if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention and isolation valves. The city may, at any point, adopt more stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation system. See V.T.C.A. Occupations Code § 1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-443. - Permit required. 
Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city is required to obtain a permit from the city building inspection department. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Exemptions: 
(1)  An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 355.002; or 
(2)  An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code § 251.002; or 
(3)  An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-444. - Backflow prevention methods and devices. 
(a)  Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers; or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California; or the International Plumbing Code; or any other laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory approval standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current published recommendations. 
(b)  If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one (1) of the following methods must be used to prevent backflow; 
(1)  An air gap may be used if: 
a.  There is an unobstructed physical separation; and 
b.  The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one (1) inch or twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if: 
a.  The device is installed at a minimum of twelve (12) inches above ground in a location that will ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and 
b.  Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief valve. 
(3)  Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure condition will occur; and 
b.  The device is installed at a minimum of twelve (12) inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler. 
c.  Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon installation and annually thereafter. 
d.  If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved, properly installed backflow prevention method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is performed. 
e.  If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly. 
f.  The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed backflow prevention assembly tester prior to being placed in service and the test results provided to the local water purveyor and the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten (10) business days of testing of the backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-445. - Specific conditions and cross-connection control. 
(a)  Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap. 
(b)  Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap. 
(c)  Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
(d)  If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined in V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, Ch. 285, then: 
(1)  All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage facilities system as required for a private water line in V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, § 285.91(10); 
(2)  Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, § 344.50; and 
(3)  Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the on-site sewage facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent the on-site sewage facilities system from operating effectively. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-446. - Water conservation. 
All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation as defined in the definitions section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-447. - Irrigation plan design: minimum standards. 
(a)  An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. The irrigator shall present the plan with an application for permit to the city building inspection department for a plan review and a permit. A paper copy of the city approved irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not: 
(1)  Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system; 
(2)  Violate any requirements of this article; and 
(3)  Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan. 
(b)  The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan. 
(c)  All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing; 
(2)  All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered; 
(3)  A North arrow; 
(4)  A legend; 
(5)  The zone flow measurement for each zone; 
(6)  Location and type of each: 
a.  Controller; and 
b.  Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze); 
(7)  Location, type, and size of each: 
a.  Water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection; 
b.  Backflow prevention device; 
c.  Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays; 
d.  Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves; 
e.  Pressure regulation component; and 
f.  Main line and lateral piping. 
(8)  The scale used; and 
(9)  The design pressure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-448. - Design and installation: Minimum requirements. 
(a)  No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component. 
(b)  Spacing. 
(1)  The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure. 
(2)  New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices in landscapes that are less than forty-eight (48) inches not including the impervious surfaces in either length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two (2) or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four (4) inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar. 
(3)  Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped area. 
(c)  Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads. 
(d)  Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five (5) feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
(e)  Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements. 
(f)  Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate. 
(g)  Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc. 
(h)  Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new installations. 
(i)  PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
(j)  Rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall. Rain or moisture shut-off technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall. 
(k)  Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention device. 
(l)  Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's published specifications for depth coverage of piping. 
(1)  If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six (6) inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six (6) inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues. 
(2)  If a utility, manmade structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the six-inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two (2) inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. 
(3)  All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade. 
(m)  Wiring irrigation systems. 
(1)  Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground. 
(2)  Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(3)  Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer. 
(4)  Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six (6) inches of select backfill. 
(n)  Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be nonpotable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled "nonpotable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system. 
(o)  Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not on-site, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on-site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-449. - Completion of irrigation system installation. 
Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete four (4) items: 
(1)  A final "walk through" with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of the system; 
(2)  The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited to: 
a.  The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic; 
b.  A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors; 
c.  A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components; that require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and 
d.  The statement, "This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to the irrigation plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time." 
(3)  A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed with waterproof ink and include: 
a.  Irrigator's name; 
b.  Irrigator's license number; 
c.  Company name; 
d.  Telephone number; 
e.  Dates of warranty period. 
(4)  The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner or owner representative. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-450. - Inspections. 
(a)  The irrigator shall call for an irrigation rough-in inspection after the installation of the irrigation lines, the backflow protection device, the isolation valve, and before the system is backfilled. 
(b)  The irrigator shall call for a final irrigation inspection after the irrigation system is completed and ready for service. The final installation shall include, but not be limited to: the freeze sensor and the rain sensor. The irrigator shall demonstrate each zone of the irrigation system for the inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-451. - Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems. 
(a)  The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system. 
(b)  All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill. 
(c)  Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
(d)  When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-452. - Reclaimed water. 
Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if: 
(1)  There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption; 
(2)  The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the irrigation system's owner; 
(3)  The irrigation system is installed using purple components; 
(4)  The domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, in accordance with V.T.C.A. Administrative Code Tit. 30, § 290.47(i) (relating to Appendices); 
(5)  A minimum of an eight-inch by eight-inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, "RECLAIMED WATER - DO NOT DRINK" and "AGUA DE RECUPERACIÓN - NO BEBER"; and 
(6)  Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the regulations of the city's water provider. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-453. - Advertisement requirements. 
(a)  All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI_______" in a contrasting color of block letters at least two (2) inches high, on both sides of the vehicle. 
(b)  All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI_______." Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and estimates which displays an entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number. 
(c)  The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a legible sign and displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation records are kept. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-454. - Duties and responsibilities of city irrigation inspectors. 
A licensed irrigation inspector shall enforce the ordinance of the city, and shall be responsible for: 
(a)  Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed; 
(b)  Inspecting the irrigation system; 
(c)  Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this chapter; 
(d)  Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test results provided to the city; 
(e)  Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and 
(f)  Maintaining records according to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-455. - Items not covered by this article. 
Any item not covered by their ordinance and required by law shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code, the Texas Water Code, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and any other applicable state statute or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rule. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-456. - Fees. 
Prior to the issuance of any building permit required by this article, a fee as established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary shall accompany the application for such permit, payable to the city, for the issuance of the permit and any inspections to be made. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 28-457. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter as may be required by governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a provision of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this chapter is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the ordinance or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the ordinance; and 
(2)  Other available relief. 
(Ord. No. 2008-302, § 1, 12-2-08)  
Chapter 29 - FIRE CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-037, § 1, adopted February 7, 2006, amended chapter 29 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 29, §§ 29-1—29-3, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Code 1966, §§ 10-1, 10-2, 10-4; Ord. No. 87-195, §§ I, II, 11-3-87; Ord. No. 94-012, § I, 1-18-94; Ord. No. 97-054, § I, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 98-401, § I, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-098, § XVI, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 2002-057, § 1, 2-19-02. 
Cross reference— Fire regulations at municipal airport, § 3-10; fire prevention generally, Ch. 11; housing generally, Ch. 15; inspection and abatement warrants, § 19-86 et seq.; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28; fire safety standards in mobile homes and recreational vehicle parks, § 32-93. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - International Fire Code—Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the City of Denton, Texas for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion, those certain Codes and Standards known as the International Fire Code, including Appendices A—J, published by the International Code Council, Inc., being particularly the 2012 editions thereof and whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by section 29-2 of this chapter. A copy of said Fire Code is now filed in the office of the city secretary, and is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this ordinance shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Denton and within five thousand (5,000) feet thereof, where specified therein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-037, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-098, § 1, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 2012-228, § 1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2015-197, § 1, 7-21-15 )  
Sec. 29-2. - Amendments. 
The International Fire Code, as adopted in Section 29-1, is hereby amended as follows: 
A.  By the amendment of the International Fire Code, as follows: 
**Section 101.1; amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Denton, Texas, the "Fire Code" or, in the context of the following amendments, "this code". 
**Section 101.2; second paragraph added to read as follows: 
The provisions of this code shall supplement any and all laws relating to fire safety and shall apply to all persons without restriction, unless specifically exempted. 
**Section 102.4.1; added to read as follows: 
102.4.1 Application of other codes. The design and construction of new structures shall comply with this code, and other codes as applicable; and any alterations, additions, changes in use or changes in structures required by this code which are within the scope of this and other codes shall be made in accordance therewith. 
**Section 102.7; amended to read as follows: 
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall include those that are listed in Chapter 80, and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
**Section 102.7.2; added to read as follows: 
102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code and any adopted amendments, the provisions of this code and any adopted amendments, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
**Section 103.1; second paragraph added to read as follows: 
Under the chief's direction, the fire department is authorized to enforce all ordinances of the jurisdiction pertaining to: 
1.  The prevention of fires, 
2.  The suppression or extinguishments of dangerous or hazardous fires, 
3.  The storage, use and handling of hazardous materials, 
4.  The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual and other private fire alarm systems and fire-extinguishing equipment, 
5.  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes, 
6.  The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards on land and in buildings, structures and other property, including those under construction, 
7.  The maintenance of means of egress, 
8.  The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire and unauthorized releases of hazardous materials, and 
9.  The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of explosions. 
For authority related to control and investigation of emergency scenes, see Section 104. 
**Section 103.1.2; added to read as follows: 
103.1.2 Department of Fire Prevention Personnel and Police. The chief and members of the Department of Fire Prevention shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this code. 
**Section 103.4.2; added section to read as follows: 
103.4.2 Local Liability. All regulations provided in this Code are hereby declared to be governmental and for the benefit of the general public. Any member of the City Council, any city official or employee, or any member of the Health and Building Standards Commission charged with the enforcement of this code, acting for the City in the discharge of his or her duties, are entitled to the legal protections afforded by Article VIII of Chapter 2 of the Code of the City of Denton, Texas (§ 2-243 through 2-250), as amended, or as otherwise provided by State law, if better. 
**Section 104.10.2; added to read as follows: 
104.10.2 Hazardous Materials. The fire code official is authorized to investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of any unauthorized releases of hazardous materials. 
**Section 104.10.3; added to read as follows: 
104.10.3 Explosives. The fire code official is authorized to investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of explosions, explosives handling, manufacturing, and usage of explosive materials. 
**Section 105.3.3; amended to read as follows: 
105.3.3 Occupancy Prohibited before Approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections indicating the applicable provisions of this code have been met. 
**Section 105.6.47; added to read as follows: 
105.6.47 Gas and Oil Wells. An operational permit is required to operate gas and oil wells in the incorporated city limits of Denton following the issuance of a gas well permit by the City of Denton in accordance and compliance with all ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas, including without limitation, Subchapter 22 of the Denton Development Code of the City of Denton, Texas. 
**Section 106; added sections 106.2.3., 106.2.4, 106.2.5, and 106.2.6, to read as follows: 
106.2.3 Frequency of Inspection. All owners of, occupants of, tenants of, lessees of or persons making use of any building or premises, or portions thereof, when used as nonresidential group occupancies, including hotels, lodging houses and congregate residences, as defined by the Building Code are required to accommodate annual inspections of such buildings, premises or portions thereof upon the reasonable and lawful demand of the Fire Marshal or his designated representative. Additionally, the Fire Marshal may initiate such inspections at such other times as he deems appropriate to satisfy the purposes of this ordinance, and may additionally inspect all other premises as may be necessary, including such other potential hazards or appliances as the Fire Marshal may specify, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition which would reasonably tend to cause a fire or contribute to its spread. 
106.2.4 Annual Fire Protection Systems Testing. The annual testing of all fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing systems, hood extinguishing systems and fire pumps shall be witnessed by the Fire Code Official or his designee. 
106.2.5 Annual Inspection Fees. The first annual inspection performed pursuant to Section 106 of this code shall be performed free of charge. If the Fire Marshal or his designee observes a violation of this chapter and performs a follow-up (re-inspection) inspection to determine whether a violation or violations observed during the previous inspection have been corrected, a fee shall be charged, and the occupant or lessee shall pay said fee within 30 days of being billed therefore as condition to continue lawful occupancy of the building or dwelling to be inspected. Said fee shall be based upon the amount of interior area of the building leased, occupied or used by the person. The fee shall be in the amount established, and from time to time amended, by ordinance of City Council, a copy that shall be kept on file with the City Secretary. Follow up inspection fees for common areas of such buildings or premises shall be charged to and paid by the owner in accordance with the area inspected. 
106.2.6 Permit and Permit Fees. Any permit required by Sections 105 or 106 of the Code shall be issued only upon payment of a permit fee in an amount established, and as from time to time amended, by ordinance of the City Council, a copy of which shall be kept on file with the City Secretary. If the Fire Marshal or his designee observes a violation of the permit or the work required by the permit is incomplete at the time of inspection and performs a follow-up (re-inspection) inspection to determine whether a violation or violations observed during the previous inspection have been corrected, a fee shall be charged. 
**Section 109.4; amended to read as follows: 
109.4 Violation Penalties. Persons who violate any provision of this code, who fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erect, install, alter, repair or perform work in violation of the approved construction documents, the directives of the fire code official, or the conditions of any permit or certificate issued under provisions of this code, shall be subject to prosecution of a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine as specified in § 1-12 of the Code of the City of Denton, Texas. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
**Section 110.4; amended to read as follows: 
110.4 Abatement. Any person operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this Code who shall permit any fire hazard to exist on the premises under his or her control, or who shall fail to take immediate action to abate a fire hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the code official or his duly authorized representative, shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued. 
**Section 111.4; amended to read as follows: 
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than two hundred ($200) dollars or more than the maximum fine specified in § 1-12 of the Code. 
**Section 202; the following definitions are added or amended to read as follows: 
AMBULATORY HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
Dialysis centers 
Sedation dentistry 
Surgery centers 
Colonic centers 
Psychiatric centers 
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION. The Denton Fire Department members authorized by the Fire Chief. 
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The Fire Marshal or other designated authority charged by the City Council with the duties of administration and enforcement of the code, or a duly authorized representative. 
FIRE DEPARTMENT. The City of Denton Fire Department. 
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building having floors used for human occupancy located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
JURISDICTION. The City of Denton, Texas. 
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis. 
STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the Fire Chief. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the Fire Chief. Charges for utilization shall be calculated at 1.5 times the hourly wage rate for each individual assigned. 
**Section 307.1.1; amended to read as follows: 
307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
Exception: {No change.} 
**Section 307.2; amended to read as follows: 
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) guidelines and/or restrictions. 
2.  State, County or Local temporary or permanent bans on open burning. 
3.  Local written policies as established by the Code Official. 
**Section 307.3; amended to read as follows: 
307.3 Extinguishment authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
**Section 307.4; amended to read as follows, deleted exception 2: 
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet of any structure. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet from a structure. 
{#2 deleted} 
**Section 307.4.1; amended to read as follows: 
307.4.1 Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 300 feet of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 300 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
**Section 307.4.2; amended to read as follows: 
307.4.2 Recreational Fires. Recreational fires shall be prohibited within the incorporated city limits of Denton, Texas. 
**Section 307.4.4; added to read as follows: 
307.4.4 Trench Burns. Trench burns shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in accordance with Section 307.2. 
**Section 307.5; amended to read as follows: 
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, bonfires, or portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum of 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
**Section 308.1.1; add a sentence to read as follows: 
Unmanned free-floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not limited to sky lanterns shall be prohibited. 
**Section 308.1.4; amended to read as follows: 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10 feet of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings. 
**Section 308.1.6.2, Exception #3; amended to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
{#1 and #2 unchanged} 
3.  Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3. 
{#4 unchanged} 
**Section 311.5; amended to read as follows: 
311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards, as required by Section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5. 
**Section 403.3; add Sections 403.3.1 and 403.3.2 to read as follows: 
403.3.1 Training. Training for crowd managers shall be approved and shall be based upon a valid job task analysis and duties outlined in Section 403.3.2. 
403.3.2 Duties. The duties of crowd managers shall include: 
a.  An inspection of the area of responsibility to identify and address any egress barriers 
b.  An inspection of the area of responsibility to identify and mitigate any fire hazards 
c.  Ensure compliance with all permit conditions, including those governing pyrotechnics and other special effects 
d.  To direct and assist the event attendees in evacuation during an emergency 
e.  Assist emergency response personnel if requested. 
f.  Other duties outlined by the Fire Code Official 
g.  Other duties outlined in the Emergency Plan 
**Section 503.1.1; the following sentence is added to the first paragraph: 
Except for single- or two-family residences, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten feet (10') wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure. 
**Section 503.1.4; added to read as follows: 
503.1.4 Existing Fire Lanes. Any fire lane that has been established prior to passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived and designated by the fire marshal or that has been established by a separate ordinance shall be a fire lane for all intents and purposes and shall be maintained as required by this code. 
**Section 503.2.4; amended to read as follows: 
503.2.4 Turning radius. Each fire apparatus access road shall have an inner turning radius of not less than 35 feet, and an exterior turning radius of not less than 55 feet, or shall have a design approved by the fire code official as functionally equivalent to this standard. 
**Section 503.2.9; added to read as follows: 
503.2.9 Fire Lane Site Plan. 
(a)  When fire lanes are required in accordance with the provisions of this article, the owner, builder, or developer shall submit a fire lane site plan measuring eight and one half (8- 1/2) inches by eleven (11) inches to the fire code official prior to issuance of a building permit. A copy of each approved fire lane site plan shall be kept on file with the fire department. 
(b)  Construction of the building shall not begin until the fire lane site plan has been submitted and approved. 
**Section 503.3; amended to read as follows: 
503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved striping or, when allowed by fire code official, signs, or both, or other approved notices shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Signs or notices and striping shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
(1)  Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 20 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. 
(2)  Signs - shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") (1.98 m) above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50 feet) (15.2 m) apart. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the code official. 
**Section 503.4; amended to read as follows: 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed by persons in any manner, including parking, stopping, or standing any non-emergency vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in a fire lane. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times. The operator of a premise shall maintain, free of obstruction, all fire lanes on his premises. No person may mark, post or otherwise identify a non-fire lane private vehicular passageway as a fire lane or in such a manner as tends to create confusion as to whether the passageway is a fire lane. Any unauthorized vehicle found in or on a fire lane is: 
(1)  Subject to removal by the operator of the premises, with the expense of removal and storage to be borne by the registered owner of the vehicle; 
(2)  Subject to citation, as well as removal, by the fire marshal or a police officer; and 
(3)  Deemed to constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by: (1) a named lessee of an unattended vehicle, if subsequently determined to be under a lease or rental agreement at the time of the incident; (2) the registered owner of an unattended vehicle; or (3) by any occupant licensed to operate the vehicle, regardless of whether such license is expired, suspended or revoked. 
**Section 603.3.2.1, Exception; amended to read as follows: 
Exception: The aggregate capacity limit shall be permitted to be increased to 3,000 gallons (11,356 L) in accordance with all requirements of Chapter 57. 
**Section 603.3.2.2; amended to read as follows: 
603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2 shall be used only to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2.4. Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be made using closed piping systems. 
**Section 604-604.2.2; amended to read as follows: 
604.1 Installation. Emergency and standby power systems required by this code or the International Building Code shall be installed in accordance with this code, NFPA 110 and 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11. 
604.1.1 Stationary generators. Stationary emergency and standby power generators required by this code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200. 
604.1.2 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70. 
604.2 Where required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.24 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other referenced code. 
604.2.1 Emergency voice/alarm communications systems. Emergency power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.5. 
Covered and Open Malls, Section 604.2.13 
Group A occupancies, Sections 907.2.1.1 and 907.5.2.2.4. 
Special Amusement buildings, Section 907.2.12.3 
High rise buildings, Section 907.2.13 
Atriums, Section 907.2.14 
Deep Underground buildings, Section 907.2.19 
604.2.2 Smoke control systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, in accordance with Section 909.11: 
Covered mall building, International Building Code, Section 404.5 
Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7 
Underground buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.5 
Group 1-3, International Building Code, Section 408.9 
Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.3.7.2 
Special Amusement buildings (as applicable to Group A's), International Building Code, Section 411.1 
Smoke protected seating, Section 1028.6.2.1 
**Section 604.2.19-604.2.24; amended to read as follows: 
604.2.19 Smokeproof enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power shall be provided for smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2. 
604.2.20 Elevator pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization system as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5. 
604.2.21 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3. 
604.2.22 Common exhaust systems for clothes dryers. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the International Mechanical Code Section 504.8, item 7. 
604.2.23 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 421.8. 
604.2.24 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 and 1104.5.1 when required by the fire code official. 
**Section 604.7; added to read as follows: 
604.7 Energy time duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system. 
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved. 
**Section 605.11.3.2 through Section 605.11.3.2.4 removed and added to the 2012 International Residential Code M2302. 
**Section 901.4.3: added to read as follows: 
901.4.3 Fire areas. {First part of section unchanged}…determined in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code. 
**Section 903.1.2; added to read as follows: 
903.1.2 Residential systems. Unless specifically allowed by this code or the International Building Code, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R shall not be recognized for the purposes of exceptions or reductions, commonly referred to as "trade-offs", permitted by other requirements of this code. In addition, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R must include attic sprinkler protection to be recognized for the purposes of such trade-offs permitted by other requirements of this code. 
**Section 903.2; amended to read as follows: 
903.2 Required Installations of Automatic Fire Extinguishing Systems. An automatic fire extinguishing system shall be installed and maintained in each occupancy, as required by the provisions of Section 903. 
**Sections 903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3 and 903.2.1.4; amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area containing a Group A-1 occupancy, where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
4.  The fire area contains a multitheater complex. 
903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area containing a Group A-2 occupancy, where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area containing a Group A-3 occupancy, where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area containing a Group A-4 occupancy, where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
**Section 903.2.8.3; added to read as follows: 
903.2.8.3 Group R-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings with a Group R-1 fire area, including all combustible concealed spaces and attic spaces. 
**Section 903.2.9.2; amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires. Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 10,000 cubic feet shall be equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
**Section 903.2.9.3; added to read as follows: 
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
**Section 903.2.10; amended to read as follows: 
903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.6 of the International Building Code. 
**Sections 903.2.11.7 and 903.2.11.8; added to read as follows: 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet, see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
**Section 903.2.11.9; added to read as follows: 
903.2.11.9 General. 
1.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all new buildings of noncombustible construction, (Type I & II) including Group R-3, which exceed three stories in height or which have more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area regardless of fire area, area separation walls, or fire walls. 
2.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all new buildings of combustible construction, (Type III, IV & V) including Group R-3, which exceed two stories in height or which have more than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of floor area regardless of fire area, area separation walls, or fire walls. 
3.  The owner(s) of any building shall be required to install an automatic sprinkler system at such time as the owner(s) constructs an addition or enlargement to the building if the total square footage of such addition, when combined with the total square footage of the existing building, exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet of noncombustible construction (Type I & II) total floor area, regardless of fire area, area separation walls, or fire walls. 
4.  The owner(s) of any building shall be required to install an automatic sprinkler system at such time as the owner(s) constructs an addition or enlargement to the building if the total square footage of such addition, when combined with the total square footage of the existing building, exceeds seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of combustible construction (Type III, IV & V) total floor area, regardless of fire area, area separation walls, or fire walls. 
**Section 903.3.1.1; amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 Sprinkler Systems. Where the provisions of this code require a building, or portion thereof, to be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system, sprinklers shall be installed throughout in accordance with N.F.P.A. 13, latest edition, except as provided in Sections 903.3.1.1.1, 903.3.1.2 and 903.3.1.3. 
**Section 903.3.1.1.1; amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas, where such rooms are protected with an approved fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because of damp conditions, fire-resistance-rated construction or the presence of electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the fire code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by a wall with a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour and a floor/ceiling assembly with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
**Section 903.3.1.2; amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Where allowed in buildings of Group R, up to and including four stories in height, automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13R, latest edition, and as further restricted by section 903.1.2, with respect to exceptions or reductions permitted by other requirements of this code. 
**Section 903.3.5; amended to read as follows: 
903.3.5 Water Supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section, the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1, and other applicable design standards and requirements. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the International Plumbing Code. 
Every fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. 
**Section 903.4; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems, except for fire department hose connection valves, shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
**Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
**Section 903.7; amended to read as follows: 
903.7 Fire department connections. The fire department connection shall be provided in a location approved by the fire code official, within 50 feet of the fire lane and unobstructed. 
**Section 905.2; amended to read as follows: 
905.2 Installation standards. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14, latest edition. 
**Section 905.3.9; added to read as follows: 
905.3.9 Building area. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet of travel, vertically or horizontally, as the hose lies, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access. 
Exception: Automatic dry and semiautomatic dry standpipes are allowed as specified in NFPA 14. 
**Section 905.4, item #5; amended to read as follows: 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located either on the roof or at the highest landing of stairways with stair access to the roof. An additional hose connection shall be provided at the top of the most hydraulically remote standpipe for testing purposes. 
**Section 905.4; add the following item 7: 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
**Section 905.9; second paragraph added after the exceptions to read as follows: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
**Section 906.1, item #1; amended to read as follows: 
1.  In Groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4, S, and U occupancies. 
**Section 907.1.4; added to read as follows: 
907.1.4 Design Standards. All new and replacement fire alarm systems serving 20 or more alarm actuating devices shall be addressable fire alarm systems. 
**Section 907.2.1; amended to read as follows: 
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons located above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for Group E occupancy. 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
**Section 907.2.1.1; amended to read as follows: 
907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A Occupancies with an occupancy load of three hundred (300) or more. Activation of the fire alarm in Group A Occupancies with an occupancy load of three hundred (300) or more shall immediately initiate a signal using an approved emergency voice/alarm communications system in accordance with Section 907.6.2.2. 
Exception: When approved, the prerecorded announcement is allowed to be manually deactivated for a period of time, not to exceed three (3) minutes, for the sole purpose of allowing a live voice announcement from an approved, constantly approved station. 
**Section 907.2.3; amended to read as follows: 
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
**Section 907.2.13; amended to read as follows: 
907.2.13 High-rise buildings. Buildings with floors used for human occupancy that are located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection in accordance with 907.2.13.1, a fire department communications system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communications system in accordance with Section 907.6.2.2. 
**Section 907.2.13; exceptions #1-6 are deleted. 
**Section 907.4.2.7; added to read as follows: 
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
**Section 907.6.1.1; added to read as follows: 
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed utilizing Class "A" wiring for all signaling, initiating, and indicating circuits. Class "A" wiring shall be designed to comply with NFPA 72. 
**Section 907.6.3.2; amended to read as follows: 
907.6.3.2 High-rise buildings. Buildings with floors used for human occupancy that are located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall establish separate zones by floor for any of the following types of alarm-initiating devices: 
1.  Smoke detectors 
2.  Sprinkler water-flow devices 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes 
4.  Other approved types of automatic fire detection devices or suppression systems. 
**Section 910.1 Exception #2; amended to read as follows: 
2.  Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers, only manual smoke and heat vents shall be required in these areas. Automatic smoke and heat vents are prohibited. 
**Section 912.2.3; added to read as follows: 
912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path, or as approved by the fire code official. 
**Section 913.4: second paragraph added to read as follows: 
The fire-pump system shall also be supervised for "loss of power", "phase reversal" and "pump running" conditions by supervisory signal on distinct circuits. 
**Chapter 10: Sections 1001 through 1029; replace all references to "fire code official" with "building official". 
**Section 1007.1; added the following Exception 4: 
Exceptions: 
{previous exceptions unchanged} 
4.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1007. 
**Section 1007.5; Platform lifts, amended to read as follows: 
1007.5 Platform lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts … required accessible route in Section 1109., Items 1 through 10. Standby power … {remainder unchanged} 
**Section 1008.1.4.4; amended deleting criteria #4 and 5: 
1008.1.4.4 Access-controlled egress doors. The entrance doors in a means of egress in buildings with an occupancy in Group A, B, E, M, R-1 or R-2 and entrance doors to tenant spaces in occupancies in Groups A, B, E, M, R-1 and R-2 are permitted to be equipped with an approved entrance and egress access control system which shall be installed in accordance with all of the following criteria: 
1.  A sensor shall be provided on the egress side arranged to detect an occupant approaching the doors. The doors shall be arranged to unlock by a signal from or loss of power to the sensor. 
2.  Loss of power to that part of the access control system which locks the doors shall automatically unlock the doors. 
3.  The doors shall be arranged to unlock from a manual unlocking device located 40 inches to 48 inches (1016 mm to 1219 mm) vertically above the floor and within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the secured doors. Ready access shall be provided to the manual unlocking device and the device shall be clearly identified by a sign that reads "PUSH TO EXIT." When operated, the manual unlocking device shall result in direct interruption of power to the lock—independent of the access control system electronics—and the doors shall remain unlocked for a minimum of 30 seconds. 
{Delete #4 and #5} 
6.  Entrance doors in buildings with an occupancy in Group A, B, E or M shall not be secured from the egress side during periods that the building is open to the general public. 
**Section 1008.1.9.4; amended exceptions 3 and 4 as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy. {Remainder unchanged} 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy. {Remainder unchanged} 
**Section 1008.1.9.9; amended to read as follows: 
1008.1.9.9 Electromagnetically locked egress doors. Doors in the means of egress in buildings with an occupancy in Group A, B, E, 1-1, 1-2, M, R-1 or R-2 and doors to tenant spaces in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, M, R-1 or R-2 shall be permitted to be electromagnetically locked if equipped with listed hardware that incorporates a built-in switch and meet the requirements below: {remaining text unchanged} 
**Section 1015; added new section 1015.7 to read as follows: 
1015.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the electrical code as adopted. 
**Section 1016; added new section 1016.2.2 to read as follows: 
1016.2.2 Group F-1 and S-1 increase. The maximum exit access travel distance shall be 400 feet (122 m) in Group F-1 or S-1 occupancies where all of the following are met: 
1.  The portion of the building classified as Group F-1 or S-1 is limited to one story in height; 
2.  The minimum height from the finished floor to the bottom of the ceiling or roof slab or deck is 24 feet (7315 mm); and 
3.  The building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
**Section 1018.1; added exception 6 to read as follows: 
{previous text unchanged} 
6.  In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings within single tenant spaces need not be of fire-resistive construction when the tenant space corridor is provided with system smoke detectors tied to an approved automatic fire alarm. The actuation of any detector shall activate alarms audible in all areas served by the corridor. 
**Section 1022.10: amended to read as follows: 
Section 1022.10 Smokeproof enclosures and pressurized stairways. Each exit that serves building stories where the floor surface is located more than 55 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access or more than 30 feet below the level of exit discharge serving such floor levels shall be a smoke proof enclosure or pressurized stairway in accordance with Section 909.20 of the International Building Code. 
**Section 1026.6; amended exception 4 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: {Exceptions 1 through 3 unchanged} 
4.  Separation from the open-ended corridors of the building … {remaining text unchanged} 
**Section 1028.1.1.1; deleted. 
**Section 1029.1; amended to read as follows: 
1029.1 General. In addition to the means of egress required by this chapter, provisions shall be made for emergency escape and rescue openings in Group R and I-1 occupancies. {Remainder unchanged} 
Exceptions: 
{Exceptions 1 through 3 unchanged.} 
4.  In other than Group R-3 occupancies, buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
**Section 1030.2; amended to read as follows: 
1030.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exit or exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress. 
**Section 1101.1; amend to read as follows: 
1101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing buildings constructed prior to the adoption of this code when an alteration, repair, addition, change of occupancy, or change of ownership occurs or if a proposed use poses an increased hazard based on life and fire risks. 
**Section 1103.3; added sentence to end of paragraph as follows: 
Provide emergency signage as required by Section 607.2. 
**Section 2303.1, item #4; amended to read as follows: 
4.  Such that a nozzle, when the hose is fully extended, will not reach within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of building openings. 
**Section 2304.1; amended to read as follows: 
2304.1 Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or, 
2.  Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or 
3.  Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3. 
At any time the qualified attendant of item Number 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3. 
**Section 2401.2; deleted this section. 
**Table 3206.2, footnote j; amended to read as follows: 
j.  Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. 
**Section 3310.1; add sentence to end of paragraph to read as follows: 
When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
**Section 5601.1.3; amended to read as follows: 
5601.1.3 Fireworks. Except as provided otherwise herein, no person shall possess, store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, manufacture, use or explode any fireworks within the city limits, or within five thousand feet (5,000 ft) (1,524 m) thereof. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage and handling of fireworks as permitted in Sections 5604 and 5608. 
2.  The use of fireworks for approved display as permitted in Section 5608. 
**Section 5608.5.6; amend by the addition of the following section: 
Section 5608.5.6 Marking of Shell. Each aerial shell shall have printed directly on its outer casing the following minimum warning 1/8 -inch high letters, which contrast to the background 
WARNING 
EXPLOSIVES CLASS "1.4G or 1.3G" 
FIREWORK 
DO NOT HANDLE- CALL "911" 
**Section 5608.11: added to read as follows: 
Section 5608.11 Ignition. Aerial shells shall be ignited by lighting the tips of fuses by an electrical ignition source, except when manual ignition is approved by the Fire Marshal. Operators shall not place any part of their bodies over the throat of the mortar. 
**Section 5703.6; sentence added to read as follows: 
An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
**Section 5704.2.9.5; change Section 5704.2.9.5 and add Section 5704.2.9.5.3 to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.5 Above-ground tanks inside of buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall comply with Section 5704.2.9.5.1 and 5704.2.9.5.2 through 5704.2.9.5.3. 
5704.2.9.5.1 {No change.} 
5704.2.9.5.2 {No change.} 
5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible liquid storage tanks inside of buildings. The maximum aggregate allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11 356 L) of Class II or III combustible liquid for storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with Section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The entire 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground tanks; 
2.  The 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank or multiple smaller tanks; 
3.  The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.1; and 
4.  Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing an approved closed piping system. 
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be counted towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not be required to be located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories below grade. 
**Section 5704.2.11.5; added a sentence to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.5 Leak prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections 5704.2.11.5.1 through 5704.2.11.5.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
**Section 5706.3.9; added to read as follows: 
5706.3.9 Permit required. An operational permit is required prior to drilling and operating a gas well. An operational permit related to a gas well located within the corporate limits of the City of Denton shall not be issued unless and until a gas well permit has been issued in accordance and compliance with all ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas, including without limitation, Subchapter 22 of the Denton Development Code of the City of Denton, Texas. 
**Section 5706.3.10; added to read as follows: 
5706.3.10 Fire Protection. Drilling and Production Sites shall be equipped with a lightning protection system. In addition, tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system approved by the fire code official. 
**Section 6103.2.1.5; sentence added to read as follows: 
Standby personnel shall be present during demonstrations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-037, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-098, § 1, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 2012-228, § 1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2013-304, § 2, 10-29-13; Ord. No. 2015-197, § 1, 7-21-15 )  
Chapter 30 - FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management generally, Ch. 9; housing generally, Ch. 15; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28; issuance of building permit where flood hazard exists, § 28-29. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public infrastructure (buildings, streets, bridges) and utilities (waterlines, wastewater lines, electric lines, gas mains, and communication lines) located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas; and 
(7)  Ensure the potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-1; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-2. - Objectives. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter shall be applied, administered, and enforced as follows: 
(1)  To restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood or that cause excessive increases in flood elevations or velocities; 
(2)  To require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  To control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  To control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  To prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(6)  No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration, or improvement of any property within a floodway or floodplain area, unless the permit shall comply with the terms hereof; 
(7)  Areas within a floodplain, when dedicated to public use as open space, green belts, or parkways or when permanently and irrevocably reserved as privately owned space, greenbelts, or parkways, shall conform to the city's plan of development. Such land may be included in the computation of open space as gross density requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-2; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-3. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet. This condition occurs where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of shallow flooding hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, designated as zone AE. 
Base flood, also known as the one-hundred-year flood, means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
City engineer means the city engineer for the City of Denton or designee. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, paving, drainage or utilities. Development activities include: subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, parking, fences, pools, signs, temporary uses, utilities, and other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; excavation, mining or drilling operations; dredging; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; storage of equipment or materials; and clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the exception of agricultural activities as defined and as permitted). Routine repair and maintenance activities are exempted. Elevated building means a non-basement building: 
(1)  Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-3D, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and 
(2)  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwater. 
Encroachment lines are limits of obstruction to flood flows. These lines are generally parallel to the stream. The lines are established by assuming that the area landward (outside) of the encroachment lines will be ultimately developed in such a way that it will not be available to convey flood flows. If hydraulic efficiency of the floodway is maintained by protecting it against unnecessary encroachments, it will be adequate to convey the regulatory flood without resulting in an increase in flood elevations of more than one (1) foot. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before August 1, 1979. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision, in which the construction of facilities servicing the lots upon which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads), was completed prior to August 1, 1979, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the City of Denton. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the areas within the boundaries of special flood hazards have been designated. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration containing flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, and the flood hazard boundary map. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
Floodplain means the area designated as subject to flooding from the base flood (one-hundred-year flood) on the flood insurance rate map. The floodplain includes the floodway. 
Floodway. See "regulatory floodway". 
Floodway fringe means the area located within the floodplain and outside the floodway. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means the flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter and 44 C.F.R. 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required facilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, means the National Geodetic Vertical Data (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevation shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
Minimum building elevation means the elevation to which uses regulated by this chapter are required to be elevated or floodproofed. This elevation would be equal to the elevation that could be reached by the regulatory flood if it occurred under conditions existing at the time the ordinance was passed, from which this chapter is derived, plus eighteen (18) inches, plus the surcharge depth due to encroachments permitted by the establishment of floodways, i.e., minimum building elevation equals regulatory flood elevation, plus eighteen (18) inches, plus the surcharge depth as indicated in the flood insurance study. 
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August 1, 1979, the effective date of the initial FIRM, including any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August 1, 1979, the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Denton, including any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Obstruction means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the debris downstream to the damage of life or property. 
Program deficiency means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations or of the standards contained in Sections 60.3, 60.4, 60.5 or 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Regulatory flood means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the area and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on a particular stream. The regulatory flood generally has an average frequency in the order of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood determined from an analysis of floods on a particular stream and other streams in the same general region. 
Regulatory floodway means a river, channel, or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Normally, the floodway will include the stream channel and that portion of the adjacent land areas required to pass the base flood (one-hundred-year flood) discharge without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation at any point more than one (1) foot above that of the pre-floodway condition, including those areas designated on the flood insurance rate map. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of its noncompliance. Ways that impact may be reduced include protecting the structure or other effective development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial expenditure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Shaded X means floods mitigation event with a drainage area of less than one (1) square mile. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, replacement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of the slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, on the ground, or attached to the ground, including but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, manufactured homes, and other similar items. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either of the following: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Market value determination, for the purposes of this definition, shall be made by the city engineer by making a determination of the cost of repair, reconstruction, or improvement, who may consider appraisals by the taxing district, information contained in the permit application, as well as other information that may be available to the department or other resource. 
Surcharge depth means the vertical rise in base flood elevation due to encroachment of the floodway fringe. 
Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or the development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate or other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-3; Ord. No. 2011-051, § 1, 4-5-11; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-4. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-4; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-5. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Denton County, Texas and Incorporated Areas" dated June 19, 2020, with flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated June 19, 2020; and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-5; Ord. No. 97-056, § I, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2011-051, § 2, 4-5-11; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-6. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-7; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-7. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-8; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-8. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-9; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-10; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Secs. 30-10—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Designation of city engineer. 
The city engineer, or his/her designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-11; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-32. - Duties and responsibilities of the city engineer. 
Duties and responsibilities of the city engineer, or his/her designee, shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Review, and approve or deny, all applications for development permits required by section 30-33 of this chapter; 
(3)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required; 
(4)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation; 
(5)  Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(6)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 30-5, the city engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from any federal, state, or other source as criteria for requiring the new construction, substantial improvements, or other developments in zone A and meet the requirements of 44 C.F.R. 60.3 subsections (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(5), (C)(6), and (D)(3) of the National Flood Insurance Program in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. In unnumbered A zones and zone X, the base flood elevation shall be established through an engineering study, and this data shall be used for requiring the lowest floor elevation to be eighteen (18) inches above the encroached base flood elevation based on fully developed conditions. 
(7)  The city engineer shall maintain on record in the engineering department the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of new and substantially improved structures in all special flood hazard areas and within two hundred (200) feet of the SFHA with a FEMA Elevation Certificate. 
(8)  Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(9)  In riverine situations, notify adjacent communities, the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(10)  The city engineer must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community, and that all provisions of Denton Development Code Subchapters 7.4 and 7.5 are met. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-12; Ord. No. 97-056, § II, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2011-051, § 3, 4-5-11; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-33. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-6; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-34. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit required in this article shall be presented to the city engineer on forms furnished by him and may include but not be limited to plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures (including placement of manufactured homes), and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures or substantially improved structures as certified by a registered professional engineer or registered public surveyor; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 30-53(b); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Typical valley cross sections showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high-water information; 
(6)  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and special arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations or streets, water supply, sanitary facilities, photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream, soil types and other pertinent information; 
(7)  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream; 
(8)  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities; 
(9)  For subdivisions of three (3) or more acres or thirty (30) lots or more, whichever is less, the base flood elevations of such subdivisions must be developed by the builder and this data will be utilized to regulate development within the area; 
(10)  For areas outside identified flood hazard areas, the elevation shall be that which is required by chapter 29-07 of the Uniform Building Code which requires a minimum six-inch elevation above adjacent ground to compensate for loss of stormwater storage or drainage areas. 
The city engineer shall maintain a record of all such information. 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the city engineer shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-14; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-35. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of adjustment, as established by the city council, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city engineer, or his/her designee, in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The city engineer shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that (i) the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and (ii) the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(f)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 30-51(c) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 30-1). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Prerequisites for granting variances shall be as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon the following: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation no more than two (2) feet below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(j)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in section 30-35 (a)—(h) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-15; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Secs. 30-36—30-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 30-51. - Zoning map flood area designations. 
(a)  Applicability; districts; boundaries. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all lands within the city irrespective of zoning district classification. 
(2)  The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into two (2) districts: floodway and floodway fringe. 
(3)  There shall be superimposed upon the official zoning map the floodplain designation, as determined by the flood insurance study and report. 
(4)  The outer boundary of the floodway fringe at any point shall correspond to the base flood elevation as obtained by flood routing procedure. Minimum finished floor elevations for buildings within the floodway fringe and within two hundred (200) feet of the SFHA boundary shall be determined by adding eighteen (18) inches of freeboard to the base flood elevation based of fully developed conditions or thirty (30) inches above the BFE as indicated in the flood insurance study. 
(5)  The boundary of a floodway shall correspond to the floodway encroachment lines. Boundaries of a floodway shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. On the ground the floodway encroachment line shall be located by measuring distances perpendicular from the floodway centerline. 
(6)  In cases where floodway encroachment lines have not been delineated, the area below the minimum building elevation shall be designated in the floodway until the encroachment lines can be determined. 
(7)  Where interpretation is necessary as to the exact location of the boundaries of the floodplain as shown on the official zoning map, the city engineer shall be consulted for guidance and direction in determining the location in question. Interpretation beyond this point shall be made by the board of adjustment after hearing testimony from all interested parties. 
(b)  Floodway uses. No use of land shall be permitted in a floodway unless: 
(1)  The use is permitted within the zoning district in which it is situated; 
(2)  Such use is not prohibited by any other ordinance; and 
(3)  The use does not require structures, fill, or the storage of materials or equipment; provided, however, that the following uses, when otherwise permitted within the zoning district in which the uses are situated, shall be permitted upon application to the city engineer for a development permit, as provided in section 30-34 of this chapter, upon proof of compliance with this chapter: 
a.  Accessory uses or structures; 
b.  Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient outdoor amusement enterprises; 
c.  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharfs; 
d.  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines; and 
e.  Other uses, similar in nature, which are consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Floodway fringe uses. No use of land shall be permitted in a floodway fringe unless: 
(1)  The use is permitted within the zoning district in which it is situated; 
(2)  Such use is not prohibited by any other ordinance; and 
(3)  The use does not require structures, fill, or the storage of materials or equipment, other than the following uses: 
a.  Any use permitted in this section; 
b.  Any other nonstructural use, provided that the use is elevated above the minimum building elevation and that a determination has first been made by the city engineer that such use will not unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodway of tributaries to the main stream, drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems; 
c.  Structures constructed on fill, provided the first floor or basement floor is above the minimum building elevation. Such fill shall be made to an elevation no lower than one (1) foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area and shall be extended horizontally at such elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the limits of any structure or building erected thereon; and 
d.  The following uses and structures shall be permitted only upon issuance of a development permit by the board of adjustment as provided in section 30-34 and subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Nonresidential structures, if adequately floodproofed as approved by the city engineer to a point above the regulatory flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Uses listed in this section and other similar uses which will not be subject to substantial flood damage and which will not cause flood losses on other lands or to the public. These may include uses which can be readily removed from flood hazard areas during the times of flood. The board may in the development permit allow such uses to be located at an elevation below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-13; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-52. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(5)  New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. 
(6)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(7)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. All exterior equipment shall be elevated eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation. 
(8)  For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
d.  The area is useable solely for parking of vehicle, building access, or storage. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-16; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-53. - Specific standards. 
(a)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure within two hundred (200) feet of the SFHA boundary shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated eighteen (18) inches above the one-hundred-year water surface elevation based on fully developed conditions in the appropriate flood insurance study or thirty (30) inches above the BFE as indicated in the flood insurance study or, if the BFE is unavailable, one-hundred-year flood elevations based on ultimate development watershed conditions. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a FEMA Elevation Certification to the city engineer, in accordance with section 30-34(a)(1), that the standard of this subsection is met. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of a commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including any basement, elevated eighteen (18) inches above the one-hundred-year water surface elevation based on encroached stream conditions as shown in the appropriate flood insurance study, or this construction, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight to eighteen (18) inches above the encroached base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If the flood insurance study does not include the property, the required one-hundred-year water surface elevations shall be based on ultimate development watershed conditions. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the city engineer, in accordance with section 30-34(a)(1), that the requirements of this subsection are met. 
(c)  Manufactured homes. 
(1)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation. Methods of anchoring may include but are not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(2)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, AE, and Shaded X shall be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least thirty (30) inches above the base flood elevation found in the current flood insurance study, or, if no flood insurance study is available, eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevations, as determined using ultimate development watershed conditions, and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation in accordance with all tie-down requirements imposed by state law or city ordinance. 
(3)  All manufactured homes not otherwise subject to the requirements of subsection 30-53(c)(1) or (c)(2) shall, if placed or substantially improved on sites within an existing manufactured home park or subdivision located within zones A1-30, AH, or AE of the FIRM, be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated thirty (30) inches above the base flood elevation found in the current flood insurance study, or, if no flood insurance study is available, eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevations, as determined using ultimate development watershed conditions; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers, or other foundation elements of equal or greater strength, with the lowest floor of the manufactured home elevated at least thirty-six (36) inches above grade, and securely anchored to a foundation system sufficient to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement in accordance with all tie-down requirements imposed by state law or city ordinance. 
(d)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM shall either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
(3)  Meet the permit requirements of section 30-34(a) and the elevation and anchoring requirements specified for "manufactured homes" in subsection 30-53(c). 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-17; Ord. No. 90-058, § II, 4-3-90; Ord. No. 97-056, § III, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2011-051, § 4, 4-5-11; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-54. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with sections 30-2, 30-3, and 30-4 of this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of sections 30-33 and 30-34 and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of twenty (20) lots or three (3) acres, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 30-5 or 30-32(6). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards or as outlined in the storm sewer ordinance of the city. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-18; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-55. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-5 are areas designated as areas of shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the top of the curb of the nearest street plus the depth number specified in the community's FIRM. If the building site is not located adjacent to a street, the lowest floor, including the basement, must be elevated a minimum of one (1) foot, plus the depth specified on the community's FIRM, above the highest adjacent existing ground elevation of the site. Fill for landscaping around the elevated structure will be limited to provide adequate drainage capacity by utilizing channelization methods that adequately route the water through the property. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the top of the curb of the nearest street plus the depth number specified on the FIRM; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or about that level referenced in subsection (2)a. of this section so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the city engineer that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 30-51(a)(1) are satisfied. 
(Code 1966, § 10½-19; Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-56. - Floodways. 
Floodways, located within areas of special flood hazard established section 30-5 above, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
(2)  If section 30-56(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 30-56. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
( Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-57. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article of the Code of Ordinances is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Sec. 30-58. - Penalties for non-compliance. 
Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. No. 20-881 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-20)  
Chapter 32 - MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cable television generally, Ch. 8; fire prevention generally, Ch. 11; housing generally, Ch. 15; motor vehicles and traffic generally, Ch. 18; inspection and abatement warrants generally, § 19-86 et seq.; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means any person authorized by the licensee of a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park to operate or maintain such park. 
Building official means the legally designated inspection authority of the building inspection division of the planning and development department or his authorized representative. 
Collector street means a roadway that collects traffic from local roadways and feeds the traffic to larger streets. 
Common access route means a private way which affords principal means of access to individual mobile home stands or auxiliary buildings. 
Driveway means a minor entranceway off the common access route within the park into an off-street parking area serving one (1) or more mobile homes. 
Drying yard means an area specifically designated for use by residents for the purpose of hanging clothes out to dry, usually approximately two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per one hundred (100) living units. 
Electrical connection means the connection consisting of all wiring, fittings and appurtenances from the disconnect box to the distribution system within a mobile home or recreational vehicle. 
Front means that part of the mobile home space which abuts the common access or private drive, if double. The owner shall elect which one is the front, and such an election shall be stated and shown on the final plat. 
HUD-code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g). 
Internal street means the same as common access route. 
License means a written license issued by the city building official permitting a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter. 
Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter. 
Local street means a street that gathers local traffic from a residential or other low-intensity area and transports it to collector streets. 
Manufactured housing or manufactured home means a HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home and collectively means and refers to both. 
Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. 
Mobile home lot means a parcel or tract of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants and which is located in a mobile home subdivision approved by the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
Mobile home park means a unified development of mobile home spaces or stands arranged on a tract of land under private ownership meeting all requirements of this chapter. 
Mobile home subdivision means a unified development of mobile home sites or lots which have been divided for the purpose of individual ownership and which is governed by the provisions of the subdivision regulations of the city. 
Natural or artificial barrier means any creek, ravine, pond, railroad, fence, hedge or similar physical separation which prohibits a direct view from outside the mobile home park. 
Park occupant means one who occupies a mobile home or recreational vehicle within a licensed park. 
Parking space means a minimum space nine (9) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in length, located within the boundary of the mobile home space for the purpose of automobile storage. 
Permit means a written permit or certification issued by the building official permitting the construction, alteration or extension of a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued under this chapter. 
Pickup coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. 
Playground means a tract or parcel of land one (1) to four (4) acres in size which is reserved and designed primarily for a children's play area and equipped with conventional playground facilities such as swings, slides, etc., in addition to larger facilities such as ballfields or adult recreation areas. 
Plot plan means a graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, and indicating the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling, self-propelled or to be towed behind a motor vehicle, without special permit being needed, of a gross weight of not more than four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds and having an overall length of not more than twenty-eight (28) feet. 
Recreational vehicle park means a development under private ownership designed primarily for transient service on which recreational vehicles, pickup coaches and self-propelled motorized vehicles are parked or situated and used for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for such vehicles meeting all the requirements of this chapter. 
Recreational vehicle stand means a parcel or area of land for the placement of a single recreational vehicle and the exclusive use of its occupants and which is located in a recreational vehicle park approved by the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
Register means a well-bound book, kept legibly, covering all pertinent information required by this chapter. 
Replacement means the act of moving one (1) mobile home from its existing stand and replacing it with another mobile home. 
Screening device means a solid masonry or wooden wall or fence, a woven wire or chainlink fence with metal strips woven through the mesh to form a solid screen, a woven wire or chainlink fence with evergreen shrubs forming a sight screen. 
Service building means a structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter. 
Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a mobile home or recreational vehicle to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the mobile home park or recreational vehicle park. 
Sewer service riser pipe means that portion of a sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a mobile home or recreational vehicle stall. 
Site means the same as stand, unless otherwise stated in the section. 
Site plan means the same as plot plan. 
Stall means that limited portion of the mobile home stand which has been readied for the placement and use of a mobile home in accordance with this chapter. 
Stand means an area within the park which has been improved for a single mobile home or recreational vehicle as provided in this chapter. 
Subdivision ordinance means the rules and regulations governing the platting, subdivision and development of land within the city and codified in chapter 34 of this Code. 
Tot lot means a small parcel of land, usually one-half acre or less in size, designed as a children's play area and equipped with swings, slides, merry-go-rounds and similar facilities. 
Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a mobile home or recreational vehicle. 
Water riser pipe means that portion of the private water service system serving a mobile home or recreational vehicle park, which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a mobile home or recreational vehicle space. 
Zoning ordinance means the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city, being Ordinance No. 69-01, as amended, and codified as chapter 35 of this Code. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 32-2. - Inspections. 
The building official, the fire chief, the fire marshal, the police chief, the city engineer, the director of public utilities and the tax assessor-collector are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 23-40) 
Cross reference— Inspection and abatement warrants generally, § 19-86 et seq.  
Sec. 32-3. - Entry on premises. 
The building official, the fire chief, the fire marshal, the police chief, the city engineer, the executive director of utilities and the tax assessor-collector or other city official shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter and for the maintenance of the utilities. 
(Code 1966, § 23-41)  
Sec. 32-4. - Inspection of register. 
The building official, the fire chief, the fire marshal, the police chief and the tax assessor-collector shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home or recreational vehicle park. 
(Code 1966, § 23-42)  
Sec. 32-5. - Duty of occupants. 
It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home or recreational vehicle within a licensed park to give the licensee, his agent or authorized employee access to any part of such park at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effectuate compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 23-43)  
Sec. 32-6. - Violations—Notice of suspension of license. 
Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home or recreational vehicle park, the city building official, after consultation with the city official he deems competent to judge, finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice in writing in accordance with section 32-7 to the licensee that, unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in such notice, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the city building official shall reinspect such park, requesting assistance from other city departments as may be required, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected he shall immediately suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the licensee. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, the licensee shall cease operation of such park, except as provided in section 32-8. 
(Code 1966, § 23-35)  
Sec. 32-7. - Same—Requirements of notice. 
Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city building official shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or agent. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the licensee or his agent, provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or his agent when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to his last known address or when he has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 23-50)  
Sec. 32-8. - Same—Appeal from notice issued by the building official. 
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter by the building official may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of adjustment, provided that such person shall file within ten (10) days after the date the notice was served, in the office of the city secretary, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension. Upon receipt of such petition, the city secretary shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(Code 1966, § 23-52)  
Sec. 32-9. - Same—Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 23-75)  
Secs. 32-10—32-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 32-36. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park or recreational vehicle park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued by the building official in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. 
(Code 1966, § 23-24)  
Sec. 32-37. - Exceptions. 
No permit shall be issued for the construction or occupancy of a permanent residential structure in any mobile home subdivision, mobile home park or recreational vehicle park with the following exceptions: 
(1)  One (1) existing residential structure may be retained or one (1) new residential structure may be constructed for the occupancy of the owner or agent of the park or subdivision; 
(2)  An existing residence may be converted to a clubhouse, community center or service building for use by the residents of the mobile home subdivision, mobile home park or recreational vehicle park. 
(Code 1966, § 23-23)  
Sec. 32-38. - Application requirements. 
(a)  All applications for permits required under this article shall be made upon standard forms provided by the building official and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and owner; 
(2)  Location and legal description of the mobile home park or recreational vehicle park; 
(b)  To this application shall be attached ten (10) copies of the plot plan and construction drawings drawn to a standard scale on a standard twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheet. The plan and construction drawings shall include all data required under this chapter. One (1) print of the plot plan is to be circulated by the building official to each of the city departments or divisions designated. The plot plan does not replace or supersede any subdivision plat of the property required by state law to be recorded in county plat records after review and approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1966, § 23-25)  
Sec. 32-39. - Plot plan. 
(a)  The plot plan shall be filed as required by section 32-38 and shall show the following: 
(1)  The area and dimensions of the proposed park with identification of location and boundaries; 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile home and recreational vehicle stands; 
(3)  The location and dimension of driveways, roadways and walkways; 
(4)  The location and size of water and sewer lines and riser pipes; 
(5)  The location and details of lighting, electrical and gas systems and semipublic telephone locations; 
(6)  The location of all water and sewer main lines and electrical lines and the dedication to the city of all necessary easements; 
(7)  The locations of all existing and proposed buildings and structures; 
(8)  Existing and proposed topography of the proposed park; 
(9)  The locations of fire mains, including the size, the hydrants and fire-extinguishing equipment; 
(10)  Such other reasonable information as may be required by city officials. 
(b)  Copies of the plot plan shall be circulated to the following city departments by the building official and approval obtained from them prior to issuance of a permit: engineering division, fire department, police department, utilities department, finance and taxation department and the parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1966, § 23-60)  
Sec. 32-40. - Fees. 
(a)  Building permit. Each application to the building official for a permit required under this article shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for up to the first ten (10) stands and two dollars ($2.00) per stand thereafter. 
(b)  Plumbing permit. The plumbing permit fee shall be two dollars ($2.00) per stand. 
(c)  Electrical permit. The electrical permit fee shall be two dollars ($2.00) per stand. 
(Code 1966, § 23-26)  
Sec. 32-41. - Issuance. 
When upon review of the application, the building official is satisfied that the proposed plans meet the requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and after four (4) complete sets of plans have been returned reflecting all changes requested by any city official, a permit required under this article shall be issued. 
(Code 1966, § 23-27)  
Sec. 32-42. - Denial; hearing. 
Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter under the procedure provided in section 32-43. 
(Code 1966, § 23-28)  
Sec. 32-43. - Appeal from denial. 
Any person affected by the refusal of the building official to issue a permit under the provisions of this article may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of adjustment, provided that such person shall file within ten (10) days after the day the permit was refused, in the office of the building official, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such petition, the building official shall forward it to the city secretary who shall set a time and place for such hearing and give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such permit should be issued. 
(Code 1966, § 23-51)  
Secs. 32-44—32-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 32-61. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home or recreational vehicle park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid license issued for the current year by the city building official in the name of such person for the specific park. All applications for licenses shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the city building official, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this chapter. The city building official shall not issue a license unless the applicant is a valid holder of a certificate of occupancy. When a certificate of occupancy is revoked, the license is automatically void. 
(Code 1966, § 23-30)  
Sec. 32-62. - Application for original license. 
(a)  Application for the original license required under this article shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the deposit of the license fee provided in this article and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the park; 
(3)  A plot plan of the park showing all mobile home or recreational vehicle stands, structures, roads, walkways and other service facilities. 
(b)  Before the original license or renewal is issued for the operation of any mobile home or recreational vehicle park, the city building official shall be assured of compliance with all provisions of this chapter. Mobile home and recreational vehicle parks in existence and lawfully operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (May 22, 1984) may continue to operate as nonconforming parks upon application for and receipt of a park license in accordance with the application procedures in this section. The provisions of section 35-13 of this Code relating to nonconforming uses and structures shall apply to nonconforming parks licensed under this article. Such parks shall be inspected at least once a year to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the occupants of the park. 
(Code 1966, § 23-31)  
Sec. 32-63. - Fee. 
Each original application or renewal for the license required under this article shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary, plus an additional fee for each mobile home stand or travel trailer stand in the mobile home or recreational vehicle park. The original fee shall be prorated on the nearest quarterly basis between the date of the original license and October 1 of that fiscal year. All renewal fees shall be due on October 1 of each year. 
(Code 1966, § 23-33)  
Sec. 32-64. - Application for renewal. 
Application for renewal of the license required under this article shall be made in writing by the licensee on forms furnished by the city building official on or before October 1 of each year. Such application shall contain any change in the information occurring after the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. 
(Code 1966, § 23-32)  
Sec. 32-65. - Transferability. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferred. A new license will be issued to any new owner upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 23-34)  
Secs. 32-66—32-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 32-81. - General requirements. 
Any development, redevelopment, alteration or expansion of a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park within the city limits shall be done in compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Location. A mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be located only in designated zoning areas and with a specific use permit for that purpose, as provided and defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Basic minimum requirements. 
a.  Area requirements. There is no minimum area which may be developed or used for mobile home park purposes. 
b.  Stand requirements. Each stand shall provide a minimum area of five thousand (5,000) square feet; however, no such stand shall be less than forty (40) feet in width nor less than one hundred (100) feet in depth. 
c.  Screening. There shall be constructed and maintained a permanent screening device not less than six (6) feet in height on all sides of the park, except where natural barriers exist to form all or part of such a screen or where roadways exist to create a traffic hazard. 
d.  Open space requirements. 
1.  The minimum front yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home or recreational vehicle to the front line of the stand. 
2.  No mobile home or travel trailer shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any adjoining public right-of-way. 
3.  For other structures, the minimum front yard setback shall be at least fifteen (15) feet. 
4.  The minimum distance between mobile homes and recreational vehicles shall be twenty (20) feet on the side and sixteen (16) feet on the front and rear. 
e.  Height regulations. 
1.  The height limit for any mobile home or recreational vehicle in the park shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
2.  The height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation, measured at ninety (90) degrees to the frame, shall not be greater than three (3) feet; for recreational vehicles not greater than two (2) feet. 
f.  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved, covered with stone screenings or other solid material or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust. 
g.  Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. The adequacy of drainage facilities shall be verified by a licensed professional engineer. There shall be an analysis and design of the one-hundred-year flood improvements to meet Federal Emergency Management Agency requirements. 
h.  Design and location of storage facilities. Storage facilities with a minimum capacity of two hundred (200) cubic feet per stand may be provided on the stand or in compounds located within one hundred (100) feet of each stand. Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the park and shall be faced with masonry, porcelainized steel, baked enameled steel or other material equal in fire resistance, durability and appearance or of any equal material approved by the building official. 
i.  Mobile home stalls. The area of the mobile home stall shall be concrete to provide adequate support for the placement of the mobile home. 
j.  Parking. Every mobile home stand shall have two (2) off-street parking spaces; recreational vehicle stands shall have one (1). 
(Code 1966, § 23-61)  
Sec. 32-82. - Access and traffic circulation. 
(a)  Generally. Internal streets in mobile home parks or recreational vehicle parks shall be privately owned, built and maintained and shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all stands and parking spaces and to facilities for common use of park residents. 
(b)  Internal streets or common access routes. 
(1)  An internal street or common access route shall be provided to each stand. All internal streets or common access routes shall be a minimum of thirty-four (34) feet in width from back of curb to back of curb. The internal streets shall be continuous and connect with either outer streets in the park, public streets or, in the alternative, shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum radius of forty (40) feet. All other streets shall have a minimum radius at intersections of thirty (30) feet. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length. 
(2)  All streets shall be constructed of at least two (2) inches of asphalt, six (6) inches of lime subgrade and with standard or surmountable curbs. Alternative materials for street construction may be approved by the city engineer as long as the alternative exceeds the standards in this section. 
(c)  Surfacing, location of off-street parking. Off-street parking for at least two (2) vehicles per stand shall be concrete, and all other parking areas shall be constructed of all-weather materials and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other mobile homes, recreational vehicles and for public parking within the park. 
(d)  Minimum parking area for vehicle storage. A minimum parking area of one hundred sixty (160) square feet per mobile home space shall be provided for storage of boats or vehicles in excess of two (2) per mobile home unit to minimize on-street parking and to facilitate the movement of emergency vehicles into and through the park. 
(e)  Maintenance of internal streets. Internal streets shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards at the expense of the licensee. Inspection of the streets shall occur at least yearly in conjunction with other city inspections of the mobile home park or recreational vehicle park. The inspections shall be made by the city engineer and shall cover the hazards listed in this subsection. 
(f)  Numbering, naming of streets. All streets within each park shall be numbered or named in an approved manner. 
(g)  Intersecting of interior streets adjoining public streets. Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at ninety (90) degrees and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with the traffic on those public streets. Design of the interior streets shall be approved by the traffic engineer with respect to horizontal and vertical alignment, access points to city streets, parking locations and internal access for emergency vehicles. 
(h)  Posting of signs. At each entrance to the park, an eighteen-inch by twenty-four-inch sign should be posted, stating: "Private Drive, No Thru Traffic." The licensee may also post a speed limit sign on this same post. 
(Code 1966, § 23-62) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic generally, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 32-83. - Area lighting. 
Adequate lighting for a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park shall be provided in a manner approved by the director of public utilities. 
(Code 1966, § 23-63)  
Sec. 32-84. - Installation of telephone lines, semipublic telephone. 
All telephone lines meeting the requirements of the telephone company shall be installed underground in mobile home parks or recreational vehicle parks. A minimum of one (1) semipublic telephone shall be provided in an easily accessible location twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
(Code 1966, § 23-64)  
Sec. 32-85. - Recreation area. 
(a)  Generally. All mobile home parks or recreational vehicle parks shall have at least one (1) recreation area, located as to be free of traffic hazards, easily accessible to all park residents and centrally located where topography permits. 
(b)  Extent. Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools and community buildings, shall be provided which, in the judgment of the park licensee, will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele the park is designed to serve. Provision of separate adult and tot lot recreational areas is encouraged. 
(c)  Size. Not less than eight (8) percent of the gross park area shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally in a central location. In large parks this may be decentralized. Recreation areas include space for community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation and child play areas and swimming pools, but not including vehicle parking, commercial, maintenance and utilities areas. 
(d)  Playground location. When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares and parking areas. Such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of dangerous conditions and hazards. 
(Code 1966, § 23-65) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation generally, Ch. 22.  
Sec. 32-86. - Water supply. 
(a)  Generally. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water meeting state standards shall be provided in each mobile home or recreational vehicle park. Connection shall be made to the public supply of water in accordance with chapter 26 of this Code. 
(b)  Water distribution system. 
(1)  The water supply system of the park shall be connected by pipes to all mobile home stands, buildings and other facilities requiring water. 
(2)  All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and city regulations and requirements. 
(3)  A master meter will be placed at the property line to serve the park, or individual water meters will be provided for each mobile home stand. If individual water meters are used, then the water system must be built in accordance with city subdivision requirements. 
(4)  A backflow preventer or vacuum break will be required to be placed at the property line on the discharge side of the master meter if the property is master metered. Beyond the master meter, the city has no maintenance responsibility. 
(c)  Individual water riser pipes and connections. 
(1)  Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the outside perimeter walls of the mobile home at a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position. 
(2)  Water riser service pipes shall extend at least four (4) inches above ground elevation. The pipe shall be at least three-quarters inch. The water outlet shall be capped in an approved manner when the stand is unoccupied. 
(3)  Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe. 
(4)  A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near each water riser pipe. 
(5)  Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water service. 
(Code 1966, § 23-66) 
Cross reference— Utilities generally, Ch. 26; plumbing code generally, § 28-141 et seq.  
Sec. 32-87. - Sewage disposal. 
(a)  General requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all mobile home and recreational vehicle parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. The sewerage system for a park shall be constructed in accordance with the plumbing code adopted in chapter 28 of this Code. All proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the city building official prior to construction, except that the use of septic tanks for the disposal of sewage shall not be approved. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of the appropriate regulatory agency of the state. The city has no maintenance responsibility for sewage disposal facilities inside the mobile home park. 
(b)  Individual sewer connections. 
(1)  Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position. 
(2)  The sewer connection from the mobile home to the sewer riser pipe shall have a nominal inside diameter of at least three (3) inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one-fourth inch per foot. The sewer connection shall consist of one (1) pipeline only without any branch fittings. All joints shall be watertight. All sewer connections shall comply with the requirements of the city and shall be inspected by the city plumbing inspector. 
(3)  All materials used for sewer connections shall be in accordance with the plumbing code and specifications in the building official's office. 
(4)  Provision shall be made for capping the sewer riser pipe in an approved manner when the stand is unoccupied. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least four (4) inches above ground elevation. 
(Code 1966, § 23-67) 
Cross reference— Utilities generally, Ch. 26; plumbing code generally, § 28-141 et seq.  
Sec. 32-88. - Electrical distribution system. 
(a)  Installation. All electrical wiring in the mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be underground and installed in accordance with the electrical code adopted in chapter 28 of this Code and specifications of the city. 
(b)  General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems. 
(c)  Power distribution lines. Main power lines shall be in approved conduit. Such conductors shall be located not less than one (1) foot radial distance from water, sewer or gas lines. The location of all such underground lines shall be clearly marked by surface signs at approved intervals. 
(d)  Individual electrical connections. 
(1)  Each stand shall be served and metered by the city electrical department the same as a single-family residential lot, with an underground service line and be provided with an approved disconnecting device and overcurrent protective equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, fifty (50) amperes. 
(2)  Outlets (receptacles or pressure connectors) shall be housed in an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved weatherproof outlet box and shall be located not more than twenty-five (25) feet from the overcurrent protective device in the mobile home or travel trailer. Two (2) three-pole, four-wire, grounding-type shall be used. 
(3)  Receptacles shall be in accordance with American Standard Outlet Receptacle C-73-1 or equivalent. 
(4)  The mobile home or travel trailer shall be connected to the outlet box by an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved type of flexible supply cord with a male attachment plug or with pressure connections. If the distance from the receptacle to the mobile home exceeds three (3) feet, the cord shall be installed underground. 
(e)  Required grounding. All exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of mobile homes and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor with branch circuit conductors. The neutral conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes or other equipment; the grounding conductor shall be attached to a permanent ground in an approved manner. 
(Code 1966, § 23-68) 
Cross reference— Utilities generally, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 32-89. - Service buildings and other community service facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. The requirements of this section shall apply to mobile home or recreational vehicle park service buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Management offices, repair shops and storage areas; 
(2)  Sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Laundry facilities; 
(4)  Indoor recreation areas; and 
(5)  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the benefit and convenience of park occupants. 
(b)  Structural requirements for buildings. 
(1)  All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather. 
(2)  All structures shall be constructed in conformance with the building code adopted in chapter 7 of this Code. 
(c)  Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and incinerators. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves and incinerators shall be located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities approved by the fire marshal. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. 
(Code 1966, § 23-69)  
Sec. 32-90. - Refuse and garbage handling. 
(a)  A mobile home shall be considered as an individual family unit which requires it to abide by chapter 24 of this Code pertaining to residential sanitation collection. 
(b)  Any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any mobile home in the city shall have garbage, trash and rubbish regularly removed by the city sanitation division. 
(c)  The charges for such services shall be included on the monthly utility bill of the applicant, as determined by the utility deposit or service application, and all utility service may be suspended upon failure to pay the required charges within ten (10) days from the due date of the bill. 
(d)  The charge for collecting garbage, trash and rubbish from each individual family unit is established by the city council and is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(e)  All individual family units shall use plastic bags, as specified in chapter 24 of this Code, and shall place such bags on the curb or alley line on collection days as specified by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 23-70) 
Cross reference— Solid waste generally, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 32-91. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Grounds, buildings and structures in mobile home and recreational vehicle parks shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the city/county health director. 
(b)  Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(c)  The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious insects or other pests. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of noxious weeds detrimental to health in accordance with chapter 20 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 23-71) 
Cross reference— Health generally, Ch. 14; nuisances generally, Ch. 20; solid waste disposal generally, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 32-92. - Fuel supply and storage. 
Fuel supply and storage in mobile home or recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Natural gas system. 
a.  Natural gas piping systems shall be installed underground and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. 
b.  Each stand provided with piped gas shall have an approved manual shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use. 
(2)  Liquefied petroleum gas system. 
a.  Individual liquefied petroleum gas systems may be used, but, when used, shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes of the city and regulations of the state railroad commission pertaining thereto. 
b.  Liquefied petroleum gas containers shall be installed on an individual space to serve only that mobile home or recreational vehicle occupying that space. 
c.  No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located outside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure, unless such installations are approved by the building official and the fire marshal. 
(Code 1966, § 23-72)  
Sec. 32-93. - Fire safety standards. 
(a)  Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases. In mobile home and recreational vehicle parks where liquefied petroleum gases are stored or dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with requirements of the plumbing code and the state railroad commission regulations. 
(b)  Storage and handling of flammable liquids. In parks in which gasoline, fuel oil or other flammable liquids are stored and/or dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with the fire code adopted in chapter 29 of this Code. 
(c)  Access for firefighting. Approaches to all recreational vehicles and mobile homes shall be kept clear for firefighting. 
(d)  Water supply facilities for fire department operations. Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to the city water supply. Water mains for fire protection purposes are to be sized six (6) ID or larger with standard city hydrants located within three hundred (300) feet of all mobile home sites, measured along driveways or streets, and such water supply systems shall meet the minimum standards for firefighting purposes as required by the state board of insurance. Fire hydrants will be subject to periodic inspections by the fire department. It shall be the responsibility of the park licensee to ensure that the fire hydrants in need of immediate repair shall be repaired in a satisfactory manner within twenty-four (24) hours. Nonemergency repairs shall be made within fourteen (14) days upon receipt of notification. "Nonemergency," for purposes of this subsection, shall mean of a nature not impairing the actual use intended. 
(e)  Collection, disposal of rubbish. The park licensee or agent shall provide an adequate system of collection and safe disposal of rubbish approved by the fire marshal and the city/county health director. 
(f)  Dry brush, limbs, leaves and weeds. The park licensee or agent shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves, limbs and weeds. 
(Code 1966, § 23-73) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention generally, Ch. 11; fire code, Ch. 29.  
Sec. 32-94. - Responsibilities of management and occupants. 
(a)  Responsibilities of the park management. The following shall be the responsibility of mobile home or recreational vehicle park management: 
(1)  All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this chapter as apply to the licensee or his agent. 
(2)  The licensee or his agent shall operate the park in compliance with this and other applicable provisions and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  The licensee or his agent shall notify each and every park occupant of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter. 
(4)  The licensee or his agent shall maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and stand number of all park residents; 
b.  Mobile home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number; 
c.  Make and model of each recreational vehicle and the license number; 
d.  Location of each mobile home and recreational vehicle within the park by stand number; 
e.  Dates of arrival and departure of each mobile home and recreational vehicle; 
f.  Name and address of business or individual who installed each mobile home or recreational vehicle; 
A new register shall be initiated on January 1 of each year, and the old register may thereafter be retired but shall be retained on the premises for at least three (3) years following its retirement. Registers shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by any official of the city whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained therein. 
(5)  The licensee or his agent shall furnish to the tax assessor-collector for the city, within ten (10) days after January 1 of each year, a list of all mobile homes in the park on January 1. The list shall contain the owner's name and address; the make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number of the mobile home; and the location of each mobile home within the park. Such list shall be prepared using forms provided by the tax assessor-collector of the city. 
(6)  Every park operator shall keep a valid certificate of occupancy for the park. 
(7)  The licensee or his agent shall ensure the proper placement of each mobile home or recreational vehicle on its stand by each park occupant and ensure the installation of all tie downs in accordance with state standards. 
(b)  Responsibilities of park occupants. Responsibilities of park occupants include the following: 
(1)  All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this chapter. 
(2)  The park occupant shall comply with all requirements of this chapter and shall maintain his stand and its facilities and equipment in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home or recreational vehicle on its stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instruction of the park management. 
(4)  Fire-resistant skirting or an equal substitute approved by the building official shall be required on all mobile homes and shall be installed within sixty (60) days after emplacement of the mobile home. 
(5)  Skirtings, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately underneath a mobile home for storage shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 
a.  The storage area shall have a base of impervious material. 
b.  Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home nor be a fire hazard. 
(6)  The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of the mobile home or recreational vehicle on its standard and proper installation of all tie downs in accordance with state standards. 
(Code 1966, § 23-74)  
Chapter 33 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-406, § 2, adopted December 1, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 33, §§ 33-1—33-8, 33-46—33-50, 33-61—33-67, 33-91—33-98, 33-121—33-127, 33-146—33-153, 33-166—33-169, 33-181—33-184, 33-196—33-199, 33-211—33-213, 33-221, 33-251—33-257, and enacted a new Ch. 33 as set out herein. The former Ch. 33 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— View and passage obstructions at intersections, § 18-196 et seq.; signs and other advertising devices in parks, § 22-29; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 25; buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Title, authority, purpose and intent. 
(a)  Title. This chapter may be known as the sign ordinance or Denton Sign Code. 
(b)  Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code ch. 216, the City Charter, and the city's inherent police power (the power to govern). 
(c)  Purposes and intent. By adopting this chapter, the city council intends to balance several important and competing interests, including the constitutional right to free speech and the public interests in safety and esthetics, including controlling visual clutter. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the construction, reconstruction, erection, installation, placement, relocation, maintenance, display, use, modification, alteration and removal of private signs within the city, in a manner that does not favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech and does not regulate noncommercial speech by content. 
(d)  Methods. It is the intent of this chapter to regulate signs generally by classifying each sign according to its design and construction and by regulating, based on such classification, the type, number, size, height and setback of signs according to their location in the various zoning districts. 
(e)  Minimal burden. It is also the intent and determination of the city council that the regulations in this chapter be and are the minimum necessary and least burdensome to accomplish the purposes stated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 2, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-1A. - Basic principles. 
(a)  Message neutrality policy. It is the policy of the city to regulate signs in a manner that does not favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech, and that does not regulate protected noncommercial speech by message content. 
(b)  Message substitution policy. Subject to the private property owner's consent, a constitutionally protected noncommercial message of any category or content may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any allowed commercial message or any other protected noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular protected noncommercial message over any other protected noncommercial message. Message substitution is a continuing right which may be exercised any number of times. The message substitution right does not: 1) create a right to increase the total amount of sign display area on a site or parcel; 2) create a right to substitute an off-site commercial message in place of an onsite commercial message or in place of a noncommercial message; 3) affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device must be properly permitted; 4) authorize changing the physical method of image presentation (such as digital or neon) display without a permit; or 5) authorize a physical change to the sign structure without compliance with applicable building codes, safety codes, and neutrally-applicable rules for sign size, height, orientation, setback, separation or illumination. 
(c)  Enforcement authority. The director of planning and development is authorized and directed to administer and enforce this chapter. 
(d)  Administrative interpretations. Interpretations of this chapter are to be made initially by the director in consultation with the city attorney. All interpretations of this chapter are to be exercised in light of the message neutrality and message substitution policies. Where a particular type of sign is proposed, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a "structure" as defined in the Building Code, as adopted by the city, then the board of adjustment shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type that is legal under the current Code, using physical and structural similarity, that is expressly regulated by this chapter. 
(e)  Responsibility for compliance. The responsibility for compliance with this chapter rests jointly and severally upon the sign owner, the permit holder, all parties holding the present right of possession and control of the property whereon a sign is located, mounted or installed. 
(f)  Onsite-offsite distinction. Within this chapter, the distinction between onsite signs and offsite signs applies only to commercial messages. It does not apply to non-commercial messages. 
(g)  Billboard policy. New billboards, as defined herein, are prohibited. Existing legal billboards may not be converted to digital display. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 2, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned sign. A sign: 
(1)  Which, for at least six (6) continuous months, does not identify or advertise a bona fide business, establishment, lessor, service, owner, product or activity; 
(2)  For which no legal owner can be found; or 
(3)  Which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies. 
Advertising. To convey information or ideas to, to seek the attraction of, or to direct the attention of, the public to any location, event, person, activity, goods, services or merchandise. 
Attached sign. A sign, other than a wind device sign, attached to or supported by any part of a building, including but not limited to a wall, roof, window, canopy, awning, or marquee. Wall, roof, and projecting signs shall be considered attached signs. 
Billboard. A permanent structure sign in a fixed location which meets any one or more of the following criteria: 1) it is used for general advertising for hire; 2) it is used to display off-site commercial messages; 3) it constitutes a separate principal use of the property, in contrast to an auxiliary or accessory use to the principal use of the property. 
City means the City of Denton Texas. 
City property means any parcel of land, or separately leasable space, over which the city (or any of its owned or controlled entities) holds the present right of possession and control, regardless of who may hold legal fee title, or that is within the public right-of-way. 
Curbline. An imaginary line drawn along and parallel to the outermost part or back of the curb and gutter on either side of a public street; or, if there is no curb and gutter, along and parallel to the outermost portion of the paved street; or, if there is no paved street, along and parallel to the outermost edge of the traveled portion of the street. 
Digital display means image display methods utilizing LED (light emitting diode), LCD (liquid crystal display), plasma display, projected images, or any functionally equivalent technology, and which is capable of automated, remote or computer control to change the image, either in a "slide show" manner (series of still images), or full motion animation, or any combination of them. 
Dilapidated or deteriorated sign. A sign: 
(1)  Where any portion of the finished material, surface or message portion of the sign is visibly faded, flaked, broken off, missing, cracked, splintered, defective or is otherwise visibly deteriorated or in a state of disrepair so as not to substantially appear as it was intended or designed to appear when originally constructed; 
(2)  Whose elements or the structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented or torn, twisted, leaning or at angles other than those at which it was originally erected, such as may result from being blown or by the failure of a structural support. 
Director means the director of planning and development for the city. 
Display face means the portion of a sign that is available for displaying sign copy, together with any frame, color, panel, ornamental molding, or condition which forms an integral part of the sign copy and which is used to differentiate such sign copy from any wall or background against which it may be placed. Those portions of the supports, uprights or base of a sign that do not function as a sign shall not be considered as part of the display face. 
Early voting period shall have the same meaning defined by the Texas Election Code, as currently drafted or hereafter revised. 
Establishment. Any legal use of land, other than long-term residential, which involves the use of structures subject to the Building Code. By way of example and not limitation, this definition includes businesses, factories, farms, schools, hospitals, hotels and motels, offices and libraries, but does not include single-family homes, mobile homes, residential apartments, residential care facilities, or residential condominiums. Multi-unit housing developments are considered establishments during the time of construction; individual units are not within the meaning of establishment once a certificate of occupancy has been issued or once a full-time residency begins. 
Flag means a piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular, of distinctive design, used as a symbol. 
Front yard. An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street and extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and from the main building line as specified for the district in which it is located (the "building setback line"). 
General advertising for hire. The enterprise of providing sign display area to a variety of advertisers or message sponsors, typically for a fee or other valuable consideration. 
Ground sign. A sign, other than a wind device sign, whose principal support is provided by burying, anchoring or otherwise connecting the sign, or supporting structure thereof, to the ground and which is not a portable sign or attached sign. 
Mobile billboard means a motorized vehicle with sign display area that is used for general advertising for hire. Mobile billboard advertising includes any vehicle, or wheeled conveyance which carries, conveys, pulls, or transports any sign or billboard for the primary purpose of advertising. 
Monument sign. A ground sign, other than a wind device sign, which is solid from the ground up, and is made of stone, concrete, metal, routed wood planks or beams, brick or similar materials, and no visible pole. 
Off-premises sign. A sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, establishment, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product not principally located or primarily manufactured, sold, offered or performed on the premises on which the sign is located. 
On-premises sign. A sign identifying or advertising a business, establishment, person, or activity, and installed and maintained on the same premises as the business, person, or activity. A sign which promotes or displays a political, religious or ideological thought, belief, opinion or other noncommercial message shall be considered an on-premises sign. 
Permanent sign means a sign that is solidly attached to a building, structure, or the ground by means of mounting brackets, bolts, welds, or other combination of attachment methods, thereby rendering the sign non-moveable or difficult to reposition without the use of machinery, cutting devices, or mechanical devices. See also "temporary sign." 
Political sign means a temporary sign promoting the election of a candidate, or an issue on the ballot of an upcoming election. 
Portable sign. A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design, use or construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support and which may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. Portable signs shall include but not be limited to signs mounted upon or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier or other mobile structure, with or without wheels, and A-frame and other similar signs, resting or leaning on the ground or other structures, but not permanently attached thereto. 
Premises means: 
For any developed property, the lot or contiguous area of real property which encompasses all the buildings, structures, appurtenances and land devoted to a common use, such as a shopping center or a business occupying and using multiple contiguous lots; or 
For undeveloped property, the area of real property designated as a lot on a plat approved in accordance with law and filed with the county clerk's office, or an unplatted tract of land as conveyed by deed or operation of law and recorded in the deed records of the county. 
Projecting sign. Any sign, other than a wind device sign, which is wholly affixed to or supported by any building wall and which extends beyond the building wall more than twelve (12) inches. 
Right-of-way means real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows the city to use the property for a public purpose. 
Roof sign. Any sign, other than a wind device sign, wholly erected on, affixed to, or supported by a roof of a building. 
Sign as used in this chapter, generally means the display of any visually communicative image placed on public display and visible from the exterior of any portion of the public right-of-way or place open to passage by the public. The general definition of "sign" does not include the following enumerated items: 
(a)  Aerial banners towed behind aircraft; 
(b)  Architectural features—Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts), which do not perform a communicative function (examples include color stripes around an office building or retail store); 
(c)  Automated Teller Machines (ATM's), when not used for general advertising; 
(d)  Cornerstones and foundation stones; 
(e)  The legal use of fireworks, candles and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this chapter; 
(f)  Grave markers, gravestones, headstones, mausoleums, shrines, and other markers of the deceased; 
(g)  Historical monuments, plaques and tablets; 
(h)  Holiday and cultural observance decorations displayed in season, including inflatable objects, on private residential property which are on display for not more than forty-five (45) calendar days per year (cumulative, per dwelling unit) and which do not include commercial messages; 
(i)  Inflatable gymnasiums associated with legal residential uses—Inflatable, temporary, moveable, gymnasium devices commonly used for children's birthday parties, and similar devices (also called "party jumps" or "bounce houses"); 
(j)  Interior graphics—Visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof; 
(k)  Manufacturers' marks—Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale; 
(l)  Mass transit graphics—Graphic images mounted on duly licensed and authorized mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city; 
(m)  News racks, newspaper vending devices and newsstands; 
(n)  Personal appearance: Makeup, masks, wigs, costumes, jewelry, apparel and the like, unless it constitutes a commercial mascot (which see); 
(o)  Safety warnings on motorized or electrified equipment; 
(p)  Searchlights used as part of a search and rescue or other emergency service operation (this exclusion does not apply to searchlights used as attention attracting devices for commercial or special events); 
(q)  Shopping carts, golf carts, horse drawn carriages, and similar devices (any motorized vehicle which may be legally operated upon a public right-of-way is not within this exclusion); 
(r)  Symbols embedded in architecture—Symbols of non-commercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal, by way of example and not limitation, such symbols include stained glass windows on churches, carved or bas relief doors or walls, bells and religious statuary; 
(s)  Vehicle and vessel insignia—On street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, non-commercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel; 
(t)  Flags; or 
(u)  Advertisements on scoreboards and fences of city athletic fields, where such advertisements are either: (1) located exclusively the field side; or (2) cannot be seen from the public right-of-way. 
Sign copy or ;i©\i; means the visually communicative elements, including but not limited to words, letters, numbers, designs, figures or other symbolic presentation incorporated into a sign with the purpose of attracting attention to the subject matter or message. 
Supporting structure. Any pole, post, cable, foundation or other supporting structural materials or fixtures arranged, designed or used to hold, secure or support a sign, abandoned sign, or part thereof. 
Temporary sign. A sign that is constructed of lightweight or flimsy material, and is easily installed and removed using ordinary hand tools. Any sign that qualifies as a "structure" under the Building Code, and for which a building permit is required is not within this definition. 
Visibility point. The viewing locations, at a height of six (6) feet, determined by extending the side yard setback lines of the property so as to intersect the curb line of the public street fronting the property, then measuring from the intersecting points along the curb line away from the property in each direction for a distance of one hundred (100) feet. If the street fronting the property is one-way, the visibility point in the direction from which traffic approaches the property shall be used to determine the visibility requirement. 
Voting period shall have the same meaning defined by the Texas Election Code, as currently drafted or hereafter revised. 
Wall sign. Any sign, other than a wind device, wholly affixed to, supported by or painted upon the wall of any building and which is not a projecting sign. 
Wind device sign. A banner, pennant, streamer, inflatable balloon or similar device made of cloth, canvas, plastic, or other similar flexible material, with or without a frame or other supporting structure, and used as a sign. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 2, 12-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-086, § 1, 4-7-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-246 , § 2, 2-6-18) 
State Law reference— Texas Election Code, §§ 61.003(b)(2), 85.001.  
Sec. 33-3. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-4. - Certain prohibited signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, construct, display, maintain, reconstruct, place, locate, relocate, or make use of any of the following signs for advertising purposes: 
(a)  Signs on private property without consent of owner. Signs located on private property without the consent of the owner of the premises and/or the persons holding the present right of possession and control. 
(b)  Parking and maneuvering areas. Signs which are located in or interfere with the use of a required off-street parking space or maneuvering area. 
(c)  Unsafe signs. Signs which are or become deteriorated, dilapidated or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe. 
(d)  Signs on public property. Any sign located on or attached to a public street light, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, traffic control device, street sign or other public structure or building, or any sign, located in, on, over, or within a public street, sidewalk, alley, easement or right-of-way. This prohibition shall not apply to projecting signs in central business districts as permitted by this chapter, markings made on public sidewalks as permitted by the Code of Ordinances or wind device signs placed over a public street by the city to advertise annual community events. (Signs placed by the city are not within the scope of this chapter. Under the government speech doctrine, the city does not need to give itself permission to display its own message on its own sign located on its own property.) 
(e)  Code compliance. Signs which do not comply with any applicable provision of a building code, electrical code or other applicable code or ordinance of the city. 
(f)  Trees and shrubs. Signs located on trees and shrubs. 
(g)  Motion picture signs. Signs which employ a motion picture machine, or which display moving images, or images which give the impression of motion, including those using digital display. 
(h)  Signs obscuring or interfering with certain views. 
(1)  Signs located or illuminated in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal or device or so as to obstruct or interfere with the view of a driver of approaching, emerging or intersecting traffic or so as to prevent any traveler on any street from obtaining a clear view of approaching vehicles for a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet along the street; 
(2)  A sign other than a traffic control sign or signal, in a triangle sight area at all intersections including that portion of public right-of-way and any corner lot within a triangle formed by a diagonal line extending through points on the two (2) property lines twenty-five (25) feet from the street corner intersection of the property lines or that point of the intersection of the property lines extended and intersecting the curblines. 
(i)  Certain illuminated signs. 
(1)  Signs, illuminated form within or without, and which: 
a.  Are illuminated in such a manner, to such intensity, or without proper shielding, so as to constitute a hazard to the operation of motor vehicles upon a public street or substantially interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of residential property; or 
b.  Have any type of intermittent illumination, including flashing, fading, revolving or blinking lights, or any type of moving, traveling or changing message by means of illumination, excluding temporary holiday lights and lights used for time and temperature signs; or 
(2)  Billboards using digital display technology. 
(j)  Portable signs. Any portable sign which is not a properly registered nonconforming portable sign as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-5. - Administration and enforcement. 
The director shall enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter. The director or city manager may delegate the duties and powers granted to and imposed upon the director by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-6. - Appeal, variances, and special exceptions. 
(a)  Compliance with state law. The board of adjustment is authorized to hear all appeals, variances, and special exceptions in accordance with powers, rules and procedures applicable as outlined in section 35.3.6 of the Denton Development Code. 
(b)  Sign variances. 
(1)  Any person requesting a variance from the provisions of the sign regulations shall submit an application on a form provided by the city, containing the information and plans requested in the application, along with the established filing fee. 
(2)  The board shall hear and act upon the variance request within a reasonable time, presumably within forty-five (45) days after the variance application is deemed complete. Nevertheless, this time period shall yield as necessary to assure compliance with notice, posting and quorum requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act, with any delay beyond the presumptive forty-five-day period timed to enable hearing and decision prior to adjournment of the next regularly scheduled board meeting. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the same manner as other appeals to the board. 
(3)  The board may grant a variance from a requirement of this chapter if it finds all the following exist: 
a.  Due to some unique condition or feature of the property which is not generally common to other properties, literal compliance with the sign regulation would cause unnecessary hardship; 
b.  The granting of the variance will not violate the spirit or the intent of the ordinance; and 
c.  The condition or feature, which creates the need for the variance, did not result from the property owners' acts. 
(4)  The board shall not grant a variance to any applicant solely for personal convenience, financial hardship, or other reasons unrelated to the property. If the board grants a variance, the variance shall be granted only to the extent that is reasonably necessary to remedy the hardship. The board may impose conditions relating to the use of the sign for which a variance is granted. 
(5)  All decisions of the board granting or refusing a variance shall be reduced to writing and signed by the chairperson. If a variance is denied, the decision shall state the conditions for the variance which were not met. If the board grants a variance, the decision shall state that all conditions for a variance were met, specify the degree to which the regulations are being varied, and be signed by the members voting in favor of the variance. 
(6)  No variance may be granted to authorize a sign type which is otherwise prohibited. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The board may grant a special exception from the regulations of this chapter governing the setback or height of a sign, other than a portable sign, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Visibility obstructions. When fifty (50) percent or more of the effective area of sign to be located in accordance with the setback or height requirements of this article would not be visible from at least one "visibility point" because of an existing building, structure, or the natural ground. 
(2)  Medical emergency signs. When a sign located on the property of an emergency medical treatment facility would not, because of the setback or height requirements of this article, be readily visible from adjacent public streets. For purposes of this provision, "emergency medical treatment facility" shall mean any hospital, clinic or other facility where medical aid is offered to a person or animal which suffers an injury or illness which requires immediate medical attention. 
(d)  In granting a special exception, the board shall specify by written order the setback or the height that will be allowed, but in doing so shall not allow deviation from the provisions of this chapter beyond what is minimally necessary to remedy the situation allowing for the special exception. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-7. - Historical landmark signs. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply insofar as they conflict with any provision applicable to a sign designated by the city as a historical landmark. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-8. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-9. - Permits. 
33.9.1. Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, relocate, erect, construct, reconstruct, replace, renovate, repair, or alter any part of a sign, including the face or supporting structure or other integral part, or to thereafter make use of a sign for which a permit is required herein, without having first secured a sign permit from the city, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. The administering official or employee shall not issue a permit for a sign that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of a sign required to be licensed by the state department of highways and public transportation as required by V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 391.001 et seq., except in accordance with a valid permit issued by the city. 
(c)  A simple change of sign copy, not involving a change to the physical structure of the sign, does not require a permit, so long as the change of copy does not violate any of the provisions of this chapter; however, the sign owner or agent shall provide written notice of the change, along with photos of the existing sign, as well as dimensional drawings showing the proposed changes. 
33.9.2. Application procedure. The application for a sign permit shall be submitted on such forms as the director may prescribe and shall be accompanied by such information, drawings and descriptive data as required by the director to ensure proper regulation of the sign and to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(a)  Application for a sign permit. Any person seeking a sign permit for a sign shall submit to the director a written application for such. The director shall prepare a sign permit application form and provide it to any person on request, along with such other materials and information as applicants need to submit for a permit. The same form may be used for both the application and the decision thereon. A single form may be used for multiple signs on the same site; however, the director may make separate decisions as to each sign. A sign permit application is complete only when it is accompanied by the appropriate application fee, in an amount set by resolution of the city council. In the case of after-the-fact permitting, the otherwise applicable fee shall be doubled. 
(1)  Application contents. The sign permit application form shall call for the following information, as applicable: 
i.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and, if applicable, the name, address, and telephone number; when the applicant is not the holder of legal title to the property, consent to the installation of the sign by the person(s) or entities who hold legal title and the present right of possession and control of the property; when the sign is proposed to be installed by a sign contractor, the name, address, contact information, and the license number, if any, of the contractor; 
ii.  As to the proposed location for the sign, two (2) sets of a fully dimensioned site plan (drawn to scale) indicating the street address, assessor's parcel number, zone classification, all property lines, public and private street lines (including center lines), structures, easements, utility poles and wires, and the location and size (in square feet) of all existing and proposed signs; 
iii.  As to existing signs already on parcel, information as to whether each is permitted or exempt from permitting; 
iv.  Accurate and scaled building elevation showing existing and proposed building signs; including existing and proposed sign area of each individual sign and the combined area of all signs (including those already existing or previously permitted) in relation to the maximum allowed sign area; 
v.  A statement as to whether the sign is intended to be used in whole or in part for off-site commercial messages, advertising for hire or general advertising; 
vi.  A statement or graphical description as to whether the proposed sign, or any part of it, is proposed to utilize any of the following physical methods of message presentation: sound; odor, smoke, fumes or steam; rotating, moving or animated elements; activation by wind or forced air; neon or other fluorescing gases; fluorescent or day-glow type colors; flashing or strobe lighting; light emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays or other video-like methods; digital display technology; use of live animals or living persons as part of the display; mannequins or statuary; 
vii.  A statement as to whether the property or parcel on which the sign is proposed to be erected or displayed, or any currently existing sign thereon, is the subject of any outstanding notice of zoning violation or notice to correct, including whether any such deficiencies are to be remedied by the proposed application; 
viii.  Photographs of the existing property, parcel and/or building on which the sign is proposed to be erected or displayed; 
ix.  In the case of any proposed sign which is subject to a discretionary process, such as a variance or specialized sign district, all information required by such process(es); 
x.  The director is authorized to modify the list of information to be provided on a sign permit application; however, additions may be made only after thirty (30) days public notice. The director is also authorized to request, require or accept application materials, in whole or in part, in electronic form, and to specify the acceptable computer formats for such submissions. 
(b)  Completeness determination. As the first step in processing a sign permit application, the director shall determine whether the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the applicant shall be so notified in person or in writing initially within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of the application; the notice of incompleteness shall state the points of deficiency and identify any additional information necessary. The applicant shall then have one opportunity, within ten (10) business days, to submit additional information to render the application complete; failure to do so within the ten-calendar-day period shall render the application void. 
(c)  Standards on application. When any sign permit application is complete and fully complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations, the permit shall be approved and issued within the required time. In the case of signs which are exempt from the sign permit requirement, there is a right to erect, display and maintain such signs as are authorized by this chapter, subject to the applicable rules. 
(d)  Disqualification. No sign permit application will be approved if: 
(1)  The applicant has installed a sign in violation of the provisions of this chapter and, at the time of submission of the application, each illegal or non-permitted sign has not been legalized, removed or a cure included in the application; 
(2)  There is any other existing code violation located on the site of the proposed sign(s) (other than an illegal or nonconforming sign that is not owned or controlled by the applicant and is located at a different establishment) which has not been cured at the time of the application, unless the noncompliance is proposed to be cured as part of the application; 
(3)  The sign application is substantially the same as an application previously denied, unless: (i) twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the last application, or (ii) new evidence or proof of changed conditions is furnished in the new application; 
(4)  The applicant has not obtained any applicable required use permit or conditional use permit. However, applications for such permits may be processed simultaneously with a sign permit application. 
(e)  Permits issued in error. Any approval or permit issued in error may be summarily revoked by the director upon written notice to the permittee, stating the reason for the revocation. "Issued in error" means that the permit should not have been issued in the first place and includes but is not limited to omissions, errors or misrepresentations in the application materials, and oversights or errors in the processing thereof. 
(f)  Denial. When a sign permit application is denied, the denial shall be in writing and sent or delivered to the address shown on the applicant's application form, and shall specifically state the grounds for denial. 
(g)  Timely decision. At each level of review or appeal, the decision on a sign permit application shall be rendered in writing within the time limits for other building permits under state law - V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 214.904. The time period begins running when an appeal, challenge or objection is received, the application is complete (or is deemed complete because no notice of incompleteness has been given), an amendment is received, or the notice of appeal has been filed, whichever applies. The timely decision requirement may be waived by the applicant or appellant. If a decision is not rendered within the required time, then the application or appeal shall be deemed denied; in the case of an appeal, the lower level decision shall be deemed affirmed. 
(h)  During the pendency of review or appeal, the status quo of the subject sign(s) shall be maintained. This does not apply whenever a sign, by virtue of its physical condition, constitutes an immediate threat to public safety. 
33.9.3. Fees. If the plans and specifications for a sign set forth in any application for a permit required under this division conform to all of the requirements of this chapter and any other ordinance applicable thereto, the director shall, upon payment of the applicable permit fee, issue the appropriate permit. Permit fees shall be established by the city council. 
33.9.4. Duration. 
(a)  Ground or attached signs. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a permit issued for a ground or attached sign shall terminate if the sign is not thereafter installed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance. 
(b)  Signs licensed by the state. A sign permit issued by the city for a sign required to be licensed by the state department of highways and public transportation under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 391.001 et seq., as amended, shall be valid for the location designated on the application for one (1) year from issuance of the permit so long as the sign is erected and legally maintained. If the state acquires the sign, or the sign is removed for any reason, the city permit shall automatically terminate. 
(c)  Wind device signs. A permit for wind device signs shall be valid for thirty (30) consecutive days. A permit shall not be issued for a location unless a period of thirty (30) days has elapsed since the expiration of a previous permit. The permit shall apply to one designated location and authorize the display of one or more wind device signs at that location for the allowed time. No more than three (3) permits may be issued for any one location in any one calendar year. 
33.9.5. Revocation; appeals. A sign permit may be revoked for a violation of any provision of this chapter or for failure to adhere to all terms and conditions of the permit or other applicable law. The permit holder may appeal the revocation to the board of adjustments. If the state department of highways and public transportation revokes the license of an owner of a sign for which the city has issued a permit, the sign permit for the sign shall terminate when the state license revocation becomes final. 
33.9.6. Transfer of state outdoor advertising sign permits. Sign permits initially issued by the state department of highways and public transportation and now issued by the city for signs licensed by the state under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 391.001 et seq., may be transferred to another party if the proper city application and fee is filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-10. - Nonconforming signs. 
33.10.1. Definition. A sign, including its supporting structure, shall be considered nonconforming when it does not conform to all or part of the provisions of this chapter applicable thereto, is not a temporary sign and: 
(a)  Was in existence and lawfully located and used on March 17, 1993; 
(b)  Was in existence and lawfully located and used in accordance with the provisions of any prior sign ordinance applicable thereto or which was considered legally nonconforming thereunder and has since been in continuous or regular use; or 
(c)  Was in existence, located and used on the premises at the time it was annexed to the city and has since been in regular and continuous use. 
(d)  Was in existence and lawfully located and used as an off-premises ground sign pursuant to section 33.14.2 on November 5, 1997. 
33.10.2. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter defining and regulating nonconforming signs shall control over any other conflicting provision of this chapter. 
33.10.3. Registration of nonconforming portable signs and billboards. On or after June 1, 1989, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any portable sign within the corporate limits, and on or after March 1, 1998, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any billboard on any premises within the corporate limits and both portable and billboard signs within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Denton without having a valid registration tag affixed thereto as required in this section as follows: 
(a)  Application. To register a nonconforming portable or off-premises (billboard) sign, application shall be made to the director on forms provided for that purpose. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of the applicable fee and shall contain the name and address of the owner of the sign, photographs of the existing property, parcel and/or building on which the sign is erected or displayed the exact location of the sign, and the date of placement. 
(b)  Issuance of registration tag. If the director determines that the portable sign or billboard is a lawfully nonconforming sign, he/she shall issue a registration tag to the applicant. The owner of the sign shall cause the tag to be affixed in a conspicuous place on the corresponding registered sign. 
(c)  Removed or destroyed signs. Any owner who removes or causes the removal of any validly registered nonconforming portable sign or billboard from any premises shall, within five (5) business days of its removal, report the removal to the director. 
(d)  Invalidation of registration. The director shall invalidate any registration tag for a nonconforming portable or billboard sign when: 
(1)  It is removed or relocated from the premises for any reason; 
(2)  It has been damaged or destroyed so as to lose its nonconforming sign status as provided in this chapter, unless the damage or destruction was caused by the intentional vandalism of a third party; 
(3)  It has become an abandoned sign. 
33.10.4. Presumption. Any sign which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter and is not properly registered as a legally nonconforming sign as provided for in this chapter shall be presumed not to be a legally nonconforming sign; provided, however, that the owner of any sign that is determined not to comply with the provisions of this chapter may, at any time, present evidence to the director that the sign is a legally nonconforming sign, and the director shall, if satisfied that the sign is a legally nonconforming sign based on the evidence presented, allow the sign to be registered as a legally nonconforming sign. 
33.10.5. Destruction; repair. 
(a)  Any nonconforming portable, attached, or ground sign, including its supporting structure which is blown down, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated, or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols, or other matter on the sign, shall not be replaced, repaired, or renovated, in whole or in part, if the cost of such replacement, repair or renovation is in excess of sixty (60) percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, including its supporting structure, unless such alteration or repair makes the sign conforming. No person shall repair, renovate, or alter a nonconforming sign without first receiving a sign permit. 
(b)  The director may, whenever he deems necessary to reasonably determine the applicability of subsection (a) of this section, require the owner of the nonconforming sign to submit two (2) or more independent estimates from established sign companies of the cost of replacing, repairing or renovating, in whole or in part, the existing nonconforming sign and two (2) or more independent estimates from established sign companies of the reproduction cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, including its supporting structure. 
(c)  The estimate required by subsection (b) shall be based on the costs for new materials for both the sign to be repaired and the new sign. Also, the estimate shall reflect the reasonable and customary costs in the industry for (1) the delivery of materials and equipment to the location of the sign and (2) the cost of labor for each phase of sign construction. 
(d)  No sign or supporting structure which is lawfully reproduced, repaired or renovated as a nonconforming sign shall be increased in effective area or height. 
33.10.6. Reserved. 
33.10.7. Signs located on nonconforming premises. Where, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a sign is located on a premises which is a legally nonconforming use of the premises and such sign is used in regard to the premises, the sign may be used and maintained on the premises, even though it would not be a permitted use, so long as such premises is continually used as a lawful nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-008, § 1, 1-6-15)  
Sec. 33-11. - Removal of unlawful signs. 
33.11.1. Notice and order. Any sign, abandoned sign, supporting structure or abandoned supporting structure which is erected, placed, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, altered, displayed, maintained, installed, modified or used in violation of this chapter may be removed by the director as provided in this article. The director shall deliver or send a written notice and order to the owner of an unlawful sign or the owner of the premises where the unlawful sign is located. A notice and order sent or delivered to the person listed by the city tax office or county appraisal district as the owner of the premises where the unlawful sign is located shall be presumed to be sufficient. The notice and order shall: 
(a)  Describe the nature of the violation, with specific citation to relevant law; 
(b)  Order the correction of the violation within a time specified, which shall not be less than five (5) business days of the delivery or mailing of the notice; and 
(c)  Give notice that the director may remove and impound the unlawful sign at the owner's expense if the violation is not corrected within the time specified. 
33.11.2. Removal; appeals. If the person ordered to correct a violation fails to do so within the time specified, the director may remove or cause the removal of the unlawful sign. Any person aggrieved by the order may file an appeal with the board of adjustment, in which case the sign may remain in place until the board of adjustment reaches its decision, unless the sign presents a threat to public safety by virtue of its physical condition. 
33.11.3. Impoundment; redemption; disposal. 
(a)  Any sign which is removed by the director pursuant to this chapter shall be impounded and transported to and stored by the director at a location designated for such purpose. Records shall be kept of the storage location for such signs. The director shall send a letter to the owner of such sign, if known, or, if not known, to the owner or person in control of the premises where such sign was located, giving notice of such impoundment. 
(b)  The director shall hold the sign in storage for at least thirty (30) days after notice of impoundment has been mailed. Any portable sign may be redeemed by the owner upon the payment of a fee to the city for hauling the sign to storage, plus a per-day storage fee. Any nonportable sign may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the cost of removal of and hauling the sign to storage, as determined by the director, plus a per-day storage fee. Such fees shall be established by the city council. 
(c)  Any sign not reclaimed by the owner thereof within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice of impoundment may be disposed of in accordance with applicable law. 
33.11.4. Recovery of costs. If, upon disposal of an unredeemed nonportable sign, the director has not received an amount sufficient to cover the cost of removal and hauling of such removed sign, the director shall send notice to the owner of the premises where such sign was located, stating payment of the removal and hauling costs, less any amount received in disposal of such sign. Any such costs remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of notice shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at ten (10) percent per annum. The director may cause such unpaid and delinquent amount to be assessed against the premises where such removed sign was located by filing and perfecting a lien against the premises. The cost levied against the premises shall include an administration fee established by the city council. 
33.11.5. Appeal. Any person may contest the reasonableness of the cost of removal of a sign imposed hereunder by filing an appeal with the board of adjustment within twenty (20) days of the mailing of the notice of the costs. The board may uphold the cost imposed by the director or impose and levy whatever cost is considered reasonable. Storage costs shall not be appealable. 
33.11.6. Summary removal of hazardous signs. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the director may summarily remove any unlawful sign which, because of its location or condition, clearly constitutes an immediate hazard or danger to the public. Prior to removing the sign, the director shall make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner of the hazardous sign or person responsible for its display, placement or maintenance to give written notice of the violation, the action necessary to correct the violation and time period in which the correction must be made. The notice shall be delivered to the owner of the sign, the owner of the premises or the person responsible for the sign's display, placement or maintenance, if located; otherwise, the notice shall be affixed to the sign or other prominent place on the premises likely to come to the attention of the owner of the sign or premises. Thereafter, the director may remove the sign if no corrective action is taken in the time specified. 
33.11.7. Certificate of occupancy. The director shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any premises on which a sign or supporting structure does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-12. - Technical requirements. 
33.12.1. Manner of measurement. The measurements required for signs by this chapter shall be made using the following procedures: 
(a)  Setback. To apply the setback provisions of this chapter for signs at any one point, the following measuring procedure shall be used: 
(1)  Draw an imaginary vertical line extending upward from the curbline of the premises; 
(2)  Beginning at any point on the vertical line, draw an imaginary horizontal line perpendicular to the vertical line and curbline extending toward the premises; 
(3)  Beginning at the point where the vertical line intersects the horizontal line, measure along the horizontal line for the required setback. 
(b)  Height. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be determined by the method of measurement that allows the greater height, as follows: 
(1)  Curbline measurement. Measure along a vertical line extended upward from the nearest curbline of the public street fronting the premises where the sign is to be located, to the maximum height allowed for the sign. From that point, extend a horizontal line to where the sign is to be located. The horizontal line is the maximum height allowed at that location. 
(2)  IH-35 measurement. Along IH-35, the height may be measured from the principal lanes, the frontage road, or the ground, whichever allows the greater height. 
(3)  Natural ground level measurement. At the highest point of the sign, draw a horizontal line to the outer extremities of the sign. At the center of the horizontal line, draw a vertical line to the natural ground level below. (The "natural ground level" shall include any changes in topography necessary for development of the property). The vertical line may not exceed height allowed for the sign at that location. 
(c)  Effective area means the area enclosed by the smallest imaginary regular shape (e.g., parallelogram, triangle, circle, trapezoid) or combination of regular shapes that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming as integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. Effective area includes such features as decorative or ornamental elements or features, borders, trims, but not including any supporting structure which is used solely for support of the sign, such as poles, columns and cable, or decorative fence, screening device or wall. 
(1)  Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted, textured or constructed as a background for the sign copy, shall be measured as the area contained within the outside dimensions of the background panel or surface. 
 
(2)  Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a wall, fence, screening device, awning or fascia of a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background of the sign copy, shall be measured as the area enclosed by the smallest regular shape or combination of shapes that will enclose all sign copy. 
 
(3)  Where there are a number of sign faces or more than one sign on a supporting structure. 
One (1)—Area of the single face only. 
Two (2)—If the interior angle between the two (2) faces is forty-five (45) degrees or less, the area will be the area of one (1) face only; if the angle between the two (2) sign faces is greater than forty-five (45) degrees, the sign area will be the sum of the areas of the two (2) faces. 
 
Three (3) or more sides—The sign area will be the sum of the areas of each of the faces. 
(4)  All signs on a single supporting structure shall be measured together as though they were one (1) sign to determine the total effective area, except that signs separated by more than thirty-six (36) inches of air space at every point between the signs shall be measured separately and added together to determine the total effective area. 
(5)  Spherical, free-form, sculptural, other non-planar signs—The area enclosed by the smallest imaginary regular shape or combination of shapes which would fully contain all portions of the sign when rotated horizontally around the sign. 
 
33.12.2. Abandoned signs and supporting structures. The owner of any premise on which there is displayed or maintained an abandoned sign or abandoned supporting structure shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  If it is an abandoned portable sign, remove or cease displaying the sign within thirty (30) days of the date it becomes abandoned. 
(b)  If it is a ground sign that does not meet the size, height, setback and other requirements of this chapter and is abandoned on or before March 17, 1993, the owner shall cease displaying the abandoned sign, remove the sign, modify or relocate the sign, or put a blank face or other bona fide message on the sign by June 17, 1993 as is necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  If the ground sign does not meet the requirements of this chapter and is abandoned after March 17, 1993, the owner shall cease displaying the sign, remove the sign, modify or relocate the sign, or put a blank face or other bona fide message on the sign within ninety (90) days of the date it becomes abandoned, as necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a supporting structure used or designed to be used with a ground sign is abandoned on or before March 17, 1993, and the abandoned supporting structure does not comply with the size, height, and setback, or other requirements applicable to ground signs, the owner of the premises shall cease displaying the supporting structure, or remove, modify or relocate the structure, or put a blank face on a sign with a bona fide message on the supporting structure by June 17, 1993 as necessary to comply with this chapter. If a supporting structure that does not meet the requirements applicable to ground signs is abandoned after March 17, 1993, the owner shall cease displaying the supporting structure or abandoned supporting structure; 1) remove 2) modify 3) relocate the structure and put a blank face or bona fide sign on the supporting structure within ninety (90) days of the date the supporting structure becomes abandoned as necessary to comply with those requirements. In determining whether the supporting structure complies with the size requirements applicable to ground signs, the effective area of the can frame, or similar part of the supporting structure that holds or to which the sign is attached shall be measured in the manner applicable to signs, except that all air spaces shall be counted. 
(e)  If an abandoned supporting structure does not have a can, frame, or similar part of the supporting structure that would hold the sign or to which the sign would be attached, and such a part or face or sign is placed on the supporting structure, the effective area of the sign or blank face placed on the supporting structure shall not exceed the requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  No abandoned sign or supporting structure which is altered under the provisions of this section shall be made more nonconforming. 
(g)  Altering, putting a blank face, or putting a sign on an abandoned supporting structure which is abandoned after March 17, 1993, and which would be nonconforming, and the cost of which exceeds sixty (60) percent of the reproduction cost of the existing abandoned sign or supporting structure shall not be permitted unless in accordance with section 33.10.5(a). 
(h)  Any abandoned sign or abandoned supporting structure displayed or maintained, or not removed, modified, or relocated in accordance with this chapter by the owner shall constitute a violation of this ordinance, and be considered an unlawful sign and may be removed by the city in accordance with the provisions applicable to the removal of unlawful signs or the owner may be prosecuted as provided under city ordinances or be enjoined from continuing such violation. 
(i)  As used in this section, abandoned supporting structure means the poles, beams, cables, or other materials that are used or once were used to support an abandoned sign or signs. 
(j)  If a ground or attached sign that conforms to the regulations of this chapter is abandoned, the owner shall cease displaying the sign and supporting structure or remove same so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way, or paint out or cover the message portion of the sign, or put a blank face on the sign in accordance with this chapter, or place a bona fide message on the message portion so as to leave the message portion and supporting structure neat and unobtrusive in appearance, within ninety (90) days of the date it becomes abandoned. 
33.12.3. Sign face standards. 
(a)  Standards. The following shall be required for the use, display, maintenance, or permitting of an alteration of any abandoned sign or supporting structure regardless of when the sign was abandoned: 
(1)  Like material. Only the same or like quality material as that being replaced or that was last installed and used as a face on or in the abandoned sign or supporting structure may be allowed as the sign face, or that part of the structure that carries the sign message or that is blanked. The face of the supporting structure must be one which the supporting structure is designed to support. Painting over a face is allowed to blank the sign face. Examples: Plastic face replaces plastic face, metal replaces metal, wood replaces wood face, etc. 
(2)  Sign copy to be unseen on blank faces. Routed, embossed, or raised messages or sign copy must not be able to be seen, if the face or message is blanked. 
(3)  Color of blank faces. Blank faces must be of one (1) color. 
(4)  Covered messages. 
a.  Painting. Abandoned signs may be painted in order to "blank" the face. However, the paint must completely cover the sign face or message portion of the structure. The covered, painted over message must not show through the paint. 
b.  Abandoned sign. Covered sign faces must be of a material or substance which renders the resulting sign face completely blank, opaque, and resistant to deterioration. Bleeding or showing through of a covered message or blanked face shall constitute the displaying or maintenance of an abandoned sign in violation of this chapter. 
(5)  Unlawful to cover sign. No person shall cover signs with bags or tarps of any material. 
(6)  Issuance of permit. No permit shall be issued for which a dilapidated or deteriorated condition, unless the permit specifically requires repair and conformance with this chapter. 
(b)  Permit required. Prior to any alteration or restoration of an abandoned sign or supporting structure, a permit for such shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
33.12.4. Sign maintenance. It shall be unlawful for any person to display, erect, locate, relocate, or keep any dilapidated or deteriorated sign, or for which a permit is required but has not been obtained. 
33.12.5. Wind loads. All ground, projecting, and roof signs shall be designed and installed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square foot of area and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required by the Building Code. 
33.12.6. Use of right-of-way. No person shall cross or park a vehicle on a state or city right-of-way for the purpose of maintaining a sign adjacent to the right-of-way. 
33.12.7. Inflatable devices. The following regulations shall apply to any balloon or other type of inflatable wind device used as a sign: 
(a)  It shall be securely anchored at all times. 
(b)  It shall not extend to a height greater than thirty (30) feet above ground level unless it is attached to the roof of a building, in which case it shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest part of the roof. 
(c)  It shall not be allowed to extend over any public street or right-of-way or over any other property not under the control of the permittee. 
33.12.8. Clearance from electrical lines. All signs shall comply with the provisions of the latest edition of the National Electric Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-13. - Portable signs. 
33.13.1. Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to display, maintain, erect, place or relocate any portable sign on any premises within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Denton that is not a registered portable sign. No new sign permits shall be issued for portable signs within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Denton from and after November 5, 1997. 
33.13.2. Lawful nonconformity. Any portable sign lawfully existing upon any premises before February 21, 1989, in accordance with the provisions of any prior ordinance, shall be allowed to remain on that premises as a nonconforming portable sign, if properly registered and continuously maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
33.13.3. Lawful nonconformity from November 5, 1997. Any portable sign lawfully existing upon any premises within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction before November 5, 1997, and any off-premises (billboard) sign lawfully existing upon any premises within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Denton before November 5, 1997, in accordance with the provisions of any prior ordinance, shall be allowed to remain on that premises as a nonconforming portable sign, if properly registered and continuously maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
33.13.4. Maintenance of nonconforming signs. A nonconforming portable sign which is properly registered in accordance with this chapter, shall not: 
(a)  Be moved to another premises so as to be visible from any public street; 
(b)  If removed from any premises for any reason, be placed on the same premises so as to be visible from any public street. 
33.13.5. Anchoring. All lawful nonconforming portable signs shall at all times be securely anchored so as to prevent overturning or unsafe movement, the sufficiency of such anchorage to be determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-14. - Regulation of signs by zoning districts. 
33.14.1. Residential districts. The following regulations shall apply to RD-5, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3, NR-4, NR-6, NR-12, DR-1, and DR-2 zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning district map of the city: 
(a)  Permitted and prohibited type. Ground, wall, wind device and temporary signs are permitted in residential districts. Roof, projecting and billboard signs are prohibited in residential districts. 
(b)  Effective area and height. No ground sign shall have an effective copy display area greater than fifty (50) square feet or a greater height than six (6) feet. 
(c)  Setbacks. All ground signs shall maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the curbline and any side or rear yard property line, except that any ground sign may make use of a supporting structure for a ground sign that was lawfully erected on or before February 21, 1989, without regard to the side or rear yard setbacks specified in this subsection, if the sign so placed would not violate any other provision of this chapter. (See Illustration 14a, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and on file with the planning and zoning department.) 
(d)  Number of ground signs. Only one (1) ground sign which is not a temporary sign, shall be located on any one premises, except as follows: 
(1)  Any premises having frontage on more than one (1) freeway, arterial or collector street may locate one (1) on-premise ground sign in the defined front yard of each street, provided that neither sign is located within that area that includes the overlapping front yards of both streets. 
(2)  Any premises which has more than five hundred (500) feet of public street frontage on a freeway, arterial, or collector street may make use of one (1) additional sign for each five hundred (500) feet of additional frontage on that street, or fraction thereof, if each additional sign permitted is located more than sixty (60) feet from another permitted ground sign on the same premise. The distance between the signs shall be measured along the curbline, from and between the two (2) points on the curbline which are nearest the two (2) signs. 
(3)  Temporary Signs. See section 33-16. 
(e)  Illuminated sign setback. Any ground sign over ten (10) feet in height and any wall sign over fifteen (15) feet in height shall maintain the following setback from any property used for a single-family residence or property zoned for single-family if the sign would be visible from such property: 
Ground or attached sign 	Setback 
Non-illuminated 	100 feet 
Internally illuminated 	200 feet 
Externally illuminated 	500 feet 
 
The setback shall be measured in a straight line from the district boundary line or residential property line to the nearest portion of the sign or its supporting structure. A sign shall be considered visible from a residential property or district if the sign can be seen from six (6) feet above ground level from any point on the property or within the district. The setback shall not apply between a sign and a single-family residence located on the same premise. 
33.14.2. Nonresidential districts. The following regulations shall apply to signs in any zoning district not designated in section 33.14.1: 
(a)  Type. Ground, wall, roof, temporary, wind device and projecting signs are allowed, subject to a sign permit, in nonresidential districts. 
(b)  Effective area and height. 
(1)  Ground signs shall have a maximum effective area and maximum height based on the street frontage of the property where located, as follows: 
Street Frontage 	Maximum Effective Area 	Maximum Height 	Monument Sign Effective Area 
IH 35N, 35E, or 35W 	250 sq. ft. 	40 ft. 	300 sq. ft. 
Loop 288 	150 sq. ft. 	30 ft. 	200 sq. ft. 
Other primary arterials 	60 sq. ft. 	20 ft.* 	N/A 
All Other Streets 	60 sq. ft. 	6 ft. 	N/A 
 
*Except for the Central Business districts. 
(2)  Any premises may make use of one (1) on-premises ground sign of a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet and an effective area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet, in lieu of any two (2) permitted ground signs. 
(3)  For any premises which has frontage on a primary arterial street and has more than one (1) tenant or occupant in separate offices, rooms, or buildings, the effective area of one (1) ground sign, if used to advertise more than one (1) tenant or occupant, may be increased above sixty (60) square feet by one-half (0.5) square foot for each foot of frontage on the primary arterial, but not in excess of one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
(c)  Setbacks. Ground and projecting signs shall maintain a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from the curbline of any public street and a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any side or rear yard property line, except as follows: 
(1)  A ground sign may make use of a supporting structure for a ground sign that was lawfully erected on or before February 21, 1989, without regard to the side and rear yard setbacks specified herein, if the sign so placed would not violate any other provision of this chapter. 
(2)  On properties fronting primary arterials, the minimum setback of twenty (20) feet for ground signs may be reduced up to a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any curbline, if the height of the sign is no higher than the setback (i.e., setback = eighteen (18) feet, height = eighteen (18) feet or less). 
(d)  Number. Only one (1) on-premise ground sign which is not a temporary sign shall be located on any one premise, except as follows: 
(1)  Any premise which has street frontage on more than one (1) freeway, arterial or collector street, may locate one (1) on-premise ground sign in the defined front yard of each arterial or collector street, provided that neither sign is located within that area that includes the overlapping front yards of both streets. 
(2)  Any premise which has more than five hundred (500) feet of street frontage on a freeway, arterial or collector street may make use of one (1) additional on-premise ground sign for each additional five hundred (500) feet of frontage, or fraction thereof, if each additional sign permitted is located more than sixty (60) feet from another permitted ground sign on the same premise. The distance between the signs shall be measured along the curbline, from and between the two (2) points on the curbline which are nearest the two (2) signs. 
(e)  Spacing requirements. 
(1)  Off-premises signs. No off-premises ground sign shall be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another off-premises ground sign on the same side of a public street. The measurement shall be between the two (2) points on the curblines which are closest to the respective signs, along and parallel to the curbline and across any intervening street intersections. 
(2)  Signs and residential structures. Any ground, roof, or projecting sign over ten (10) feet in height and any wall sign over fifteen (15) feet in height, shall maintain the following setback from any single-family zoning district or property used for a single-family residence if the sign would be visible from that district or property: 
Ground or Attached Sign 	Setback 
Non-illuminated 	100 feet 
Internally Illuminated 	200 feet 
Externally Illuminated 	500 feet 
 
The setback shall be measured in a straight line from the district boundary line or residential property line to the nearest portion of the sign or its supporting structure. A sign shall be considered visible from a residential property or district if the sign can be seen from six (6) feet above ground level from any point on the property or within the district. The setback shall not apply between a sign and a single-family residence located on the same premise. 
33.14.3. Planned development districts. 
(a)  The regulations for signs located in planned development zoning districts shall be contained in the ordinance or concept or detailed plan approved for the district, except that no billboards shall be permitted. Should the regulations for signs be omitted from an ordinance or concept or detailed plan for the district, the sign regulations that, would be applicable to the most restrictive comparable zoning district classification, based upon the land uses permitted therein, as determined by the director, shall be applied to the district or part thereof for which the regulations were omitted. 
(b)  Deviations from the standards in this chapter may be considered if the continuous street frontage in the planned development district is less than that required for consideration of approval of a special sign district. 
(c)  Deviations from the standards in this chapter may be approved as long as the deviations equally meet the objectives of this chapter, such deviations are necessitated by the design of the development within the planned development district, and such deviations are found to meet the criteria as that for creation of a special sign district pursuant to section 33.17. 
(d)  Approval of deviations from general sign standards shall be supported by written findings approved either by the city council, or by the planning and zoning commission, in those circumstances where the planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve a detailed plan. 
33.14.4. Central business districts. The following regulations shall apply to signs in the central business district: 
(a)  Type. Ground, wall, roof, temporary, wind device, and projecting signs are permitted in central business districts. 
(b)  Effective area and height. No ground or roof sign shall have an effective area greater than sixty (60) feet, and no ground sign shall have a height greater than six (6) feet. 
(c)  Right-of-way limitation on projecting signs. No projecting sign shall project or extend into the public right-of-way for a distance of more than ten (10) feet or within two (2) feet of the nearest curbline, whichever is more restrictive. No projecting sign, supporting structure or part thereof which extends into the public right-of-way shall occupy any of the space between the ground level and eight (8) feet above the ground level in the right-of-way. 
(d)  Establishments with a main customer entrance directly facing a public street or sidewalk may place an A-frame type sign on the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to such public entrance, during the times when the establishment is open to the public, subject to: 
(1)  Maximum sign height shall be three (3) feet. 
(2)  Maximum sign width shall be two (2) feet and signs shall not be placed in front of adjoining property and no portion of the sign shall extend more than three (3) feet from the building face. 
(3)  Signs must be properly anchored (temporarily) or weighted against the wind. 
(4)  A minimum clear sidewalk width of forty-eight (48) inches shall be maintained. 
(5)  Chalkboards may be used for daily changing messages and no changeable letter on tracks may be used. 
(6)  Signs shall be designed and constructed so as to promote and not visually obscure the significant architectural features of the National Register District and its buildings. 
(7)  Signs must be removed after business hours. 
(8)  No other portable signs are permitted. 
(9)  Permits fees for applications, renewals, alterations, and variances shall be set by city council as for other signs in this chapter. Applications for sandwich board or "A" frame signs must be approved by the City of Denton Historic Preservation Officer before the issuance of a permit and all applications must be submitted for officer approval at least fourteen (14) days prior to installation. 
(10)  Permits for sidewalk or "A" frame signs shall be valid for the location designated on the application for one (1) year. Permits may be transferred to another owner after payment of a transfer fee set by city council. Permits may/shall require that the establishment provide proof of comprehensive general liability insurance, including coverage for personal injury (including death), property damage, and advertising injury (defamation, false light, invasion of privacy) with coverage as separately provided by ordinance. Such insurance must name the city as an additional insured and remain in force at all times that the establishment places an A-frame on a public sidewalk. Further, the insurance must provide at least a thirty-day notice to the city of cancellation or expiration. 
(11)  Any variance to the requirements for sandwich board or "A" frame signs will be handled the same as any other sign variance. The board of adjustment in considering any variance request regarding sandwich board or "A" frame signs shall consider any recommendation made by the historic landmark commission regarding the application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-15. - Attached signs. 
33.15.1. Scope. In addition to any other applicable regulations, the regulations in this section for attached signs shall apply to the type of sign specified in all zoning districts. 
33.15.2. Roof signs; projection. Roof signs and their supporting structures shall not extend laterally beyond the exterior walls of the building and shall have a maximum height and effective area as follows: 
Number of Stories 	Maximum Height 	Maximum Effective Area 
1 	55% of bldg. height 	60 sq. ft. 
2 	36% 	75 sq. ft. 
3 to 5 	30% 	* 
6 to 9 	25% 	* 
10 to 15 	23% 	* 
16 or more 	40 feet 	* 
 
*For each story above two (2) stories, the effective area of the sign may be increased by fifteen (15) square feet per story, to a maximum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
33.15.3. Projecting signs. 
(a)  Construction. All projecting signs shall be securely attached to the building or structure. 
(b)  Projection beyond roof. A projecting sign shall not extend upward to a height greater than the highest part of the roof or any exterior wall, whichever is higher. 
(c)  Size. The total square footage of all projecting signs shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the wall area to which such signs are located. 
33.15.4. Signs on common buildings. When one or more attached signs are located on a building which is divided and contains more than one (1) business or use, the regulation of such attached signs as to size and projection shall apply separately to the part of the exterior walls which contain that business or use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-16. - Temporary signs. 
33.16.1. Temporary signs. A temporary sign shall be considered a ground sign and shall be permitted only according to the standards for ground signs except that a temporary sign not larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in effective area need not obtain a sign permit if: 
(a)  The supporting structure of this sign is not larger than one in which two (2) perimeter dimensions are greater than four (4) inches or one in which the diameter is not greater than four (4) inches; 
(b)  No more than one (1) off-premises sign advertising the sale or lease of one (1) piece of real property or one (1) real estate subdivision or development sign is placed on any one premises; 
(c)  No temporary sign shall be located within any public street median or within ten (10) feet of any curbline; and 
(d)  The temporary sign shall be removed or cease to be displayed within five (5) days after the event being communicated or advertised on the sign has occurred. 
33.16.2. Wind device signs. 
(a)  Wind device identification tag. The director or designee shall issue a registration tag to the wind device permittee. The wind device permittee shall cause the tag to be affixed in a conspicuous place on the permitted wind device. 
(b)  No permit shall be required to display one or more flags on any one premises. 
33.16.3 Limitations upon regulations applicable to signs with political content. The following limitations are imposed upon the enforcement of these regulations with respect to signs in the following contexts only, as provided by state law. 
(a)  Private real property with property owner's consent. 
(1)  These regulations of this chapter shall not prohibit, or impose a fee or permit approval requirement upon, the placement of a sign containing primarily a political message on private real property, provided that: 
a.  The owner of the property consents; 
b.  The effective area of the sign is no more than thirty-six (36) square feet; 
c.  The sign is no more than eight (8) feet high; 
d.  The sign is not illuminated; 
e.  The sign has no moving elements; 
f.  The sign is not located on real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows the city to use the property for a public purpose; and 
g.  The political message is not a temporary display upon a sign, including a billboard, that is generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not primarily political. 
(b)  Political signs at public polling places during early voting periods and election periods. 
(1)  During early voting periods recognized under the Texas Election Code, the regulations of this chapter shall not act to prohibit the location or display of one or more political signs on the premises of any public building used as an early voting location, provided that: 
a.  No political signs may be located or displayed within one hundred (100) feet of any outside door, through which a voter may enter the building or structure in which the early voting place is located. Nothing herein shall deemed to authorize electioneering of any sort, in a manner contrary to state law. 
b.  No political signs may be located or displayed upon real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows the city to use the property for a public purpose; 
c.  No political signs may have an effective area greater than thirty-six (36) square feet; 
d.  No political signs may be more than eight (8) feet high; 
e.  No political signs may be illuminated, have moving elements, or otherwise have characteristics prohibited by section 33-4; and 
f.  This section does not authorize the location of political signs whose political message is a temporary display upon a permanent sign, including a billboard, that is generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not primarily political. 
(2)  During election periods recognized under the Texas Election Code, these regulations shall not act to prohibit the location or display of one (1) or more political signs on the premises of any public building used as polling place, provided that: 
a.  No political signs may be located or displayed within one hundred (100) feet of any outside door, through which a voter may enter the building or structure in which the polling place is located. Nothing herein shall deemed to authorize electioneering of any sort, in a manner contrary to state law. 
b.  No political signs may be located or displayed upon real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows the city to use the property for a public purpose; 
c.  No political signs may have an effective area greater than thirty-six (36) square feet; 
d.  No political signs may be more than eight (8) feet high; 
e.  No political signs may be illuminated, have moving elements, or otherwise have characteristics prohibited by section 33-4; and 
f.  This section does not authorize the location of political signs whose political message is a temporary display upon a permanent sign, including a billboard, that is generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not primarily political. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-086, § 2, 4-7-15 ) 
State Law reference— Texas Election Code, §§ 61.003, 85.036; Texas Local Government Code, § 216.903.  
Sec. 33-17. - Illustrations. 
33.17.1. Ground sign setback. The illustration of setbacks for ground signs is as follows: 
 
33.17.2. Measurement of height. The illustration for measurement of height is as follows: 
 
33.17.3. Number and placement of ground signs. The illustration for the number and placement of ground signs is as follows: 
 
33.17.4. Visibility point. The illustration for the visibility point of signs is as follows: 
 
33.17.5. Exceptions to effective area. The illustration for exceptions to the effective area of signs is as follows: 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14)  
Sec. 33-18. - Special sign districts. 
33.18.1. Purpose. The purpose of a special sign district is to allow properties to deviate from the sign regulations of this chapter if a qualifying property has an alternate Comprehensive Plan that is clearly superior to what could be accomplished under standard regulations. 
33.18.2. Application and plans. Any person requesting the creation of a special sign district, or amendment of a sign district, shall submit an application, the fee and the required plan, along with any other information specified by the director. 
33.18.3. Sign plan. The sign plan for the district shall show, in the form and manner specified by the department, the location, setback, size, dimensions, height of all signs regulated by this chapter, any other conditions, restrictions, or regulations that will apply to the district, and any other information specified by the department, the commission, or council needed to adequately evaluate the sign plan. Such information may include, but is not limited to, information concerning the items noted in section 33.17.4. 
33.18.4. Creation, review of plan, criteria. The city council may approve the creation of a sign district for any property which has more than three hundred (300) feet of continuous street frontage on one (1) public street if it finds the district: 
(a)  Provides a Comprehensive Plan for signs that would be clearly superior to what would be allowed without the plan; 
(b)  Would be compatible with surrounding properties. In considering whether a district and sign plan is "compatible" and "clearly superior", the commission and council shall consider, but are not limited to considering the following: 
(1)  Scale. The relationship between and compatibility of sign scale, site scale and the scale of nearby buildings. 
(2)  Color. The relationship between and compatibility of sign color to the color of nearby buildings and landscaping: The degree to which sign colors are complimentary to its surroundings. 
(3)  Material. The materials of the signs and how they relate to their surroundings. 
(4)  Shape. The shape and design of the signs and how they relate to their surroundings. 
(5)  Landscaping. The relationship of signs to landscaped features in and outside the district. 
(6)  Traffic safety and traffic circulation. The impact of the signs on driver's view, the degree to which view obstructions are created or improved, avoidance of confusion with or obstruction of traffic control signs and devices, and the time it takes a motorist to read the sign. 
(7)  Illumination. The impact and compatibility of sign illumination within the district and in relation to neighboring properties. The avoidance of glare and light pollution. 
(8u)  Integration. How the signs in the district are integrated into a unified development concept with the topography, building design, other signs, landscaping, traffic circulation and other development features on the district and nearby property. 
a.  Is not being used merely to avoid or gain a variance of the sign regulations; 
b.  Does not violate the spirit or intent of the sign regulations; and 
c.  Complies with the requirements of this section. 
(C)  Under no circumstances may a special sign district be used to authorize construction of new billboards or any other new signs that are otherwise prohibited under section 33-4, or one (1) or more signs that will be used for general advertising for hire. 
33.18.5. Conditions imposed. The planning and development department and the planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may impose appropriate conditions concerning the placement, design or use of signs in the district in order to protect surrounding properties, the community, and comply with the intent of this chapter. 
33.18.6. Procedures. The procedures for approval of a sign district and thereafter any amendment of the district, shall be the same as those applicable to a change in zoning classification or regulations. 
33.18.7. Designation on zoning map. Property approved as a special sign district shall be shown on the official zoning map with the abbreviated designation "SD". 
33.18.8. Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2014-406, § 5, 12-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-008, § 1, 1-6-15) 

DEVELOPMENT CODE OF THE CITY OF DENTON, TEXAS 
____________ 
  
Subchapter 1 - General Standards  
1.1 - Title and Effective Date 
1.1.1 This document is Chapter 35 of the Municipal Code of Ordinances of the City of Denton, Texas. It shall be officially known and cited as the "Denton Development Code," and is referred to internally in this document as "this DDC" and "this Code." 
1.1.2 This DDC shall become effective on October 1, 2019.  
1.2 - Purpose 
Pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code (TLGC), the City Council enacts this DDC to: 
1.2.1 Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the City's inhabitants; 
1.2.2 Implement the City's comprehensive plan - the City's guide in managing growth, promoting reinvestment, and improving the quality of life of the citizens of Denton; 
1.2.3 Preserve and protect the natural environment; 
1.2.4 Improve the City's appearance; 
1.2.5 Improve mobility for all modes of transportation and promote traffic safety; 
1.2.6 Facilitate the adequate provision of public services and utilities; 
1.2.7 Encourage the appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures; and 
1.2.8 Establish procedures for the processing of planning and zoning actions that affect the development and use of property subject to the planning jurisdiction of the City.  
1.3 - Authority, Applicability, and Jurisdiction 
 
1.3.1 - Authority. 
A.  This DDC is adopted pursuant to the authority in Article X of the Denton Municipal Charter, as amended, and enacted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by provisions of the State of Texas, including the statutory authority granted in Chapters 42, 43, 211, 212, and 213 of the TLGC, and all other relevant provisions of the State of Texas. 
B.  Whenever any provision of this DDC refers to or cites a section of the Texas state statute and that section is later amended or superseded, this DDC shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. 
C.  Whenever a provision of this DDC requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the City to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty, unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise.  
1.3.2 - Applicability. 
A.  General Applicability. Unless otherwise stated, this DDC applies to all land, buildings, structures, and uses located within the City and if applicable, its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
B.  Applicability to Public Agencies. To the extent allowed by law, the provisions of this DDC shall apply to all land, buildings, structures, and uses owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by any district, county, state, city, or federal government agencies in the City of Denton. Where the provisions of this DDC do not legally control such land, buildings, structures, and uses, such agencies are encouraged to meet the provisions of this DDC.  
1.3.3 - Compliance Required. 
No land shall be used or divided, and no structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered, or moved until: 
A.  All applicable development review and approval processes have been followed in accordance with Subchapter 2: Administration and Procedures; 
B.  All applicable approvals have been obtained; and 
C.  All required permits or authorizations to proceed have been issued.  
1.3.4 - Conflicts with Other Ordinances and Criteria Manuals. 
A.  Whenever any provision of this DDC conflicts with other provisions of the Municipal Code of Ordinances, the stricter provision, as determined by the Director following the interpretation procedure in Subsection 2.8.6, Interpretations, shall govern. 
B.  Whenever any provision of this DDC conflicts with a Criteria Manual adopted by ordinance by the City of Denton as established in Section 2.11, including but not limited to those listed below, the Criteria Manual shall govern, as determined by the Director: 
1.  Administrative Criteria Manual 
2.  Connectivity Component - Mobility Plan 
3.  Construction Criteria Manual 
4.  Environmentally Sensitive Areas Criteria Manual 
5.  Solid Waste Criteria Manual 
6.  Stormwater Design Criteria Manual 
7.  Transportation Criteria Manual 
8.  Water and Wastewater Criteria Manual 
C.  All Criteria Manuals are available online on the City's website and housed in the Development Services Department. Criteria Manuals are maintained and updated by the Department annually. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0014a, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-2019)  
1.3.5 - Private Covenants. 
A.  This DDC is not intended to revoke or repeal any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. 
B.  Nothing in this DDC shall modify or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not excuse any failure to comply with this DDC. 
C.  Nothing in this DDC obligates the City to enforce the provisions of any easements, covenants, or agreements between private parties.  
1.3.6 - Transfer of Ownership. 
Permits, licenses, or approvals authorizing a particular use of land or structure shall transfer with the ownership of the land or structure so long as the land or structures, or any portion of the land or structures, continue to be used for the purpose and in the manner authorized by a permit, license, or approval. No person, including a successor or assignee of the person who obtained the permit or approval, may use the land or structure except in accordance with all the terms, conditions, and requirements of the permit or approval.  
1.3.7 - Emergency Powers. 
The Mayor may authorize any deviation from this DDC during a local state of disaster as prescribed in Chapter 418 of the TLGC.  
1.4 - Severability 
In the event one or more of the provisions of this DDC shall for any reason be held to be illegal or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is the intention of the City Council that such illegality or invalidity shall not affect any other provision in this DDC, but this DDC shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal or invalid provision had not been contained.  
1.5 - Nonconformities 
 
1.5.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of Section 1.5 is to regulate and limit the development and continued existence of land, buildings, structures, uses, and site features that were lawfully established prior to the effective date of this DDC, but that no longer conform to the requirements of this DDC. All such situations are collectively referred to in this section as "nonconformities." While nonconformities may continue, the provisions of this section are designed to curtail substantial investment in nonconformities to bring about their eventual elimination in order to preserve the integrity of this DDC and the goals of the City of Denton.  
1.5.2 - Regulations Applicable to All Nonconformities. 
A.  Authority to Continue. Nonconformities may continue to be used and occupied, subject to regulations as to the maintenance of premises and conditions of operations set forth in this section, or unless such nonconformity is terminated as provided in this section. 
B.  Determination of Nonconformity Status. The burden of establishing the existence of a nonconformity shall be solely on the owner of the property containing the nonconformity. An applicant may use the procedure in Subsection 2.5.4, Certificate of Zoning Compliance, to establish the existence of a nonconformity. 
C.  Maintenance and Minor Repair. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconformities are permitted and encouraged, provided that the repairs and maintenance do not increase the degree of nonconformity. Minor repairs and maintenance include the following: 
1.  Repairs necessary to maintain and to correct any damage or deterioration to the structural soundness of, or the exterior or interior appearance of, a building or structure without expanding the height or footprint of the building or structure, unless compliant with this DDC; 
2.  Maintenance of land to protect against and mitigate health and environmental hazards; 
3.  Resurfacing or restriping parking areas (but no enlargement of parking area) pursuant to Section 7.9, Parking and Loading; 
4.  Replacing diseased or dead plant materials pursuant to Section 7.7, Landscaping, Screening, Buffering, and Fences; 
5.  Repairs that are required to remedy unsafe conditions; and 
6.  Repairs necessary to comply with current building code requirements. 
D.  Change of Ownership or Tenancy. Changes in ownership, tenancy, or management of property with an existing nonconformity may occur, but such nonconformities shall continue to be subject to the standards of this Section 1.5. 
E.  Compliance to the Maximum Extent Practicable. Where compliance with the requirements of this section is precluded by a lack of sufficient developable area due to the size of the lot, the layout of existing development, or the presence of significant wetlands, floodplains, watercourses, hazard areas, or other significant environmental constraints, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of this section to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Director. 
F.  Discontinuance. 
1.  Whenever a nonconforming use or structure is discontinued for one year or more, all nonconforming rights shall cease, and the use of the premises or the structure shall be in conformance with this Subchapter and all applicable codes of the City. For purposes of this provision, the following actions shall create a rebuttable presumption of discontinuance: the property or structure is vacant and no attempt to market the property is observable on the property or from the exterior of any structure, or that the property or structure is vacant and City taxes owed on the property are delinquent. The determination of discontinued status may be delayed for up to one year by the Director upon written request, if the applicant provides documentation that the property has been actively marketed for at least six months during the previous, first year. 
2.  The right to maintain or operate a nonconforming structure or use may be terminated by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with Subsection 1.5.8, Amortization of Nonconforming Uses or Structures. Any appeal of the termination of nonconforming rights by the Zoning Board of Adjustment under this Subchapter shall be made to the District Court within 10 days of receipt of written notice of the termination by the Director. 
G.  Nonconformity Due to Outside Action. 
1.  Where a lot, tract, or parcel is occupied by a lawful structure, and where the acquisition of right-of-way, by eminent domain, dedication, or purchase, by a city, county, state, or federal agency creates noncompliance of the structure or property regarding any requirement of this DDC, such structure or property shall be deemed nonconforming, and acquiring agency shall provide a compliance plan. Such designation shall apply only to noncompliance that results directly from the acquisition of right-of-way or by acquisition through eminent domain. 
2.  In the event that such structure is partially or totally destroyed by natural or accidental causes, the structure may be rebuilt upon approval of a building permit by the Building Official, subject to Subsection 1.5.4D, Damage or Destruction of More than 50 Percent of the Gross Floor Area. 
H.  Prior Construction Approved. Nothing contained in this section shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of a building legally under construction, or for which a permit for construction has been issued, at the time of passage of this DDC or amendments. 
I.  Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures. The adoption of this DDC shall not cause any existing, legally established single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex use or structure to become nonconforming. Any single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex structure, lot, and associated site features lawfully existing on the effective date of this DDC shall be deemed a lawful structure, lot, or site feature.  
1.5.3 - Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  Limitations on Continuation of Nonconforming Uses of Land. 
1.  A nonconforming use may be extended throughout the same building, provided that: 
a.  No structural alteration of the building (or portion of such building containing the nonconforming use in the case of buildings with multiple uses) shall be permitted; 
b.  No additional dwelling units shall be permitted in the building; and 
c.  No additional nonresidential units and/or uses shall be permitted. 
2.  No nonconforming use shall expand into an additional structure. 
3.  Any use of land that was established in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction and annexed into the City shall be subject to the provisions established in TLGC, Section 43.002, as amended. 
B.  Change of Use. 
1.  A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use, provided the Director determines that the new use creates lesser impacts on surrounding properties and is no more intensive than the use it replaces, and no structural alterations to the building are required to accommodate such change, except those alterations necessary to meet accessibility provisions required by state and federal law. 
2.  A nonconforming use that has been changed to a less nonconforming use pursuant to this subsection may not subsequently be changed back to a more nonconforming use. 
3.  A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, may not subsequently be changed back to any nonconforming use unless otherwise permitted by this DDC. 
C.  Existing Uses Requiring a Specific Use Permit. The adoption of this DDC shall not cause any existing, legally established use that requires a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP), to become nonconforming. Any legally established use existing on the effective date of this DDC that has been damaged or destroyed by fire or other natural or accidental causes in whole or in part may be restored to its original condition and is not required to obtain a specific use permit.  
1.5.4. - Nonconforming Structures. 
A.  Expansion of a Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming structure may only be expanded or enlarged pursuant to Subsection 1.5.2C, and any such expansion or enlargement shall be in full compliance with this DDC. 
B.  Increasing Level of Nonconformity Prohibited. A nonconforming structure shall not be altered in a way that increases the nonconformity of the structure, but any structure or portion of a structure may be altered to decrease the nonconformity of the structure. 
C.  Damage or Destruction of Less than 50 Percent of the Gross Floor Area. A nonconforming structure that has been damaged or destroyed by fire or other natural or accidental causes may be restored to its original condition, provided that: 
1.  The extent of the damage does not require the reconstruction of more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the nonconforming structure. For purposes of this provision, the 50-percent threshold shall apply to each individual structure, and not cumulatively to multiple structures on one lot; and 
2.  A building permit is issued for the work to be performed and such work is commenced within one year of such event and completed within 18 months of such event. By written request from the property owner, the Director may grant one extension of either the work commencement and/or the completion of work time period. 
3.  A restoration or reconstruction of the structure in violation of this subsection immediately terminates the right to operate the nonconforming structure. 
D.  Damage or Destruction of More than 50 Percent of the Gross Floor Area. A nonconforming structure that has been damaged or destroyed by fire or other natural or accidental causes shall not be rebuilt or occupied, except in conformance with this DDC. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0009c, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-2019)  
1.5.5 - Nonconforming Lots. 
A.  A structure situated on a nonconforming lot shall be considered a nonconforming structure, subject to the provisions of this Section 1.5. 
B.  A nonconforming lot that was made nonconforming by virtue of enactment of this DDC may be used for construction of a building allowed in the applicable zoning district, provided that all other zoning district and dimensional standards are met, unless as otherwise provided for in this Section 1.5. 
C.  A structure on a nonconforming lot deemed nonconforming by virtue of Subsection 1.5.4C may be restored to its original condition pursuant to Subsection 1.5.4C.  
1.5.6 - Nonconforming Site Features. 
A.  For purposes of this provision, the term "nonconforming site feature" includes any driveway, off-street parking or loading area, building coverage, landscaping, buffer, or screening element that lawfully existed per regulations in place prior to the effective date of this DDC, as well as the lack of any such feature required by subsequently enacted City regulations. 
B.  A lawfully nonconforming site feature may continue in its existing condition unless and until full or limited compliance with the development standards of this DDC, as required in Section 7.2: Applicability. 
C.  No action shall be taken that increases the degree of the nonconformity of a site feature.  
1.5.7 - Nonconforming Signs. 
Nonconforming signs shall comply with Municipal Code of Ordinances, Chapter 33.10, Nonconforming Signs.  
1.5.8 - Amortization of Nonconforming Uses or Structures. 
A.  Initiation of Proceedings. The City Council may initiate proceedings to amortize a nonconforming land use or structure. 
B.  Consideration by Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
1.  Generally. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may require the termination of nonconforming uses of land or structures under a plan whereby the value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this DDC. 
2.  Criteria for Determining Amortization Period. Before the Zoning Board of Adjustment may determine an amortization period, it shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The owner's capital investment in the structures on the property at the time the use became nonconforming; 
b.  The amount of the investment realized to date from revenue generated by the property and the amount remaining, if any, to be recovered during the amortization period; 
c.  The existence or nonexistence of lease obligations, as well as any contingency clauses therein permitting termination of such leases; 
d.  Removal costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of a termination date; and 
e.  Other costs and expenses that are directly attributable to the establishment of a termination date. 
3.  Cessation of Use. If the Zoning Board of Adjustment establishes a termination date for a nonconforming use or structure, the use shall cease operations on that date and the owner shall not operate it after that date unless it becomes a conforming use or structure.  
1.5.9 - Illegal Nonconformities. 
A nonconformity becomes illegal when: 
A.  A nonconforming structure is destroyed or substantially destroyed by an intentional act of the owner or an agent without a proper permit or other required city approval. If this occurs, the nonconforming structure shall lose its nonconforming status and shall be required to conform to existing codes. If a nonconforming use was also in the structure, the nonconforming use and all site improvements shall lose their nonconforming status and be required to come into compliance with existing codes; and 
B.  A use, structure, or site improvement results in a nonconformity without being lawfully authorized in accordance with the provisions of this DDC. Such use and/or structure shall cease operations until the required city approvals are obtained.  
1.5.10 - Applicability of Gas Well Reverse Setbacks to Existing Protected Uses or Residential Lots. 
A.  All Protected Uses and Residential Lots that were deemed non-conforming as result of Ordinance No. 2010-196, which established the 250-foot gas well reverse setback, are hereby conforming. 
B.  Any existing Protected Use or Residential Lot existing within the Gas Well Reverse Setback radius on the effective date of Ordinance No. DCA19-0009e [February 11, 2020] are a conforming site feature, lot, or structure, provided all applicable requirements of the Fire Code and underlying zoning district regulations are met. 
For the purposes of this section, "existing" shall include any existing Protected Use structure, site feature, residential lot, or any lot that is part of a project under TLGC Chapter 245 that has filed an application for a preliminary plat or general development plan that has not expired as of February 11, 2020. 
Improvements that meet underlying zoning district regulations may be permitted for Protected Uses within the lot boundaries that exist on February 11, 2020; however, if the property is replatted or otherwise subdivided after February 11, 2020, then the new lots must comply with Reverse Setback regulations in effect at the time of plat application. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0009c, § 2(Exhibit A), 11-19-19)  
1.6 - Enforcement 
 
1.6.1 - Purpose. 
This Section 1.6 establishes procedures through which the city seeks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this DDC and obtain corrections for violations of this DDC. This section also sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this DDC.  
1.6.2 - Violations. 
A.  Generally. Any person who violates any applicable provision of this DDC shall be deemed guilty of a violation punishable in accordance with Subsection 1.6.5. For purposes of this section, the term "violation" shall mean a final finding by a court of record that an ordinance has been violated. 
B.  Prior Violations. If a development or activity in violation of the prior development regulations fully complies with this DDC, such development or activity shall no longer be deemed a violation. Unpaid fees and/or penalties from prior enforcement of violations are still valid and shall remain the responsibility of the violator under the prior regulations. 
C.  Violations within the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. Any person who violates any applicable provision of this DDC within the extraterritorial jurisdiction shall not be guilty of a misdemeanor; however, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in the District Court to enjoin the violation of this DDC. 
D.  Activities Constituting a Violation. 
1.  Activity Inconsistent with this DDC. Any erection, construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, maintenance, expansion, movement, or use of any land, building, structure, or sign that is inconsistent with this DDC. 
2.  Activity Inconsistent with a Permit or Approval. Any development, use, or other activity that is in any way inconsistent with the terms or conditions of any permit or approval required to engage in such activity under this DDC. 
3.  Illustrative Examples of Violations. Examples of violations of this DDC include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Increase of the density or intensity of any use of land or structure except in accordance with the requirements of this DDC; 
b.  Reduction or diminishment of lot area, setbacks, buffers, open space, or other standards below the minimum requirements set forth in this DDC; 
c.  Creation, expansion, replacement, or change of a nonconformity inconsistent with this DDC; 
d.  Failure to install, improve, or maintain any public or private improvements required by the terms of any permit or approval; 
e.  Failure to abide by conditions of any approval or agreements executed in association with an approval; 
f.  Failure to comply with applicable requirements for a certificate of occupancy or building permit; or 
g.  Failure to obtain any required permit.  
1.6.3 - Continuing Violations. 
Any violation of this DDC shall be considered a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of this DDC is continued past the date of the issuance of notice of violation, with each violation punishable in accordance with Subsection 1.6.5.  
1.6.4 - Enforcement Actions. 
A.  Responsibility for Enforcement. This DDC shall be administered and enforced by the Director or such other person as may be designated by the Director. 
B.  Investigation. Whenever the Director receives a written, signed, third-party complaint alleging a violation of this DDC or a permit or approval issued under this DDC, the Director shall investigate the complaint and inform the complainant in writing of his or her findings and any actions that have been, or will be taken. 
C.  Persons Liable. The owner, tenant, manager, or occupant of any building or land, or any part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this DDC or a permit or approval issued pursuant to this DDC, may be held responsible for the violation and be subject to the penalties and remedies provided in this section. 
D.  Procedures upon Discovery of Violations. 
1.  If the Director finds that any provision of this DDC is being violated, the Director shall send a written notice to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Additional written notices may be sent at the Director's discretion. 
2.  The Director shall not be required to provide notice of intent to suspend or revoke for violations of this DDC that cause imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. 
3.  When a delay would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of the DDC, or pose a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, the Director may immediately issue an order for compliance by personal service, posting of the property as indicated in the current Denton Central Appraisal District records, or certified mail with return receipt required to the owner of record of the subject property, or to the homeowners association, as applicable, and seek enforcement through the municipal court as authorized below. 
E.  Continuation of Prior Enforcement Actions. Nothing in this DDC shall prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement actions undertaken by the city pursuant to previous regulations.  
1.6.5 - Penalties and Remedies. 
A.  Fines. Any violator of this DDC pursuant to Subsection 1.6.2 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in Subpart A, Section 1-12: General Penalty, of the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Deny, Withhold, or Revoke Approval. Any form of approval or permit issued under this DDC may be denied, withheld, or revoked after notice and a hearing, when the Director determines that: 
1.  There is a departure from the approved plans, specifications, limitations, or conditions as required under the approval; 
2.  The approval or permit was established by false representation; 
3.  The approval or permit was issued in error; or 
4.  There is any other violation of this DDC. 
C.  Stop-Work Orders. 
1.  The Building Official may issue a stop-work order whenever any building, structure, site, or portion of a building, structure, or site is being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in a hazardous manner, in substantial violation of any state or local building provision, or in a manner that endangers life or property. 
2.  The Building Official may issue a stop-work order on any property with an uncorrected violation of this DDC or approval issued under this DDC. 
3.  A stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the applicant/permit holder and/or person performing the work, and shall specify the provision of this DDC or other law in violation. 
4.  If a stop-work order is issued, no work shall proceed on any building, structure, site, or portion of a building, structure, or site subject to the order except to correct a violation or to comply with the order. 
5.  Once conditions cited in the stop-work order have been adequately addressed, the Building Official shall rescind the stop-work order.  
1.6.6 - Continuation of Prior Enforcement Actions. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from pursuing any other remedies it may have for violations of this DDC.  
1.7 - Transition from Prior Regulations 
 
1.7.1 - Continuity of Provisions. 
The provisions of this DDC, insofar as they are substantially the same as previously existing regulations relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not new enactments. Any actions, proceedings, permits, or approvals commenced or issued pursuant to any previously existing ordinance and subject to TLGC § 245 shall not be affected by the enactment of this DDC.  
1.7.2 - Violations Continue. 
Any violation of the previous zoning and subdivision regulations will continue to be a violation under this DDC and be subject to penalties and enforcement under Section 1.6, Enforcement, unless the use, development, construction, or other activity complies with the provisions of this DDC. The enactment of this DDC shall not abate any pending prosecution and/or lawsuit or prevent any prosecution and/or lawsuit from being commenced for any violation of a previously existing ordinance occurring before October 1, 2019.  
1.7.3 - Nonconformities Under Prior Regulations. 
Any nonconformity under the previous zoning and subdivision regulations that has been issued a Certificate of Occupancy will remain a nonconformity under this DDC, as long as the situation that resulted in the prior nonconforming status continues to exist. If a nonconformity under the previous zoning and subdivision regulations becomes conforming because of the adoption of this DDC, then the situation will no longer be a nonconformity.  
1.7.4 - Uses, Lots, Structures, and Sites Rendered Nonconforming. 
A.  When a lot is used for a purpose that was a lawful use before October 1, 2019, and when a Certificate of Occupancy was issued and this DDC no longer classifies such use as either a permitted use or specific use in the zoning district in which it is located, such use shall be considered nonconforming and shall be controlled by the provisions of Section 1.5, Nonconformities. 
B.  Where any building, structure, lot, or development site that legally existed on October 1, 2019 and does not meet all standards set forth in this DDC, such building, structure, lot, or site shall be considered nonconforming and shall be controlled by the provisions of Section 1.5, Nonconformities.  
1.7.5 - Pending Applications. 
A.  Any complete application subject to TLGC § 245 that has been submitted for approval, but upon which no final action has been taken by the appropriate decision-making body prior to October 1, 2019, shall be reviewed in accordance with the regulations in effect on the date the application was deemed complete unless the applicant requests otherwise pursuant to Subsection 1.7.5B below. If the applicant fails to comply with any applicable required period for submittal or other procedural requirements, the application shall expire and subsequent applications shall be subject to the requirements of this DDC. Any re-application of an expired project approval shall meet the standards in effect at the time of re-application. 
B.  An applicant with a complete application subject to TLGC § 245 that has been submitted for approval, but upon which no final action has been taken prior to October 1, 2019, may submit a written request for the complete application to be reviewed under this DDC.  
1.7.6 - Preliminary Plat Approvals. 
A.  An application for which approval of a preliminary subdivision plat was granted prior to October 1, 2019, shall be considered as having received preliminary plat approval under this DDC. 
B.  Preliminary approvals granted under the previous regulations shall be valid for two years from the date of approval. 
C.  Failure to obtain a final plat approval, within two years of the approval of a preliminary plat, shall result in the expiration of the preliminary plat. 
D.  In the instance of large tracts or blocks of land contained within a recorded subdivision and intended or designed for replatting into smaller tracts, lots, or building sites, the replatting shall comply with all provisions of this DDC.  
1.7.7 - Approved Projects. 
A.  Any permits or licenses subject to the standards of this DDC that are valid on October 1, 2019, shall remain valid until their expiration date. Projects with valid permits or licenses may be carried out in accordance with the zoning and subdivision regulations in effect at the time of approval, provided that the permit or license remains valid and has not lapsed. 
B.  No provision of this DDC shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to October 1, 2019, unless the building permit has expired. 
C.  The Director may renew or extend the time of a previous approval of an application that was administratively approved if the required findings or criteria for approval remain valid. Any extension granted shall not exceed one year in length, and no more than one extension may be granted. 
D.  Non-administratively approved projects may be granted one extension not exceeding one year in length, from the reviewing body by which they were originally approved as identified in Section 2.2: Summary Table of Review Procedures, where such extension would be permissible under the zoning and subdivision regulations in effect at the time of approval. If those regulations are silent as to extensions then no extension may be granted. 
E.  Any re-application for an expired project approval shall meet the standards in effect at the time of reapplication.  
1.7.8 - Rezonings With Overlay Conditions Under Prior Regulations. 
Any property that was rezoned with overlay conditions under the prior regulations shall be designated as a Planned Development (PD) on the "Official Zoning Map of City" and shall be governed by the conditions listed in the ordinance authorizing the rezoning. All remaining zoning district regulations and design standards shall be governed by the base zoning district and the development standards of this DDC, effective on October 1, 2019. Proposed changes to such properties shall follow the PD amendment procedures provided in paragraph 2.7.3C.6.d: Amendments to a Planned Development. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0015a, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-19)  
1.7.9 - Master Planned Communities. 
The following Master Planned Communities (MPCs) shall retain the zoning and development regulations established by their respective MPC ordinances, specifically including those regulations incorporated (or excepted) from prior development codes or ordinances as they existed on the date of approval for each MPC approval ordinance and amendment. 
A.  Hills of Denton MPC (Ordinance 2007-150). 
B.  Cole Ranch MPC (Ordinance 2008-030). 
C.  Hills of Denton North MPC (Ordinance 2008-262). 
D.  Hunter Ranch MPC (Ordinances 2008-286; 2010-159; and 2010-160). 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0013a, § 2, 11-5-2019)  
Subchapter 2 - Administration and Procedures  
2.1 - Purpose and Organization 
 
2.1.1 - Purpose. 
This subchapter establishes procedures for the processing of planning and zoning actions that affect the development and use of property subject to the planning jurisdiction of the city.  
2.1.2 - Organization of this Subchapter. 
A.  Section 2.2, Summary Table of Review Procedures, includes a summary table listing the land use and development procedures in this DDC. 
B.  Section 2.3, Review and Decision-Making Bodies, describes the duties and membership of the boards, commissions, and committees that have review and decision-making responsibilities under this DDC. 
C.  Section 2.4, Common Review Procedures, describes standard procedures that are applicable to most application types. 
D.  Section 2.5, Development Permits and Procedures, describes the procedures for site-specific development provisions. 
E.  Section 2.6, Subdivision Procedures, describes the procedures for applications for subdivision and conveyance of land. 
F.  Section 2.7, Plan and DDC Amendments, describes the procedures for amending the comprehensive plan or amending this DDC. 
G.  Section 2.8, Flexibility and Relief Procedures, describes the procedures for applications to vary from strict conformance with this DDC and contains various relief provisions. 
H.  Section 2.9, Historic Preservation Procedures, describes the procedures for various applications related to historic properties.  
2.2 - Summary Table of Review Procedures 
Table 2.2-A lists the development applications authorized in this DDC. For each type of application, the table indicates the role of city review, noticing requirements, and decision-making and appeal authorities. 
Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures 
R = Review/recommendation  D = Decision  A = Appeal  [R/D/A] = Public hearing required
(R/D/A) = Public meeting required  ? = Recommended  ? = Required 
Procedure 	DDC Reference 	Public Notice 	Pre-Application Activities 	Review and Decision-Making Bodies 
		Online 	Mailed 	Published 	Posted Sign 	Pre-Appl. Conference 	Citizen Participation 	Development Assistance Team 	Director 	Planning and Zoning Commission 	City Council 	Zoning Board of Adjustment 
Development Permits and Procedures 
Site Plan Review 	2.5.1 					? 		R 	D 			A 
Specific Use Permit 	2.5.2 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	At Director discretion 	R 	[R] 	[D] 	
Temporary Use Permit 	2.5.3 								D 			A 
Certificate of Zoning Compliance 	2.5.4 								D 			A 
Environmental Sensitive Areas (ESAs) Field Assessment 	2.5.5 								D 		A 	
Gas Well Development Site Plan 	6.2.4 							R 	D 			
Watershed Protection Permit 	6.3.9 						? 	R 	D 			A 
Vested Rights 	See Subsection 2.5.6: Vested Rights 
Exaction Proportionality Determination and Appeal 	See Subsection 2.5.7: Exaction Proportionality Determination and Appeal 
Subdivision Procedures 
Administratively Approved Plat 	2.6.2 					? 		At Director discretion 	D [1] 			
Preliminary Plat 	2.6.3 					? 	? 	R 	R 	(D) 	(A) 	
Final Plat 	2.6.4 					? 	? 	R 	R 	(D) 	(A) 	
Development Plat 	2.6.5 					? 		R 	D 			A 
Gas Well Development Plat 	2.6.6 	See TLGC §§ 212.041 through 212.050 
Replat [2] 	2.6.7 	? 	? 	? 		? 	? 	R 	R/D 	[D] 		
Vacating Plat 	2.6.8 	? 	? 	? 		? 		R 	R 	(D) 	(A) 	
Plan and DDC Amendments 
Comprehensive Plan Amendment 	2.7.1 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	R 	R 	[R] 	[D] 	
Zoning Amendment 	Map [3] 	2.7.2 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	R 	R 	[R] 	[D] 	
	Rezone to PD 	2.7.3 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	R 	R 	[R] 	[D] 	
	Text 	2.7.4 	? 		? 			? 	R 	R 	[R] 	[D] 	
Annexation 	See Subsection 2.7.5: Annexation 
Flexibility and Relief Procedures 
Variance 	2.8.1 					? 		R 	R 			[D] 
Minor Modification 	2.8.2 	Pursuant to application procedure warranting the request 
Appeal of Administrative Decision 	2.8.3 	? 	? 	? 					R 	Appeal authority determined by original application type and in accordance with this Table 2.2-A 
Alternative ESA Plan 	2.8.4 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	R 	R 	[R] 	[D] 	
Alternative Tree Preservation Plan 	See paragraph 7.7.4F: Alternative Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan 
Watershed Protection Permit Relief 	2.8.5 								R 		D 	
Interpretations 	2.8.6 								D [4] 			A 
Historic Preservation Procedures 
Certificate of 
Appropriateness 	See Subsection 2.9.2: Certificate of Appropriateness 
Historic and Conservation District Designation 	See Subsection 2.9.3: Historic and Conservation District Designation 
Historic Landmark Designation 	See Subsection 2.9.4: Historic Landmark Designation 
Notes: 
[1] The Director at his discretion may refer the plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Director shall not disapprove an administratively approved plat but shall refer such plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission if he recommends disapproval. 
[2] Non-residential minor replats may be approved by Staff pursuant to TLGC § 212.0065, as amended. The appeal authority is determined based on the original approval body (i.e., if the Planning and Zoning Commission is the approval authority then the appeal authority is the City Council; if City Staff is the approval authority then the appeal authority is Zoning Board of Appeals. 
[3] Mailed notice shall not be required if the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council initiate an application to repeal and replace the Official Zone Map for all or substantially all of the planning jurisdiction. 
[4] The Director, City Engineer, or Building Official may make an interpretation based on the criteria in Subsection 2.8.6. 
  
2.3 - Review and Decision-Making Bodies 
 
2.3.1 - Purpose. 
This section establishes and prescribes the basic duties and operating procedures of the administrative entities responsible for administering and enforcing this DDC.  
2.3.2 - City Council. 
See Charter, Article II: The Council, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances.  
2.3.3 - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
A.  Composition and Operational Procedures. See Charter, Article X: Planning and Zoning, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Powers and Duties. 
1.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the review and decision authority as shown in Table 2.2-A, pursuant to the application-specific procedures outlined in this DDC. 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission also has the powers and duties permitted under Article X, Section 10.03 in the Municipal Code of Ordinances, and § 211.007 and § 371.042 of the TLGC. 
3.  The members of the Planning and Zoning Commission are held to the City of Denton's Ethics Code.  
2.3.4 - Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
A.  Composition and Operational Procedures. See Charter, Article X: Board of Adjustment, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Powers and Duties. 
1.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the review and decision authority as shown in Table 2.2-A pursuant to the application-specific procedures outlined in this DDC. 
2.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment's jurisdiction shall extend to and include the hearing and deciding of final decisions regarding changes, the reestablishment, or termination of a nonconforming use. 
3.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be the body responsible for hearing appeals of administrative determinations under this DDC, unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this DDC. 
4.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall also have the powers and duties permitted under TLGC § 211.009 and Subpart B, Section 33.6: Appeal, Variances, and Special Exceptions, of the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
5.  The members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment are held to the City of Denton's Ethics Code.  
2.3.5 - Public Utility Board. 
See Charter, Article XII: Public Utilities, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances.  
2.3.6 - Historic Landmark Commission. 
A.  Composition. See Subpart A, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2: Administration, Article III: Boards, Commission, and Committees in the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Operational Procedures. 
1.  The Historic Landmark Commission shall meet as often as necessary to dispose of the business of the Historic Landmark Commission or upon call by the Historic Landmark Commission chair or upon petition of a simple majority of Historic Landmark Commission members. 
2.  Five members present shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and all issues shall be decided by a majority of those members present and voting, except that in those instances where only a quorum of five is present at a meeting, all issues shall be decided by at least four affirmative votes. 
3.  The Historic Landmark Commission shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations for the conduct of its business and the election of its chair and other officers. The minutes of each meeting shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary. 
C.  Powers and Duties. The Historic Landmark Commission shall have the review and decision authority as shown in Table 2.2-A, pursuant to the application-specific procedures outlined in this DDC, and the following additional powers and duties under this DDC: 
1.  The Historic Landmark Commission shall thoroughly familiarize itself with buildings, structures, sites, districts, areas, and lands within the City that may be eligible for designation as historic landmarks, shall have review authority over the City's Historic Preservation Plan, and shall: 
a.  Establish criteria to be used in determining whether certain buildings, structures, sites, districts, areas, lands, and other objects should be designated as historic landmarks; 
b.  Establish guidelines to be used in determination of whether to grant or deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition; 
c.  Suggest sources of funds for preservation and restoration activities and acquisitions, to include federal sources, state sources, private and foundation sources, as well as municipal sources; and 
d.  Recommend, to the proper agencies, incentives designed to encourage historic preservation. 
2.  The City's Historic Preservation Plan shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration and recommendation to the City Council for inclusion in the Denton Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The Historic Landmark Commission shall recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission ordinances designating certain buildings, structures, sites, districts, areas and lands in the city as historic landmarks. 
4.  The Historic Landmark Commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed ordinances and the owner of any land included in the proposed ordinance shall be given at least 15 days written notice of the public hearing. 
5.  If the Historic Landmark Commission finds that buildings, structures, sites, districts, lands or areas cannot be preserved without acquisition, the Historic Landmark Commission may recommend to the City Council that the fee or a lesser interest of the property in question be acquired by gift, device, purchase, eminent domain or otherwise, pursuant to the City's Charter and state and federal law. 
6.  Where there are conditions under which the required preservation of a historic landmark would cause undue hardship on the owner, use district changes may be recommended by the Historic Landmark Commission. 
7.  The designation of an historic landmark may be amended or removed using the same procedure provided in this DDC for the original designation. 
8.  The Historic Landmark Commission shall provide information and counseling to owners of designated historic landmarks. 
9.  Any person making application to have any building, structure, site, district, area or land designated as an historic landmark pursuant to the provisions of this article shall pay to the Development Services Department a filing fee in an amount determined and as from time to time amended by ordinance by the City Council, a copy of which ordinance is on file with the Department. 
10.  The members of the Historic Landmark Commission are held to the City of Denton's Ethics Code.  
2.3.7 - Economic Development Partnership Board. 
See Subpart A, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2: Administration, Article IX: Economic Development Partnership Board, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances.  
2.3.8 - Health and Building Standards Commission. 
See Subpart A, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2: Administration, Article X: Health and Building Standards Commissions, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances.  
2.3.9 - Park and Recreation Board. 
A.  See Subpart A, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 22: Parks and Recreation, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
B.  See Subpart A, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 22: Parks and Recreation, Article III: Park Dedication, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances for payment of fees in lieu of park land dedication and payment of park development fees.  
2.3.10 - City Administration. 
A.  The Director of Development Services (referred to as "Director") shall have the responsibility for administering this DDC and shall have the review and decision-making responsibilities listed in Table 2.2-A, and elsewhere in this DDC. 
B.  The Director shall also coordinate other types of review not specifically addressed in this DDC, but relevant to land use and governed by other parts of the Municipal Code of Ordinances, including but not limited to: clearing and grading; fire; health; and building permits.  
2.3.11 - Development Assistance Team. 
A.  Composition. 
1.  The Development Assistance Team (DAT) is an advisory group comprised of City staff members and outside agencies (as necessary) who meet to review and comment on development proposals and applications and to discuss other matters related to the city's review and management of development. 
2.  The members of the DAT shall be composed of persons from various city departments, which have an interest in the development review and approval process, as designated by the Director. 
B.  Powers and Duties of the Development Assistance Team. The DAT shall have the review authority and responsibilities shown in Table 2.2-A, and the following additional powers and duties under this DDC: 
1.  To assist the Director in developing and maintaining an Administrative Criteria Manual, on request; 
2.  To provide expertise and technical assistance to the city's review and decision-making bodies on request; and 
3.  To review and comment on proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan.  
2.4 - Common Review Procedures 
 
2.4.1 - Overview. 
A.  These common review procedures provide the foundation for specific review and approval procedures identified in Sections 2.5 through 2.9. The common review procedures are illustrated in Figure 2.4-1. Tailored versions of this illustration appear in each of the specific application types. 
B.  Not all common review procedures apply to every development application type. Sections 2.5 through 2.9 identify how these common review procedures are applied to specific application types, and identify additional procedures and requirements beyond the common review procedures. 
Figure 2.4-1: Summary of Common Review Procedures
  
2.4.2 - Consistency with State and Federal Provisions. 
The notice, decision-making authority, public hearing, and other requirements for all approvals shall comply with the TLGC and other applicable state and federal provisions. This Subchapter shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with all applicable state and federal provisions. If these requirements conflict with state or federal provisions, then the state or federal provisions shall control.  
2.4.3 - Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
A.  Pre-Application Conference. 
1.  Purpose. Pre-application conferences are intended to provide an opportunity for a potential applicant to meet with city staff to review submittal requirements, procedures, and schedules; discuss details and potential impacts of the proposed project; and establish points of contact for the development review process. 
2.  Applicability. A pre-application conference is required prior to submittal of certain types of applications, as listed in Table 2.2-A, and is recommended for most other types of applications. City-initiated applications are exempt from holding a pre-application conference. 
3.  Procedure. 
a.  Request. The applicant may submit a request for a pre-application conference to the Development Services Department. 
b.  Scheduling. The Director shall coordinate with the applicant and facilitate the meeting, including the time and location of the meeting. 
c.  Meeting Process. The meeting shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements in the Administrative Criteria Manual. 
4.  Effect. 
a.  Any information, comments, or other material provided to the potential applicant by the city shall expire after 45 days of the pre-application conference. 
b.  Any information or discussions held as part of the pre-application conference shall be binding on the city or the potential applicant, up to 45 days. 
c.  Discussions of potential conditions to mitigate impacts do not reflect actions by the decision-making body until and unless a decision-making body takes formal action to attach that condition to a development approval. 
B.  Citizen Participation. 
1.  Purpose. The citizen participation process provides the residents of Denton with an opportunity to actively participate in the city's development review procedures to help shape the direction of the city's development, thereby enhancing the welfare of the community. 
2.  Applicability. The preparation and execution of a Citizen Participation Plan and submittal of a Citizen Participation Report is recommended prior to submittal of certain types of applications, as listed in Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
3.  Citizen Participation Plan. 
a.  Director Review. The Citizen Participation Plan is recommended to be reviewed by the Director prior to its execution by the applicant. 
b.  Property Owner Names and Mailing Addresses. Upon request by the applicant, staff will provide to the applicant the names and mailing addresses of property owners within 200 feet of the subject property and residents within 500 feet of the subject property. 
c.  Neighborhood Meetings. 
i.  Two Neighborhood Meetings. The applicant is recommended to conduct a minimum of two neighborhood meetings. 
a.  The first neighborhood meeting is recommended to occur prior to distribution of the city's first set of development review comments to the applicant. 
b.  The second neighborhood meeting is recommended to occur prior to the first public meeting/hearing in which the application is heard. 
ii.  Generally. 
a.  Neighborhood meeting invitations should be sent out in advance to allow attendees time to prepare for the meeting. 
b.  The invitation should include the date, time, and location of the scheduled neighborhood meeting. 
c.  The invitation should include as much information about the project and subject request as possible to inform attendees regarding what is being proposed. 
d.  Neighborhood meetings should be located in the City of Denton and as close to the subject property as is practical to help minimize the distance that attendees need to travel to participate. 
e.  Neighborhood meetings should be scheduled to avoid, as much as possible, any conflict with other publicly scheduled meetings. 
f.  Neighborhood meetings should take place during non-business hours to allow attendees who work during the day an opportunity to attend. 
d.  Staff Attendance. 
i.  It is recommended that the applicant keep the Development Services Department informed of the status of its citizen participation efforts by informing staff regarding the details for the neighborhood meeting. 
ii.  Staff will attend neighborhood meetings to observe, collect information, and provide answers related to Denton Plan 2030, this DDC, and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the City. 
4.  Citizen Participation Report. 
a.  Contents. A Citizen Participation Report prepared by the applicant is recommended and should include the following: 
i.  Dates, times, and locations of all meetings that attendees were invited to attend to discuss the project and subject request. 
ii.  The names and affiliation of those that attended that represent the applicant. 
iii.  The names and department of staff that attended the meeting. 
iv.  A sign-in sheet listing the names of the attendees that participated in the process. 
v.  A written summary of the issues and/or concerns raised by the attendees and how the applicant proposes to resolve these issues and/or concerns. If the applicant is unable to resolve the issues and/or concerns raised by the attendees, the summary should state the reason why these issues and/or concerns cannot be resolved. 
b.  Public Meeting/Hearing. 
i.  Prior to the public meeting/hearing, staff will prepare a summary of the neighborhood meeting and include it as part of the staff's analysis. 
ii.  If a Citizen Participation Report is submitted by the applicant, the report will be reviewed by staff and included as an exhibit as part of the backup that is sent to the decision-making body prior to the public meeting/hearing.  
2.4.4 - Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. 
A.  Authority to Submit Application. Unless expressly stated otherwise in this DDC, a development application shall be submitted by: 
1.  The property owner, contract purchaser, or any other person having a recognized property interest in the land on which development is proposed; or 
2.  A person authorized to submit the application on behalf of the owner, contract purchaser, or other person having a recognized property interest in the land; or 
3.  If there are multiple owners, contract purchasers, or other persons authorized to submit the application, all such persons shall sign the application or a letter or document consenting to the application. 
B.  Application Content. 
1.  The application shall be submitted to the Development Services Department. 
2.  The application shall be submitted on a form established by the Director. 
3.  The applicant bears the burden of ensuring that an application contains sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with application requirements. 
4.  The application shall include all required information as indicated in the Administrative Criteria Manual, and any additional information requested by the Director or other staff during a pre-application conference to help demonstrate compliance with this DDC and other applicable city codes. 
C.  Application Fees. 
1.  Application fees shall be paid at the time of submittal according to the type of application. Fees shall be established by ordinance by the City Council. 
2.  All fees required by this DDC, the Administrative Criteria Manual, or otherwise prescribed in the Municipal Code of Ordinances shall be paid to and collected by the Development Services Department. 
3.  Where initial application fees are based on the estimated costs of review of the application by an outside consultant (for example, review of a project's traffic impacts by a traffic consultant), and the Director determines that additional funds are needed to complete the consultant's review, the Director may impose additional application fees to recover the city's actual costs in completing review. Prior to imposing such additional fees, the Director shall notify the applicant of the additional fees and provide the applicant with the option to move forward or withdraw the application. 
D.  Submittal and Review Schedule. The Director shall establish a submittal and review schedule for development applications and shall include that information in the Administrative Criteria Manual. The Director may amend the schedule to ensure effective and efficient review under this DDC. 
E.  Determination of Application Completeness. 
1.  Application Materials. 
a.  No application is complete unless all of the information required by Subchapter 2: Administration and Procedures, the Administrative Criteria Manual, and any application materials required by the Development Services Department, are included, and all required filing fees are paid. 
b.  An application is not considered filed until it is complete. 
c.  The applicant shall file an application in advance of any required public hearing or public meeting where the application is considered. 
d.  The Director may establish a schedule for filing and reviewing any application that requires action by the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Historic Landmark Commission, Director, or Building Official. The schedule shall provide adequate time for notice and/or publication consistent with the applicable state statutes and this Subchapter. 
e.  Completed applications shall be filed according to any published schedule. 
f.  A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this DDC, other Ordinances of the City of Denton, or state or federal law. 
2.  Review Procedure. 
a.  No later than 10 business days after an application is submitted, the Director shall determine whether the application is complete and shall transmit a written determination to the applicant. If the written determination is not made within this time period, the application is deemed complete. Failure to complete this review within the specified time does not constitute approval and does not give rise to any cause of action against the City. 
b.  If the application is determined not to be complete, the Director shall provide written notice to the applicant of the failure. The notice shall specify the necessary documents or other information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided. The Director shall provide this notice no later than the 10th business day after the date the application is filed. 
c.  Pursuant to TLGC 245.002(e), the application shall expire on or after the 45th day after the date the application is filed if: 
i.  The applicant fails to provide documents or other information required by Subsection 2.4.4B above; or 
ii.  The Director provides the notice described in paragraph 2.4.4E.2.b, above; and 
iii.  The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the time provided in the notice. 
d.  If an application expires, the city shall not process the application. The applicant shall file a new application and pay the required fees to obtain the requested approval. 
3.  Notice of Application Acceptance. When the Director determines that an application is filed in proper form and is ready to be formally accepted, the Director shall notify the applicant in writing. The application is then processed according to the remainder of this subchapter and the Administrative Criteria Manual, including referrals to outside agencies and scheduling for public hearing and/or meetings, as applicable. 
4.  Time Limits Triggered by Complete Application. Whenever this subchapter establishes a time period for processing an application, the time period does not begin until the Director has reviewed the application for completeness and the applicant has corrected all deficiencies in the application. 
5.  Appeal. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the applicant may appeal that decision in writing to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 2.8.3, Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
F.  Minor Application Revisions. 
1.  An applicant may revise an application after receiving notice of deficiencies following staff review according to Subsection 2.4.5, or on requesting and receiving permission from an advisory or decision-making body after that body has reviewed, but not yet taken action on, the application. 
2.  Revisions shall be limited to changes that directly respond to specific requests or suggestions made by staff or the advisory or decision-making body, as long as they constitute only minor additions, deletions, or corrections and do not include significant substantive changes to the development proposed in the application or do not increase the intensity of land use, as determined by the Director. 
3.  Whenever this subchapter establishes a time period for processing an application, minor application revisions may warrant restarting the time period, as determined by the Director. 
4.  All other application revisions shall be processed as a new application per this Subsection 2.4.4. 
G.  Application Withdrawal. 
1.  After an application has been accepted for review, the applicant may withdraw the application at any time by submitting a letter of withdrawal to the Director. 
2.  An applicant is not entitled to a refund of application fees for withdrawn applications; however, the Director may refund fees not expended if the application is withdrawn. 
3.  If an applicant fails to respond to staff comments within 45 days, or an application is otherwise determined by the Director to be inactive for a period of 45 days, then the application is no longer valid. 
H.  Concurrent Review. 
1.  Where possible, without creating an undue administrative burden on the city's decision-making bodies and staff, this subchapter intends to accommodate the simultaneous processing of applications for different permits and approvals that may be required for the same development project in order to expedite the overall review process. 
2.  Review and decision-making bodies considering concurrent applications shall render separate reports, recommendations, and decisions on each application based on the specific standards applicable to each request. 
3.  Some forms of approval depend on the applicant having previously received another form of approval, or require the applicant to take particular action within some time period following the approval in order to avoid having the approval lapse. Therefore, even though this subchapter intends to accommodate simultaneous processing, applicants should note that each of the permits and approvals set forth in this subchapter has its own timing and review sequence.  
2.4.5 - Step 3: Staff Review and Action. 
A.  Refer Application to Staff and Review Agencies. The Director shall distribute the complete application to appropriate staff and appropriate internal and external review agencies per the Administrative Criteria Manual. 
B.  Staff Review and Application Revisions. Staff shall review the application and submit recommendations and comments to the applicant in a form established by the Director. The application shall not move forward for further review until the Director determines that the applicant has adequately responded to staff recommendations and comments, or the applicant requests that the application move forward with a staff recommendation of denial. 
C.  Applications Subject to Staff Recommendation. 
1.  Staff Report. The Director shall submit a written report to the recommending or decision-making body. The Director's report should include the reports and recommendations of other city departments, if applicable, and should state whether or not the application complies with all applicable DDC requirements. The staff report may also include a recommendation for a decision by the authorized recommending or decision-making body and recommend how noted deficiencies may be corrected and negative impacts mitigated. 
2.  Distribution and Availability of Application and Staff Report. The Director must submit a copy of the staff report to the applicant and advisory or decision-making body and must make the staff report and all related materials available for public review pursuant to the Administrative Criteria Manual. 
3.  Forwarding Applications for Review. A recommending- or decision-making body may remand the application back to the Director for further consideration, and the City Council may remand the application back to a recommending body for further consideration. 
D.  Applications Subject to Staff Decision. If an application is subject to staff review and a final decision by the Director pursuant to Table 2.2-A, the Director shall make a decision based on the review standards applicable to the application type. The decision shall be in writing and shall clearly state reasons for a denial or for conditions of approval. The Director may, at his or her discretion, require that the application be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review. 
E.  Approval Criteria Applicable to all Applications. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  Unless otherwise specified in this DDC, City review and decision-making bodies must review all development applications submitted pursuant to this subchapter for compliance with the general review criteria stated below. 
b.  The application may also be subject to additional review criteria specific to the type of application, as set forth in sections 2.5 through 2.9. 
c.  If there is a conflict between the general review criteria in this section and the specific review criteria in sections 2.5 through 2.9, the applicable review criteria in sections 2.5 through 2.9 controls. 
2.  Prior Approvals. The proposed development shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of any prior land use approval, plan, development agreement, or plat approval that is in effect and not proposed to be changed. This includes an approved phasing plan for development and installation of public improvements and amenities. 
3.  Consistent with Comprehensive Plan and Other Applicable Plans. The proposed development shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and any applicable plans. The decision-making authority: 
a.  Shall weigh competing plan goals, policies, and strategies; and 
b.  May approve an application that furthers the overall goals of the Comprehensive Plan even if the development does not match the future land use designation in the Comprehensive Plan. 
4.  Compliance with this DDC. 
a.  The proposed development shall comply with all applicable standards in this DDC, unless the standard is to be lawfully modified. 
b.  Compliance with these standards is applied at the level of detail required for the subject submittal. 
5.  Compliance with Other Applicable Regulations. The proposed development shall comply with all other city regulations and with all applicable regulations, standards, requirements, or plans of the federal or state governments and other relevant jurisdictions. This includes, but is not limited to, wetlands, water quality, erosion control, and wastewater regulations. 
6.  Consistent with Interlocal and Development Agreements. The proposed development shall be consistent with any adopted interlocal and applicable development agreements, and comply with the terms and conditions of any such agreements incorporated by reference into this DDC. 
7.  Minimizes Adverse Environmental Impacts. The proposed development should be designed to minimize negative environmental impacts, and should not cause significant adverse impacts on the natural environment. Examples of the natural environment include water, air, noise, stormwater management, scenic resources, wildlife habitat, soils, and native vegetation. 
8.  Minimizes Adverse Impacts on Surrounding Property. The proposed development should not cause significant adverse impacts on surrounding properties. The results of the citizen participation process may be appropriately considered under this section. 
9.  Minimizes Adverse Fiscal Impacts. The proposed development should not result in significant adverse fiscal impacts on the city. 
10.  Compliance with Utility, Service, and Improvement Standards. As applicable, the proposed development shall comply with federal, state, county, service district, city and other regulatory authority standards, and design/construction specifications for roads, access, drainage, water, sewer, schools, emergency/fire protection, and similar standards. 
11.  Provides Adequate Road Systems. Adequate road capacity shall exist to serve the uses permitted under the proposed development, and the proposed uses shall be designed to ensure safe ingress and egress onto the site and safe road conditions around the site, including adequate access onto the site for fire, public safety, and EMS services. 
12.  Provides Adequate Public Services and Facilities. Adequate public service and facility capacity shall exist to accommodate uses permitted under the proposed development at the time the needs or demands arise, while maintaining adequate levels of service to existing development. Public services and facilities include, but are not limited to, roads, domestic water, sewer, schools, public safety, fire protection, utilities, libraries, and vehicle/pedestrian connections and access within the site and to adjacent properties. 
13.  Rational Phasing Plan. If the application involves phases, each phase of the proposed development shall contain all of the required streets, utilities, landscaping, open space, and other improvements that are required for that phase, and may not defer those improvements to subsequent phases. 
F.  Conditions of Approval. 
1.  Except for zoning map amendments or annexations, or where otherwise prohibited by law, where this DDC authorizes a review body to approve or deny an application subject to applicable criteria, the review body may approve the application with conditions necessary to bring the proposed development into compliance with this DDC or other regulations, or to mitigate the impacts of that development on the surrounding properties and streets. 
2.  All conditions of approval shall be reasonably related to the anticipated impacts of the proposed use or development or shall be based upon standards duly adopted by the city. Such conditions may include those necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of the City's Comprehensive Plan, development agreements, other adopted city plans, and this DDC. 
3.  No conditions of approval shall be less restrictive than the requirements of this DDC, except where the DDC expressly allows deviations. 
4.  Any condition of approval that requires an applicant to dedicate land or pay money to a public entity in an amount that is not calculated according to a formula applicable to a broad class of applicants shall be roughly proportional both in nature and extent to the anticipated impacts of the proposed development, as shown through an individualized determination of impacts. 
5.  During its consideration, the decision-making body may consider alternative potential conditions; however, no discussion of potential conditions shall be deemed an attempt or intent to impose any condition that would violate the federal or state constitutions, statutes, or regulations. Discussions of potential conditions to mitigate impacts do not reflect actions by the decision-making body unless and until the decision-making body takes formal action to attach that condition to a development approval. 
6.  Unless otherwise provided in this DDC, any representations of the applicant in submittal materials or during public hearings shall be binding as conditions of approval. 
7.  Failure to meet any condition of approval prior to the issuance of any type of permit shall negate the approval and the application shall be deemed denied.  
2.4.6 - Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. 
A.  Scheduling. 
1.  If an application is subject to a public hearing pursuant to Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures, the Director shall schedule the public hearing for either a regularly scheduled meeting or special meeting of the appropriate decision-making body following submission of a completed application. 
2.  Unless otherwise specified, notice for public hearings shall meet or exceed TLGC requirements. 
B.  Public Notice Requirements. 
1.  All public hearings required by this DDC shall be preceded by the notices identified in Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures, all such notices shall meet the content, timing, and other specifications in the Administrative Criteria Manual. 
2.  Applicants are responsible for any additional notice beyond the requirements in this DDC, other city ordinances, or state law. 
C.  Constructive Notice. 
1.  Minor Defects in Notice Shall Not Invalidate Proceedings. Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice shall be limited to errors in a legal description or typographical or grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notice to affected parties. In all cases, however, the requirements for the timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date, and place of a hearing shall be strictly construed. 
2.  Failure to Receive Notice Shall Not Invalidate Action. Failure of a party to receive written notice shall not invalidate subsequent action. 
3.  Re-Noticing. A new notice is required if there is an increase in land use intensity, as determined by the Director, between the action described in the original notice and the final action.  
2.4.7 - Step 5: Review and Decision. 
The application shall be subject to review, hearings, recommendations, and decisions as indicated in Table 2.2-A and the following: 
A.  Generally. 
1.  If the application is subject to a public hearing, the applicable review body shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with Subsection 2.4.6. 
2.  The applicable review body shall consider the application, relevant support materials, staff report, and any evidence and public comments from the public hearing (if required). 
3.  The applicable review body shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on the applicable approval criteria, including the general criteria in Subsection 2.4.5E, Approval Criteria Applicable to all Applications, and the specific standards in sections 2.5 through 2.9. 
4.  If the review involves a quasi-judicial hearing, the recommendation or decision (as applicable) shall be based only on the record of the public hearing and shall: 
a.  Be made in writing; 
b.  Include findings of fact based on competent, material, and substantial evidence presented at the hearing; 
c.  Reflect the determination of contested facts; and 
d.  State how the findings support compliance with applicable review standards. 
B.  Conditional Approvals. The decision-making body may incorporate or require, as part of a condition of approval, a written agreement between the applicant and the city that enforces the conditions. All conditions shall comply with the limitations in Subsection 2.4.5F, Conditions of Approval. 
C.  Postponement of Public Hearings at Applicant's Request. An applicant may request one postponement of the scheduled public hearing at least five business days prior to the scheduled public hearing. If any publication or notice is provided by the city, the applicant is responsible for any costs or fees associated with the postponement. If the request is submitted less than five days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the decision-making body may, in its discretion, either hold or continue the public hearing. 
D.  Continuances. The decision-making body may continue a public hearing to a specified date, time, and place. The date of continuance shall be made part of the motion and publicly announced at the public hearing. Publication or property owner notification of the continued date is not required, unless required by state law or recommended by the hearing body or the Director. 
E.  Postpone a Decision. A decision-making body may close a public hearing and postpone the decision. The request shall appear on the next subsequent agenda unless the decision is deferred to a specific date. 
F.  Other Rules to Govern. Other matters pertaining to the public hearing shall be governed by other provisions of these regulations applicable to the body conducting the hearing and its adopted rules of procedure.  
2.4.8 - Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
A.  Notice of Decision. 
1.  Within 10 days after a final decision on an application, the Director shall provide written notification of the decision, unless the applicant was present at the meeting where the decision was made or required by law. 
2.  If the review involves a quasi-judicial hearing, the Director shall, within 10 days after a final decision on the application, provide a written notification of the decision to the owner(s) of the subject site (unless the applicant was present at the meeting where the decision was made or required by law), and any other person that submitted a written request for a copy of the decision before its effective date. 
B.  Appeal. 
1.  A party aggrieved or adversely affected by any decision by the City Council or Zoning Board of Adjustment may seek review of the decision in the courts in accordance with applicable state law. 
2.  A party aggrieved by other final decisions may appeal the decision in accordance with the procedures and standards in Subsection 2.8.3 and as set forth in sections 2.5 through 2.9, as applicable. 
C.  Expiration of Approval. 
1.  An application approval under this subchapter expires if no progress is made towards completion of the project within the established expiration dates provided in sections 2.5 through 2.9. 
2.  A change in ownership of the land shall not affect the established expiration time period of an approval. 
3.  For purposes of this subsection, progress towards completion of the project is as defined in TLGC § 245.005. 
D.  Extensions of Approval Period. 
1.  The original approval body may grant one extension of an approval period of up to one year for good cause. 
2.  All requests for extensions shall be submitted in writing to the Director at least 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of approval. 
3.  An extension request shall include: 
a.  A narrative stating the reasons for the applicant's inability to comply with the specified deadlines; and 
b.  A narrative describing any changes in the character of the neighborhood, the Comprehensive Plan, or this DDC that have occurred since approval of the permit/plan, and how any such changes affect the permit/plan; and 
c.  The anticipated time schedule for completing the review project and/or the specific project. 
4.  Additional review of the permit/plan may result in additional conditions, as applicable. 
E.  Modification or Amendment of Approval. Unless otherwise provided in this DDC, any modification of an approved plan, permit, or condition of approval shall require a new application that is submitted and reviewed in accordance with the full procedure and fee requirements applicable to the particular type of the original application. 
F.  Limitation on Subsequent Similar Applications. 
1.  Except at City Council's request, following denial of an application, no application that is the same or substantially similar will be accepted within one year of the previous denial. For purposes of this provision, "substantially similar" shall mean any application that is not materially different in terms of proposed development or activities relative to the reasons for denial of a previously submitted application, as determined by the Director. 
2.  This waiting period may be waived by the decision-making body provided that: 
a.  There is a substantial change to circumstances, or new information available, relevant to the issues or facts considered during the previous application review; or 
b.  The new application is materially different from the previous application, as determined by the Director.  
2.5 - Development Permits and Procedures 
 
2.5.1 - Site Plan Review. 
A.  Purpose. The site plan review procedure is intended to ensure compliance with the development and design standards of this DDC and to encourage quality development reflective of the adopted goals and objectives of the city. The site plan review procedure ensures that proposed development applications address and mitigate potential adverse impacts associated with the proposal. 
B.  Applicability. Site plan review is required for the following types of activities. All other activities are exempted. 
1.  Residential. 
a.  New construction of multifamily buildings. 
b.  Expansion of multifamily buildings by more than 10 dwelling units or 10 percent of the number of existing units, whichever is less. 
c.  Reconstruction of a multifamily building after voluntary demolition. 
2.  Mixed-Use and Nonresidential. 
a.  New construction of mixed-use or nonresidential buildings. 
b.  Expansion of a mixed-use building by more than 2,000 square feet of nonresidential space or the lesser of more than 10 dwelling units or 10 percent of the number of dwelling units. 
c.  Expansion of a nonresidential building by the greater of either 2,000 square feet or more or 20 percent of the total square footage of the building. 
d.  Reconstruction of a mixed-use or nonresidential building after voluntary demolition. 
C.  Site Plan Procedure. Figure 2.5-1 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of site plans. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.5-1: Summary of Site Plan Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. 
a.  Generally. 
i.  The site plan application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
ii.  The Director may require at any stage of review of any site plan, submission of any plan, study, survey or other information, in addition to that specified in this DDC, or the Administrative Criteria Manual, and at the applicant's expense, as determined necessary to enable review, recommendation, and/or approval of the site plan. 
b.  Concurrent Review. 
i.  Civil Engineering Plans. For properties that have already been platted, the Director may require submittal of civil engineering plans for proposed streets, sidewalks, drainage, utility, or other public improvements associated with the site plan review. If required, such civil engineering plans may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with the site plan application. 
ii.  Environmental Sensitive Areas ESAs Compliance Review. ESA Compliance Review shall be reviewed concurrently with an application for a site plan in accordance with Subsection 7.4.4: ESAs Procedures. 
iii.  Other Applications. An application for a site plan approval may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with rezonings, specific use permits, subdivision applications, and variance applications, provided that the Director shall not decide the site plan approval application until after an official decision is made on the rezoning, subdivision, and/or variance application. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the site plan application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.5.1D, below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. Not required. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. Not applicable. Review and decision is by the Director under Step 3. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
a.  No Building Permit without Approval. No building permit shall be issued until the site plan and any associated development plans have been approved, and all conditions of approval have been met. 
b.  Lapse of Approval. Unless otherwise provided in the conditions of approval, site plans shall expire after 24 months if the use or construction has not obtained all necessary permits. Extensions may be granted by the Director for good cause shown due to unforeseen circumstances, such as an application for amendments to the approved site plan. Such extensions may only be granted if a written request is made to the Director prior to expiration. 
c.  Amendments. During construction, the Director may authorize minor adjustments without requiring resubmittal of a site plan application provided such adjustments: 
i.  Comply with the standards of this DDC; 
ii.  Are necessary to meet provisions of the building code or other life safety code; 
iii.  Are necessary to meet conditions of approval by other city, county, or state departments and/or agencies; or 
iv.  Would not significantly alter the function, form, intensity, character, demand on public facilities, or impact on adjacent properties as approved with the site plan. 
d.  Appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The applicant may appeal the denial, revocation, or suspension of a site plan to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with Subsection 2.8.3. 
D.  Site Plan Review Approval Criteria. In reviewing a proposed site plan application, the Director shall consider the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether: 
1.  The lot on which the development is proposed has been legally platted or is otherwise exempt from platting requirements; 
2.  The site plan complies with all site specifications adopted by the city; and 
3.  The site plan complies with applicable standards in this DDC, including Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts; Subchapter 4: Overlay and Historic Districts; Subchapter 5: Use Regulations; Subchapter 7: Development Standards; and any other applicable standards of this DDC.  
2.5.2 - Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
A.  Purpose. The specific use permit (SUP) procedure provides a mechanism for the city to evaluate proposed development and land uses that have unique or widely varying operating characteristics or unusual features. This procedure is intended to ensure compatibility with surrounding areas and that adequate mitigation is provided for anticipated impacts. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The SUP procedure shall apply to uses identified in Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, as requiring a SUP. No such use may be established, enlarged, or altered without approval of a SUP. 
2.  The City Council may grant, repeal, and amend SUPs for certain uses, but only where specified in this DDC. 
C.  Specific Use Permit Procedure. Figure 2.5-2 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of SUPs. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 
Figure 2.5-2: Summary of Specific Use Permit Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Citizen Participation is recommended in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3B: Citizen Participation. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. The SUP application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the SUP application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.5.2D below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. The SUP application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and shall be noticed pursuant to Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures and Subsection 2.4.6. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. 
a.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the SUP application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.5.2D below, and shall forward its recommendation to the City Council. 
b.  City Council Review and Decision. 
i.  The City Council may review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the SUP application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.5.2D below. 
ii.  If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of the SUP, the SUP shall become effective only by a three-fourths vote of all members of the City Council. 
c.  Concurrent Review. An applicant may request a SUP approval concurrent with a rezoning. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply with the following modifications: 
a.  Expiration of a Specific Use Permit. If the authorized use or construction is not substantially underway within 24 months after the date of SUP approval, or an extension is granted pursuant to Subsection 2.4.8C, the SUP shall expire. 
b.  Expansion or Enlargement. 
i.  Expansion or enlargement of a SUP shall require a new application, unless the Director determines that the expansion or enlargement: 
a.  Is not expected to increase potential negative impacts to surrounding property or the city; and 
b.  Will not require adjustments to any standards greater than allowed through the minor modification procedures in Subsection 2.8.2. 
ii.  Any expansion or enlargement of a SUP that does not meet the criteria for Director approval established above shall require review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and review and approval by the City Council. 
c.  Denial or Revocation of Permit. 
i.  A SUP may be revoked or modified after notice to the property owner and a hearing before the City Council, for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The SUP was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; or 
b.  One or more of the conditions of approval imposed on the SUP has not been met or has been violated; or 
c.  At the time of change of ownership or condition indicated in the original approval. 
ii.  If a SUP is denied or revoked in accordance with this section, then the subject property shall not be eligible for resubmittal for 12 months unless the applicant can show a substantial change in circumstances to justify a resubmittal. 
d.  Recording. All approved SUPs shall be referenced on the Official Zoning Map of City as "SUP." 
D.  Specific Use Permit Approval Criteria. In reviewing a proposed SUP, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether: 
1.  The specific use proposed is compatible with the surrounding area; 
2.  The specific use proposed has minimal impacts on future development of the area; 
3.  The specific use proposed meets all other standards of this DDC and all other applicable city codes; 
4.  Any impacts associated with access, traffic, emergency services, utilities, parking, refuse areas, noise, glare, and odor have been adequately mitigated; 
5.  The use is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and any other applicable adopted plans; and 
6.  The use adversely impacts the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the area and the City of Denton.  
2.5.3 - Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  Purpose. The temporary use permit procedure provides a mechanism for the city to evaluate prospective uses and/or structures on private property of limited duration to ensure compliance with applicable standards of this DDC, including Section 5.5: Temporary Uses and Structures. 
B.  Applicability. A temporary use permit is required before establishing, constructing, or installing any temporary use or structure designated as requiring a temporary use permit in Section 5.5: Temporary Uses and Structures. 
C.  Temporary Use Permit Procedure. Figure 2.5-3 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of temporary use permits. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.5-3: Summary of Temporary Use Permit Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is optional in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. The temporary use permit application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the temporary use permit application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.5.3D below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. Not required. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. Not applicable. Review and decision is by the Director under Step 3. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply, with the following modifications: 
a.  Effect of Approval. A temporary use permit authorizes establishment, construction, or installation of the approved temporary use or structure in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
b.  Expiration of Approval. 
i.  A temporary use permit shall be valid beginning on the date specified on the permit and shall remain valid for the time period indicated on the permit, but in no event, longer than 12 months. 
ii.  Upon request, the Director may grant a one-year extension; however, in no case shall a temporary use permit be valid for more than one year after its original expiration date. This one-year extension period may not be further extended. 
iii.  Any temporary use permit requesting an approval period beyond one year shall require a specific use permit approval pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2. 
c.  Removal and Restoration. Before the expiration of a temporary use permit, the permittee shall disconnect all temporary uses and structures, and associated property and equipment, and free the temporary use site from all trash, litter, and debris to the satisfaction of the Director. 
d.  Appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The applicant may appeal the denial, revocation, or suspension of a temporary use permit to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with Subsection 2.8.3. 
D.  Temporary Use Permit Approval Criteria. In reviewing a temporary use or structure, the Director shall consider the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether the proposed use or structure: 
1.  Complies with applicable temporary use standards in Section 5.5: Temporary Uses and Structures, as well as all other applicable standards in this DDC; 
2.  Adequately mitigates any impacts associated with access, traffic, emergency services, utilities, parking, refuse areas, noise, glare, and odor; and 
3.  Complies with all requirements and conditions of approval of any prior development permit or approval.  
2.5.4 - Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 
A.  Purpose. The certificate of zoning compliance procedure provides a mechanism for the city to evaluate new and/or changes in use of any building, structure, or land to ensure compliance with applicable standards of this DDC. A certificate of zoning compliance may also be obtained by a property owner to demonstrate the existence of a nonconformity subject to Section 1.5, Nonconformities. 
B.  Applicability. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required prior to the use of any building, structure, or land, except that temporary uses and structures approved in accordance with Section 5.5, Temporary Uses and Structures, shall be exempt from certificate of zoning compliance requirements. 
C.  Certificate of Zoning Compliance Procedure. Figure 2.5-4 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of a certificate of zoning compliance. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.5-4: Summary of Certificate of Zoning Compliance Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is optional in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. The certificate of zoning compliance application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance when, after examination of the building, structure, landscaping, and/or other improvements or changes to the property, the Department finds that the building and site complies with the applicable provisions of this DDC and other applicable ordinances and construction codes of the city. This review shall include, but is not limited to: off-street parking, landscaping, and other development standards listed in Subchapter 7: Development Standards. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. Not required. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. Review and decision is subject to Subsection 2.4.7. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply, with the following modifications: 
a.  Effect of Approval. 
i.  A certificate of zoning compliance authorizes establishment of a new use and/or change of occupancy of an existing property or building with any additional terms and conditions of the permit and shall be valid as long as the conditions of the building or land use permit remain in effect. 
ii.  The certificate of zoning compliance shall clearly state that the proposed use of a building or property complies with the provisions of this DDC. 
iii.  For any proposed certificate of zoning compliance requiring a building permit, a certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued at the time of permitting. 
b.  Revocation of a Certificate of Use Permit. 
i.  A certificate of zoning compliance may be revoked by the Director if the use of the property or building is inconsistent with the authorized use of the certificate of zoning compliance. 
ii.  The Director shall notify the permit holder in writing and provide 30 days from the date of the letter for the permit holder to bring the use of the property into compliance with the certificate of zoning compliance, or the permit shall be revoked. 
c.  Appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The applicant may appeal the denial, revocation, or suspension of a certificate of zoning compliance to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with Subsection 2.8.3.  
2.5.5 - Environmental Sensitive Areas (ESAs) Field Assessments. 
A.  Purpose. The environmentally sensitive areas (ESAs) field assessment procedure provides a mechanism for the city to confirm the presence of ESAs protected habitats and to correct any errors on the Official ESA Map. 
B.  Applicability. Field assessments are required when there is reasonable evidence that ESAs, as depicted on the Official ESA Map, may not be accurate. ESA field assessments that require map adjustment shall supersede the Official ESA Map in determining what areas of a proposed development are subject to the requirements of Section 7.4: Environmentally Sensitive Areas. 
C.  ESA Field Assessment Procedure. Figure 2.5-5 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of ESA field assessments. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.5-5: Summary of ESA Field Assessment Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is optional in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. 
a.  Generally. 
i.  The ESA field assessment application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
ii.  The Director may require additional information deemed appropriate and necessary to process the application. 
iii.  An application for an ESA field assessment must be submitted and reviewed prior to or concurrently with the platting of property. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review an ESA field assessment application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in accordance with the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5, and any specific biological, hydrological, and soil identification standards included on the ESA field assessment forms provided by the city. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. Not required. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. Not applicable. Review and decision is by the Director under Step 3. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
a.  An ESA field assessment application shall expire two years after its approval, or if the natural conditions of the ESA have been significantly altered. 
b.  A change in ownership of the land shall not affect the established expiration time period of an approval. 
c.  For purposes of this section, progress towards completion of the project is as defined in TLGC § 245.005. 
d.  Appeals to staff determinations shall follow the procedure in Section 2.8.3.  
2.5.6 - Vested Rights. 
A.  Introduction and Purpose. TLGC, Chapter 245, commonly referred to as the state's "vested rights law," provides an opportunity for persons to "freeze" or "vest" governmental regulations by filing a permit application. Other laws, such as TLGC, § 211.016, also provide certain vesting to: 
1.  Ensure that the city recognizes and protects all vested rights created by TLGC, Chapter 245, and other applicable laws; 
2.  Ensure that all vested rights are made by the city only after the city is in receipt of all information necessary to allow the city to determine whether vested rights are present; and 
3.  Provide a method of administrative review of vested rights. 
B.  Vested Rights. For purposes of this DDC, any person who believes that they have obtained a vested right under TLGC, Chapter 245, or other applicable vested rights law, shall submit to the Director a petition explaining the factual and legal bases upon which the person relies to support their contention that they have a particular vested right and, consequently, is exempt or not subject to a particular city order, regulation, ordinance, rule, expiration date, or other properly adopted requirement otherwise applicable to development of the petitioner's property (hereinafter referred to collectively as "regulations"). The petition shall be accompanied by an unconditional waiver of any statutory time periods or time periods established by ordinance for review of any filed applications which are the subject of the petition. The petition shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The name, mailing address, phone number, and fax number of the person (or the person's duly authorized agent); 
2.  Identification of the property for which the person claims a vested right; 
3.  Identification of the permit applications for which the applicant seeks relief under this DDC; 
4.  Identification of the "project," as that term is defined in TLGC, Chapter 245 at § 245.001(3), and the permit application, permit or development plan giving rise to the project; 
5.  Identification of the original application for the first permit in the series of permits required for the project, as described in TLGC, Chapter 245 at § 245.001(1) and § 245.002(a) and (b), and each subsequent permit application or permit constituting the series of permits, by type of permit and dates filed or approved by the city; 
6.  Identification of any exemptions under this DDC or city ordinances to which the petitioner believes are applicable to the project defined; 
7.  Identification of all pertinent city regulations in effect at the time the original application for the permit was filed that: 
a.  The Petitioner contends control the approval, disapproval, or conditional approval of the application(s) for a permit for which relief is sought, pursuant to TLGC, Chapter 245 at § 245.002(a); and 
b.  Identification of all current city regulations that the petitioner contends do not apply to the project due to the vested rights provided the person by TLGC, Chapter 245, or other applicable vested rights laws. Global references to a particular ordinance, statute or set of criteria, may be deemed insufficient and the city may consider the request for a vested rights to be incomplete and, hence, not subject to a staff determination at that time. 
8.  Identification of all current city regulations that the petitioner accepts as applicable to the project. 
C.  Vested Rights. The Director shall first determine whether the application is complete pursuant to Subsection 2.4.4: Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. Once the application has been determined or deemed complete, the Director shall forward the vested rights petition, together with the required supporting information or documentation, to the City Manager and City Attorney for their respective reviews. Prior to rendering a final determination, the City Manager may request a pre-determination conference with the person to discuss the person's vested rights and to ensure that the nature of the claim is fully and completely understood by the City Manager. The City Manager, after consultation with the City Attorney, shall render a final administrative determination that grants the relief requested in the petition in whole or in part, or denies the requested relief in whole or in part within 30 days of the date the petition is complete. The City Manager's determination shall include a statement of the nature and scope of the project and the reasons for the decision, and shall identify those current regulations that are applicable to the project, if any, and prior existing regulations that are applicable to the project, if any. 
D.  Board of Adjustment Appeal. If the petitioner believes that the City Manager's vested rights determination is in error, the petitioner shall have the right to appeal such determination to the City's Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 2.8.1: Variance, which board shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide the appeal pursuant to Subsection 2.3.4: Zoning Board of Adjustment and TLGC, Chapter 211. 
E.  Criteria for Deciding Petition. The City Manager, or the Board of Adjustment on appeal, shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors: 
1.  Whether the city received fair notice of the project and the nature of the permit sought; 
2.  Whether the nature and scope of the project prevents the city from applying one or more current regulations to the proposed or pending applications; 
3.  Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law; 
4.  Whether any statutory exception to a right asserted pursuant to TLGC, Chapter 245, is applicable to one or more current regulations; 
5.  Whether any exemption from one or more regulations under the DDC or city ordinances is applicable to the project; and 
6.  Whether the project is dormant. 
F.  Binding Determination. The City Manager's final determination, if not timely appealed to the Board of Adjustment within 15 days after the decision is rendered by the City Manager, shall be immediately filed in the city's files related to the project and the determination shall be considered binding upon the city and the petitioner for the duration of the project. If an appeal is taken to the Board of Adjustment, the Board of Adjustment's decision shall be so filed and shall supersede the decision of the City Manager. Similarly, any decision by the Board of Adjustment regarding a vested rights petition, shall be filed in the city's files related to the project and the determination shall be considered binding upon the city and the petitioner for the life of the project. The City Manager's decision, or the Board of Adjustment's decision on appeal, shall be deemed filed on the first business day following the date on which action was taken by the City Manager or Board of Adjustment. Notwithstanding the binding nature of the city's final determination, the city and petitioner may, at any time, enter into an agreement that, to the extent authorized by law, modifies the final determination and the applicable regulations to be applied to the project. 
G.  Judicial Review. Should the petitioner or city be aggrieved by or dissatisfied with the decision of the Board of Adjustment, the petitioner or city may pursue all legal remedies to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to TLGC, Chapter 211.  
2.5.7 - Exaction Proportionality Determination and Appeal. 
A.  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
1.  Permit shall carry the meaning defined for that term by TLGC, Chapter 245, as amended. 
2.  Public facilities system means the collection of public infrastructure facilities owned or operated by or in behalf of the city for the purpose of providing services to the public, including existing and new developments. 
3.  Public infrastructure improvement means an improvement to a component part of the above-defined public facilities system, required in whole or in part as a consequence of development, excluding those public infrastructure improvements funded by development impact fees under procedures authorized by TLGC, Chapter 395. 
B.  Purpose, Applicability, and Designation. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of a proportionality appeal is to assure that a requirement to dedicate, construct or pay a fee for a public infrastructure improvement imposed on a proposed plat or development permit as a condition of approval does not result in a disproportionate cost burden on the property owner, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed development on the city's public facilities systems. 
2.  Applicability. An appeal under this section may be filed by a property owner to contest any requirement to dedicate land, to construct improvements, or to pay development fees, other than impact fees, for a public infrastructure improvement, which requirement is imposed under the city's subdivision regulations to a plat application pursuant to this DDC, whether the requirement is applicable under uniform standards or is imposed pursuant to an individual evaluation of the proposed subdivision. 
3.  Designation The City Manager may designate and retain another licensed professional engineer to perform the duties assigned to the City Engineer by this section, as needed to adjust workflow or to provide specific expertise. 
C.  Proportionality Determination by City Engineer. Prior to consideration and approval of a final plat application or other requested permit requiring dedication or construction of a public infrastructure improvement, and upon receipt of a written request by applicant or platting entity, the City Engineer shall prepare a report affirming that each public infrastructure improvement to be imposed as a condition of plat or permit approval is roughly proportionate to the demand created by the development on the city's public facilities systems, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the development proposed. 
1.  In making his proportionality determination, the City Engineer may rely upon data submitted by the developer pursuant to the Administrative Criteria Manual, as well as: findings pertaining to on-site improvements; the proposed or potential use of the land; the timing and sequence of development in relation to availability of adequate levels of public facilities; impact fee studies or other studies that measure the demand for services created by the development and the impact on the city's public facilities systems; the function of the public infrastructure improvements in serving the proposed development; the degree to which public infrastructure improvements to serve the subdivision are supplied by other developments; the anticipated participation by the city in the costs of such improvements; any reimbursements for the costs of public infrastructure improvements for which the proposed development is eligible; or any other information relating to the mitigating effects of the public infrastructure improvements on the impacts created by the development on the city's public facilities systems. 
2.  The proportionality assessment must be based upon an individualized determination, related both in nature and extent to the impact of the proposed development, but no precise mathematical calculation is required. Wherever feasible and appropriate, the determination may incorporate or consider: applicable federal, state, local or regional data, statistics, guidelines, standards, methodologies or studies; or generally accepted best practices of the profession. 
3.  Based upon his proportionality determination, the City Engineer shall affirm that the developer's portion of the costs required for infrastructure improvements does not exceed the amount that is roughly proportionate to the impacts of the proposed development. 
4.  The City Engineer may promulgate any application requirements that may assist in making the proportionality determination required by this subsection. 
D.  Commission Determination. The City Planning and Zoning Commission or other permitting authority shall take into account the City Engineer's report concerning the proportionality of public infrastructure improvement requirements to be applied to a proposed final plat application or permit approval, as the case may be, in making its decision on the plat application or permit approval, and shall identify any variation to the requirements that are to be included as conditions to plat or permit approval. 
E.  Appeals. 
1.  Who May Appeal. An appeal to the City Council under this section may be filed by a property owner or the applicant for a final plat or permit, in which a requirement to dedicate land for, construct or pay a fee (other than an impact fee) for a public infrastructure improvement has been applied or attached as a condition of approval by the decision-making body, or as grounds for recommending denial of the pending plat application. 
2.  Time for Filing and Request for Extension of Time. The appeal shall be filed in writing within 10 days of the date the applicant receives the City Engineer's proportionality determination. The appeal shall be filed with the City Engineer, who shall place the item for consideration at an upcoming meeting of the City Council. Upon filing an appeal, the applicant is thereby requesting the postponement of consideration of a pending plat application by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or permit, as discussed under Subsection 2.5.7C, pending preparation of the study required by subsection (4) below, and completion of the appeal process, in which case the applicant shall also waive the statutory period for deciding plats for the time needed to decide the appeal by the City Council. 
3.  Form of Appeal. An appeal under this subsection shall allege that application of the standard or the imposition of conditions relating to the dedication, construction or fee requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the city's public facilities systems, or does not reasonably benefit the proposed development. 
4.  Study Required. The appellant shall provide a study in support of the appeal that includes the following information, within 30 days of the date of appeal, unless a longer time is requested in writing, not to exceed 60 days total: 
a.  Total capacity of the city's roadway, drainage or park system to be used by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed. 
b.  Total capacity to be supplied to the city's roadway, drainage or park facilities system by the dedication of an interest in land, construction of improvements or fee contribution. If the plat application is proposed as a phased development, the information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedication, construction or fee payments. 
c.  Comparison of the capacity of the city's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in land, construction of improvements, or fee payment. In making this comparison, the impacts on the city's public facilities system(s) from the entire development shall be considered. 
d.  The amount of any city participation in the costs of oversizing the public infrastructure improvement to be constructed in accordance with the city's requirements. 
e.  Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts created by the proposed development and the dedication, construction or fee requirement imposed by the city. 
F.  Processing Application. 
1.  Responsible Official. The City Engineer is the responsible official for evaluation and processing of an appeal under this subsection. 
2.  Evaluation Recommendation. The City Engineer shall evaluate the appeal and supporting study and shall make a recommendation to the City Council based upon the information contained in the study, and the City Engineer's analysis based upon the same factors considered in making his original proportionality determination. 
G.  Decision. The City Council shall decide the appeal based on the criteria listed in Subsection 2.5.7H, and may take one of the following actions: 
1.  Deny the appeal, and impose the standard or condition on the plat or permit application in accordance with the City Engineer's recommendation or the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision on the plat; 
2.  Deny the appeal, upon finding that the proposed dedication, construction or fee requirements are inadequate to offset the impacts of the subdivision on the public facilities system for water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park improvements, and either deny the plat or permit application, or require that additional public infrastructure improvements be made as a condition of approval of the application; 
3.  Grant the appeal, and waive in whole or in part any dedication, construction or fee requirement for public infrastructure improvements to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or 
4.  Grant the appeal, and direct that the city participate in the costs of acquiring land for or constructing the public infrastructure improvement under standard participation policies. 
H.  Criteria for Approval. In deciding an appeal under this section, the City Council shall determine whether the application of the standard or condition requiring dedication of an interest in land for, construction of, or payment of a fee for public infrastructure improvements is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed subdivision on the city's public facilities systems for water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facilities, and reasonably benefits the development. In making such determination, the City Council shall consider the evidence submitted by the appellant, the City Engineer's report and recommendation, considering in particular the factors identified in Subsection 2.5.7C. 
I.  Action Following Decision. If the relief requested under the proportionality appeal is granted in whole or in part by the City Council, the dedication, construction or fee requirement initially recommended by the decision-making body as a condition of plat or permit approval shall be modified accordingly, and the standards applied or the conditions attached to approval of the plat or permit application shall be conformed to the relief granted. 
J.  New Study Following Modification. If the plat or permit application is modified to increase the number of residential units or the intensity of non-residential uses, the responsible official may require a new study to validate the relief granted by the City Council. 
K.  Expiration of Relief. If an applicant for plat or permit approval prevails on a proportionality appeal but fails to conform the plat or permit application to the relief granted by the City Council within the 90-day period provided, the relief granted by the City Council on the appeal shall expire. 
1.  The Council may extend the time for filing the revised plat or permit application for good cause shown, but in any event, the expiration date for the relief granted shall not be extended beyond one year from the date relief was granted on the appeal. 
2.  If the plat application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for relief shall be required on any subsequent application.  
2.6 - Subdivision Procedures 
 
2.6.1 - General. 
The following provisions apply to all subdivision procedures in this section: 
A.  Timing of City Action Following Completeness Determination. When a plat application is considered complete, the city shall take final action on such application within 30 days unless the applicant signs a waiver. 
B.  Finding of Proportionality. Any payment of fees or construction costs or required easement, dedication, and/or reservation of land included on any plat application required in this section shall meet the requirements of TLGC, § 212.904.  
2.6.2 - Administratively Approved Plat. 
A.  Purpose. The administratively approved platting procedure is used to evaluate proposed plats that will create few lots and/or involve minimal adjustments to approved final plats. The administratively approved platting procedure also provides a mechanism for administrative platting decisions, to address plat errors, to apply minor adjustments to property boundaries, and for conveyance plats. 
B.  Applicability. The administratively approved platting procedure shall apply to: 
1.  Subdivisions of properties creating four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities; 
2.  An amending plat as permitted by TLGC § 212.016, as amended or superseded; 
3.  A replat that does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities, as permitted by TLGC § 212.0065, as amended or superseded; and 
4.  A conveyance plat, which is an interim plat recording the subdivision of property, or defining the remainder of a property created by the approval of a final plat, and that creates four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. A conveyance plat may be used solely for the purpose of subdividing land and the recording of same, or recording a single existing lot or parcel created by other means. A conveyance plat allows the recording of a subdivision without requiring the construction or design of public improvements or collection of development fees. Easements, dedications, and reservations may be recorded on a conveyance plat. 
C.  Administratively Approved Plat Procedure. Figure 2.6-1 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of administratively approved plats. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.6-1: Summary of Administratively Approved Plat Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Handling. The administratively approved plat application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. 
a.  Director Review and Decision. The Director shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the administratively approved plat application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.6.2D below. 
b.  Referral to Planning and Zoning Commission. 
i.  The Director, at his discretion, may refer the plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
ii.  Any plat that involves a dedication, reservation, or easement shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for findings pursuant to TLGC, § 212.904. 
iii.  The Director shall not disapprove an administratively approved plat but shall refer such plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission if he recommends disapproval. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. Not required. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. Review and decision is subject to Subsection 2.4.7. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply with the following modifications: 
a.  Signing and Filing. 
i.  After the approval of the plat, the applicant shall submit filing fees and the required number of copies to the city for filing with the county. Having submitted all copies and fees, the applicant may request a delay of filing for up to 180 days from the date of approval. 
ii.  Prior to filing, the Director shall certify the plat and it shall be recorded with the Denton County Clerk and Recorder. 
iii.  The Director shall forward one copy of the recorded plat to the property owner. 
b.  Effect of Approval. 
i.  Plat approval and acceptance by the city does not relieve the owner from obligations, including fees, required by other sections of this DDC or any other chapter of the Municipal Code of Ordinances pertaining to the improvement of the property or extension of services as required to make the property suitable for development. 
ii.  Neither reservation nor dedication of right-of-way shall relieve the property owner from any obligation for street construction or assessments associated with public street improvement programs. Easements for access, utilities, and drainage shall be recorded on plats. 
iii.  No building permits shall be issued, nor development begun, nor permanent utility service provided, for land that has only received approval of a conveyance plat. This information shall be set forth in bold type on the plat. 
iv.  A conveyance plat may be vacated, replatted, or superseded in total or in part by compliance with the procedures and requirements of this DDC. 
c.  Lapse of Approval. 
i.  Any plat that has not been filed with the county within 180 days of the date of approval shall be void. 
ii.  Any plat withdrawn or voided must be resubmitted under current regulations and procedures and reapproved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Director and filed with the county. 
d.  Reservation of Rights-of-Way. 
i.  Conveyance plats shall identify any future rights-of-way for public thoroughfares and streets specified on the City's thoroughfare plan; 
ii.  The identification of the right-of-way does not grant any right or interest in the property to the City or other entity; and 
iii.  The final alignment may be adjusted upon final platting in order to meet engineering design standards. 
e.  Dedication of Rights-of-Way. 
i.  Dedication of right-of-way shall be required where a plat is used to record the remainder of a tract created by the final platting of a portion of the property; and 
ii.  The required right-of-way dedication shall be limited to that which is necessary to provide access to the property proposed for final plat approval and to complete turn lanes, intersections, and transitions in road pavement width resulting from development of property proposed for final plat approval. 
D.  Administratively Approved Plat Approval Criteria. In reviewing an administratively approved plat application, the Director shall consider the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether the application: 
1.  Is consistent with the intent of the underlying zoning district; 
2.  Complies with applicable dimensional and development standards in this DDC; 
3.  Does not affect a recorded easement without approval from the easement holder; 
4.  Will not result in adverse impacts to surrounding property; 
5.  Will not limit the city's ability to provide adequate and sufficient facilities or services; and 
6.  Complies with all other ordinances and plans and regulations adopted by the city, including the Comprehensive Plan and other long-range or special area planning documents.  
2.6.3 - Preliminary Plat. 
A.  Purpose. The preliminary plat procedure provides a mechanism for the city to review an overall plan for a proposed subdivision to ensure compliance with this DDC, the Comprehensive Plan, other applicable city plans and regulations, and the adequate provision of facilities and services in the city. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  A preliminary plat is required if the proposed subdivision is within the city limits and: 
a.  Is on land that has not been platted; 
b.  Is on land that will be developed in phases; 
c.  Will include the dedication of public right-of-way, other public tracts, or public improvements not determined to be eligible for minor subdivision processing; or 
d.  Is not eligible to be processed as an administratively approved plat, pursuant to Subsection 2.6.2. 
2.  A preliminary plat is not required but may be submitted within the ETJ. 
C.  Preliminary Plat Procedure. Figure 2.6-2 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of preliminary plats. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.6-2: Summary of Preliminary Plat Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Citizen Participation is recommended in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3B: Citizen Participation. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. The preliminary plat application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the preliminary plat application and prepare a staff report and recommendation that includes the City Engineer's findings when required by TLGC, § 212.904, in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.6.3D below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling of Public Meetings. The preliminary plat application shall be scheduled for public meetings before the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plat application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.6.3D below. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply with the following modifications: 
a.  Expiration of Approval. A preliminary plat shall become null and void 24 months from the date of approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, unless a final plat is filed and approved for all or part of the preliminary plat within that time or within the time provided by a phasing schedule approved for the preliminary plat. 
b.  Effect of Approval. 
i.  Within six months of approval of the final plat for the first phase of the development, or within such other period as may be provided in a phasing schedule approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a complete application for a final plat must be approved for the next phase of the development, continuing with each successive phase, until final plats have been approved for all the land subject to the original preliminary plat in accordance with this section or a phasing schedule approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
ii.  If the applicant fails to receive approval for a final plat for any phase of the development within the prescribed period, or within any extension granted pursuant to Subsection 2.6.3C.6.c, below, the original preliminary plat shall expire for that phase and for all other phases for which a final plat has not been approved or no longer remains in effect on the date of expiration. 
iii.  If an approved final plat expires, the preliminary plat for that phase shall also expire, and all other phases for which a final plat has not been approved or is not pending approval, or has lapsed subsequent to approval, on the date of expiration. 
c.  Extension of Preliminary Plat Approval. 
i.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may extend a preliminary plat or any phase thereof pursuant to Subsection 2.4.8D: Extensions of Approval Period, and the following criteria: 
a.  The request must be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission before the preliminary plat or phase expires and must document the reasons for the extension. 
b.  In determining whether to grant a request, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall take into account: 
1.  The reasons for the requested extension; 
2.  The ability of the applicant to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval; 
3.  Whether the extension is likely to result in timely completion of the project; and 
4.  The extent to which any newly adopted regulations should be applied to the proposed development. 
c.  In granting an extension, the Planning and Zoning Commission may impose such conditions as are needed to assure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served, including compliance with one or more new adopted development standards. 
7.  Concurrent Review. Preliminary plat applications may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with an application for a zoning map amendment pursuant to Subsection 2.7.2; rezone to a planned development pursuant to Subsection 2.7.3; and/or a site plan pursuant to Subsection 2.5.1. 
D.  Preliminary Plat Approval Criteria. In reviewing a preliminary plat application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether the preliminary plat: 
1.  Provides a layout of lots, roads, driveways, utilities, drainage, and other public facilities and services designed to minimize the amount of disturbance to sensitive natural areas or other community resources; 
2.  Provides evidence of public water and sewer system connections; 
3.  Identifies and adequately mitigates known natural hazard areas; and 
4.  Proposes reasonable project phasing in terms of infrastructure capacity.  
2.6.4 - Final Plat. 
A.  Purpose. The final plat procedure completes the subdivision process and ensures compliance with the approved preliminary plat and applicable standards in this DDC. 
B.  Applicability. The final plat procedure applies to all subdivisions in the city and the ETJ, unless otherwise stated in this DDC. 
C.  Final Plat Procedure. Figure 2.6-3 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of final plats. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.6-3: Summary of Final Plat Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Citizen Participation is recommended in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3B: Citizen Participation. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. The final plat application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4, and subject to the following modifications: 
a.  The final plat application shall be submitted within 24 months of preliminary plat approval, or within six months as established in Subsection 2.6.3C.6; 
b.  The final plat may reflect the entire area covered by a preliminary plat or any part thereof; 
c.  ESA Compliance Review shall be reviewed concurrently with an application for a final plat in accordance with Subsection 7.4.4: ESAs Procedures; and 
d.  The Director may require submittal of civil engineering plans for proposed streets, sidewalks, drainage, utility, or other public improvements associated with the final plat review. If required, such civil engineering plans may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with the site plan application. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the final plat application and prepare a staff report and recommendation that includes the City Engineer's findings when required by TLGC, § 212.904, in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.6.4D below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. The final plat application shall be scheduled for public meetings before the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final plat application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.6.4D below. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply and the Director shall record the approved final plat with the Denton County Clerk and Recorder upon acceptance of any public improvements or dedications. 
7.  Concurrent Review. Final plat applications may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with an application for a site plan pursuant to Subsection 2.5.1. 
D.  Final Plat Approval Criteria. In reviewing a final plat application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the general approval criteria applicable to all applications in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether: 
1.  The final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, including any conditions of approval; 
2.  The development will substantially comply with all requirements of this DDC; and 
3.  The development will comply with the applicable technical standards and specifications adopted by the city.  
2.6.5 - Development Plat. 
A.  Purpose. The development plat procedure provides a mechanism for any person who proposes development of a tract of land located within the corporate limits or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction that is not required by this DDC to prepare a preliminary or final plat. 
B.  Applicability. Any person who proposes the development of a tract of land located within the corporate limits or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction that is not required by this DDC to prepare a preliminary or final plat, shall prepare a development plat in accordance with the elements required for preliminary and final plats by this subchapter unless: 
1.  The development is excepted under Section 8.2.3: Exemptions; or 
2.  The development is an addition or alteration to existing development which, after development, would result in development no less compliant with the DDC than before the development. 
C.  Development Plat Procedure. Figure 2.6-4 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of development plats. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.6-4: Summary of Development Plat Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. The development plat application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the development plat application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in accordance with Subsection 2.4.5 and TLGC, §§ 212.041 through 212.050, as amended. No new development may begin on the subject property until the development plat is filed and approved by the City. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. Not required. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. Review and decision is subject to Subsection 2.6.5C.3. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. A development plat shall become null and void two years from the date of approval by the Director if no progress toward completion has been made per TLGC, § 245.005(c), as amended.  
2.6.6 - Gas Well Development Plat. 
A.  Plats Required. Any person who proposes gas drilling or production on a tract of land located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall submit a gas well development plat for review and approval by the city. If any portion of the proposed area to be platted lies within a floodplain, an ESA or within 1,200 feet of the flood pool elevation of Lake Ray Roberts or Lake Lewisville, a watershed protection permit application for such area(s) shall be submitted with the development plat application, and shall be decided before any decision on the plat. 
B.  Gas Well Development Plats in Areas Subject to Flooding. No gas well development plat shall be approved for land located within a floodplain, an ESA or within 1,200 feet of the flood pool elevation of Lake Ray Roberts or Lake Lewisville until a watershed protection permit and, where applicable, a specific use permit or application for relief pursuant to Subsection 2.8.5, have been first approved. Denial or conditional approval of the applicable watershed protection permit or petition for review shall constitute grounds for denial or conditional approval of the gas well development plat for such land. 
C.  Gas Well Development Plat Procedures. Gas well development plats shall be processed and approved in accordance with TLGC, §§ 212.041 through 212.050, as amended, and no new natural gas development may begin on property until the gas well development plat is filed and approved by the city in accordance with this DDC. 
D.  Gas Well Development Plat Standards for Approval. Gas well development plats shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  All proposed gas well development shall be in compliance with the Roadway Component of the Mobility Plan. 
2.  Erosion control is required and shall comply with all local, state, and federal requirements or as required by the watershed protection permit or gas well development plat. The operator shall file a copy of the stormwater pollution plan if required by the EPA. 
3.  Reserve pits within 200 feet of a body of water, creek or floodplain shall be lined to prevent water pollution. 
4.  With the exception of vehicular access, no gas well development or activity is allowed in the FEMA designated 100-year floodway. Drilling within a flood fringe or other ESA shown on the map adopted by the city is allowed under the restrictions set forth in Subsection 6.3.9D: Watershed Protection Permit Standards. 
5.  Where tree mitigation is required, pursuant to a watershed protection permit, any funds due shall be paid prior to final approval of a gas well development plat. 
6.  No gas well development plat shall be approved until the applicant has entered into a road damage remediation agreement with the city in substantially the same form as the agreement on file in the City's Development Services Department, and has paid all road damage remediation fees provided for in the agreement based in the road damage remediation calculations set forth in the attachments to the agreement. A road damage remediation agreement is not required if access to the well site is through roadways not maintained by the city. 
7.  The gas well development plat shall provide for adequate required public facilities, which may include water supply, access roads, drainage, erosion control and other necessary supporting facilities identified on the plat. The design, location, and arrangement of all driveways and required parking spaces shall provide for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments. 
8.  In addition to the requirements of Subsection 2.6.3: Preliminary Plat, if applicable, a gas well development plat shall: 
a.  Identify truck routes and access points. 
b.  Identify environmentally sensitive areas (ESA's) including floodplains and any proposed floodplain, creek and stream crossings. 
i.  All floodplain, creek and stream crossings requiring the use of a culvert shall be designed to a 10-year storm frequency. 
ii.  All floodplain crossings shall have no negative effects on surrounding property. 
iii.  A drainage study sufficient to substantiate subsections (i) and (ii) above will be required as part of the submittal if crossings are proposed. 
c.  Show the location and use of all structures within 1,000 feet of the wellhead. 
d.  Identify the proposed source of water and any other public utilities required. 
e.  Identify and show proposed method of erosion control. 
f.  Identify the location of proposed lease lines and well locations. 
i.  Label distance between wells and property lines. 
ii.  Label distance between wells and structures within 500 feet of wells as measured from the property line. 
iii.  Label distance between temporary holding ponds and floodplains. 
g.  Provide typical well site schematics showing layout during drilling and upon completion of drilling. 
h.  Show location of all proposed underground pipelines. As built drawings shall be filed with the city. All pipelines proposed in public rights-of-way shall require a right-of-way use agreement. The City Manager shall have the authority to enter into a right-of-way use agreement. 
i.  Identify if pipelines connect with a gas distribution system. 
j.  Clearly delineate the boundaries of the gas well drilling or production area with metes and bounds. All gas well drilling and production activities shall be limited to this area. 
k.  A gas well development plat shall only contain one drilling or production area, and the area shall not be greater than five acres. 
E.  Expiration of Gas Well Development Plat. 
1.  If gas well drilling activities have not commenced within one year from the date of approval, the gas well development plat shall expire. 
2.  A gas well development plat may not be extended. 
3.  If the gas well development plat expires, then so too shall all associated watershed protection permits. 
4.  Upon expiration of a gas well development plat, the applicant may reapply for a new gas well development plat, subject to all requirements of the DDC, as amended. If a watershed protection permit is required in conjunction with the gas well development plat, the applicant must also apply for a new watershed protection permit, subject to all requirements of the DDC, as amended. 
5.  If gas well drilling or production has commenced, the gas well drilling and production area shall be subject to inspections by the city.  
2.6.7 - Replat. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the replat procedure is to outline the process for replatting any portion of an approved final plat, other than to amend or vacate the plat. 
B.  Applicability. A replat of a subdivision or part of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat: 
1.  Is signed and acknowledged by the owners of the property being replatted; 
2.  Is approved after a public hearing; and 
3.  Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions. 
C.  Replat Procedure. 
1.  Replats are subject to the procedures established for administratively approved plats in Subsection 2.6.2, and shall conform to the requirements of TLGC, § 212.0065, if: 
a.  The replat involves four or fewer lots fronting an existing street that does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities; or 
b.  The replat is for part of a subdivision without vacation of the preceding plat as provided in TLGC, § 212.0145; or 
c.  The amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is solely for one or more of the purposes identified in TLGC, § 212.016. 
2.  Residential replats without vacation of the preceding plat are subject to the procedures established for administratively approved plats in Subsection 2.6.2, and shall conform to the requirements of TLGC, § 212.015 if: 
a.  During the preceding five years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot; or 
b.  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot. 
3.  All other replats that do not include the vacation of the preceding plat and that do not qualify for administrative approval pursuant to Subsection 2.6.2, are subject to the approval procedures established for preliminary plats (see Subsection 2.6.3). Such replats shall require a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission; however, notification shall not be required.  
2.6.8 - Vacating Plat. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the vacating plat procedure is to outline the process for vacation of all or a portion of a prior-approved plat. 
B.  Applicability. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may vacate the plat pursuant to TLGC, § 212.013, as amended. If dedicated by an instrument other than a plat, then the applicant shall follow the procedure established in Charter, Article XII: Public Utilities. 
C.  Vacating Plat Procedure. Figure 2.6-5 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of vacating plats. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.6-5: Summary of Vacating Plat Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. The vacating plat application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the vacating plat application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with the general approval criteria applicable to all applications in Subsection 2.4.5. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. The vacating plat application shall be scheduled for a public meeting before the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be noticed pursuant to Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures and Subsection 2.4.6. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. 
a.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the vacating plat application in accordance with the general approval criteria applicable to all applications in Subsection 2.4.5. 
b.  As a condition of approval, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require the applicant to prepare a revised final plat in accordance with Subsection 2.6.4: Final Plat. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply with the following modifications: 
a.  The Director shall record the vacating plat with the Denton County Clerk and Recorder prior to the recordation of a new plat. 
b.  Regardless of the Planning and Zoning Commission's action on the application, the applicant will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees, or charges paid to the city nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the city except as may have previously been agreed to by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  
2.7 - Plan and DDC Amendments 
 
2.7.1 - Comprehensive Plan Amendment. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for amending the text and or maps of the Comprehensive Plan or for adoption of a new Comprehensive Plan. The amendment process is established to provide flexibility in response to changing circumstances and to reflect changes in public policy, and to advance the general welfare of the city. 
B.  Applicability. An amendment to the Comprehensive Plan may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Director, or the property owner(s) with an application executed by all property owners, or their authorized agents. 
C.  Comprehensive Plan Amendment Procedure. Figure 2.7-1 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of Comprehensive Plan amendments. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.7-1: Summary of Comprehensive Plan Amendment Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Citizen Participation is recommended in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3B: Citizen Participation. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. The comprehensive plan amendment application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. 
a.  Director Review and Recommendation. The Director shall review the comprehensive plan amendment application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.1D below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. The comprehensive plan amendment application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and shall be noticed pursuant to Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures, and Subsection 2.4.6. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. 
a.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the comprehensive plan amendment application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.1D below, and shall forward its recommendation to the City Council. 
b.  City Council Review and Decision. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the comprehensive plan amendment application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.1D below. The adoption or amendment of a new comprehensive plan shall become effective by a simple majority vote of all members of the City Council. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. The City Council decision is a final action and may not be appealed. 
D.  Comprehensive Plan Amendment Approval Criteria. 
1.  Comprehensive plan amendments may be approved by the City Council only following a determination that the proposed amendment is consistent with the overall purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan and that any one of the following criteria has been met: 
a.  There was an error in the original Comprehensive Plan adoption; 
b.  The City Council failed to take into account then-existing facts, projections, or trends that were reasonably foreseeable to exist in the future; 
c.  Events, trends, or facts after adoption of the Comprehensive Plan have changed the City Council's original findings made upon plan adoption; or 
d.  Events, trends, or facts after adoption of the Comprehensive Plan have changed the character or condition of an area so as to make the proposed amendment necessary. 
2.  In addition to the above-listed criteria, any proposed amendment is subject to the following additional review standards: 
a.  That the amendment is not in conflict with any portion of the goals and policies of the plan. 
b.  That the amendment constitutes a substantial benefit to the city and is not solely for the good or benefit of a particular landowner or owners at a particular point in time. 
c.  The extent to which the proposed amendment and other amendments in the general area are compatible with the land use goals of the plan and that they avoid creation of isolated uses that will cause incompatible community form and a burden on public services and facilities. 
d.  That the development pattern contained in the existing plan does not provide adequate and appropriate optional sites for the use or change being proposed in the amendment. 
e.  That the impact of the amendment, when considered cumulatively with other applications and development in the general area, will not adversely impact the city or a portion of the city by: 
i.  Significantly altering acceptable existing land use patterns; 
ii.  Having significant adverse impacts on public services and facilities that are needed to support the current land use and that cannot be mitigated to the maximum extent feasible; 
iii.  Adversely impacting environmentally sensitive areas or resources; or 
iv.  Adversely impacting existing uses because of increased traffic on existing systems. 
f.  That site conditions, including but not limited to topography, utility corridors/easements, drainage patterns, noise, odors, or environmental contamination, would make development under the current plan designation inappropriate.  
2.7.2 - Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning). 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the zoning map amendment procedure (referred to as "rezoning") is to make amendments to the Official Zoning Map of the City of Denton to reflect changes in public policy, changed conditions, or to advance the welfare of the City. The purpose is neither to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special privileges or rights on any person. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  A rezoning may be approved by the City Council following review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.  Rezonings should not be used when a specific use permit, or minor modification could be used to achieve a similar result. 
3.  Changes to the characteristics of zoning districts (such as setback requirements) and development standards (such as parking requirements) shall be processed as zoning text amendments according to Subsection 2.7.4. 
4.  A rezoning to a Planned Development is a distinct type of amendment to the Official Zoning Map and shall follow the procedures in Subsection 2.7.3. 
C.  Rezoning Procedure. Figure 2.7-2 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of rezonings. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.7-2: Summary of Rezoning Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Citizen Participation is recommended in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3B: Citizen Participation. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. 
a.  The zoning map amendment application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
b.  In addition to the persons authorized to submit an application listed in Subsection 2.4.4A, the City of Denton may initiate a rezoning application following discussion at any Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the rezoning application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.2D below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. 
a.  The rezoning application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and shall be noticed pursuant to Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures and Subsection 2.4.6. 
b.  Mailed notice shall not be required if the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council initiate an application to repeal and replace the Official Zone Map for all or substantially all of the city. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. 
a.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation. 
i.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the rezoning application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.2D, below, and shall forward its recommendation or report to the City Council. 
ii.  After closing the public hearing, should a majority of voting Planning and Zoning Commissioners fail to recommend either approval or denial of a proposed amendment, or approval of a modified amendment, city staff is directed to place the matter for vote on the next available Planning and Zoning Commission agenda as an item for individual consideration. A second failure of a majority of voting Planning and Zoning Commissioners to recommend either approval or denial of a proposed amendment, or approval of a modified amendment, shall be deemed a recommendation to deny approval of any amendment to the City Council. Such failure is not subject to Subpart A, Section 2-29(g)(5)a., of the City Code of Ordinances, and shall not require a three-fourths vote of all members of the City Council qualified to vote as stated in paragraph 2.7.2C.5.b.ii. 
b.  City Council Review and Decision. 
i.  The City Council may review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the rezoning application based on the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.2D below. 
ii.  If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of the rezoning, the rezoning shall become effective only by a three-fourths vote of all members of the City Council. 
c.  Protest Procedure. 
i.  The rules governing amendment over protest are contained in TLGC, Chapter 211. The Director may prescribe forms for protest petitions. 
ii.  Property owners within 200 feet of a proposed rezoning, as indicated on the most recently approved city tax roll, may file a written protest against the rezoning. If written protests are received by owners of 20 percent or more of the area within 200 feet of the proposed rezoning, approval shall require three-fourths vote of the City Council for a rezoning to become effective. In such case, a supermajority vote shall not be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
iii.  The protest procedure process does not apply to citywide legislative rezonings. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8, shall apply with the following modifications: 
a.  The City Council decision is a final action and may not be appealed. 
b.  Following approval of a rezoning by City Council, the Director shall prepare a revision to the Official Zoning Map of the City. 
D.  Zoning Map Amendment Approval Criteria. 
1.  In reviewing a proposed rezoning, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether: 
a.  The proposed rezoning is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  The proposed rezoning is consistent with relevant Small Area Plan(s); 
c.  The proposed rezoning is consistent with the purpose statement of the proposed zoning district, as provided in Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts; 
d.  There have been significant changes in the area to warrant a zoning change; 
e.  The intensity of development in the new zoning district is not expected to create significantly adverse impacts to surrounding properties or the neighborhood; and 
f.  Public facilities and services are available to adequately serve the subject property while maintaining adequate level of service to existing development; and/or 
g.  There was an error in establishing the current zoning. 
2.  These approval criteria shall not apply to legislative rezonings by the City Council.  
2.7.3 - Rezone to a Planned Development (PD) District. 
A.  Purpose. The zoning classification of any parcel may be changed to a Planned Development (PD) pursuant to this section. The purpose of rezoning to a PD is to achieve greater flexibility than allowed by the strict application of this DDC, and/or to encourage unique or innovative land use concepts, while providing greater benefit to the city and to ensure efficient provision of services and utilities. 
B.  Applicability. The PD procedure shall not be used when a specific use permit, minor modification, or rezoning to an existing base zoning district could achieve a similar result. 
C.  Rezoning to PD Procedure. Figure 2.7-3 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of rezoning to PDs. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.7-3: Summary of Rezoning to PD Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required to be held in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. In addition, the applicant shall include a concept/schematic plan for review by the Director to help determine whether or not a proposed PD is the appropriate procedure for the applicant and the city. The concept/schematic plan shall include at a minimum the following: 
i.  Proposed uses; 
ii.  Number and type of dwelling or commercial units (as applicable); 
iii.  Floor area of all buildings; 
iv.  Floor area of each use for mixed-use buildings (if applicable); 
v.  Proposed parking capacity and configuration; 
vi.  General site planning layout and phasing; and 
vii.  Summary of proposed deviations from DDC standards and a description of compensating public benefits achieved through the PD process. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Citizen Participation is recommended in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3B: Citizen Participation. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. 
a.  Generally. 
i.  The PD application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
ii.  An application for rezoning to a PD shall include submittal requirements as specified in the Administrative Criteria Manual, which shall include a PD plan. 
b.  PD Plan. 
i.  Generally. 
a.  The PD Plan establishes the development regulations for a planned development and specifically identifies where there are deviations from this DDC. 
b.  The PD Plan shall include a development plan map. 
c.  Unless specifically modified by the PD Plan, the PD shall comply with all standards in this DDC, as amended. 
d.  Where the applicant is proposing deviations from the zoning provisions of this DDC, the applicant shall specify both the existing regulations and the wording of each corresponding substitution, as proposed. The proposed PD district shall represent a quality development when weighed overall against the standards in the DDC or the alternative regulations proposed by the applicant. 
e.  The PD plan shall be reviewed by the Director and the Planning and Zoning Commission, whose recommendations are forwarded to the City Council for review and approval. 
f.  Approval of the PD plan is required prior to approval of a development permit in a PD zoning district. 
ii.  Prohibited Deviations from the DDC. Deviations from the following standards shall not be allowed in conjunction with a PD zoning district: 
a.  Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. 
b.  Section 7.4: Environmentally Sensitive Areas. 
c.  Section 7.7.4: Tree Preservation. 
iii.  Public Benefits to be Provided. When an applicant is proposing deviations from the zoning provisions of this DDC to establish a PD zoning district, the applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed PD zoning district will generally provide public benefits to justify the increased flexibility offered by the city through the PD procedure. 
c.  Concurrent Comprehensive Plan Amendment Review. A comprehensive plan amendment application submitted under Subsection 2.7.1 may be reviewed concurrently with a PD application. 
d.  Concurrent Subdivision Review. A subdivision application submitted under Section 2.6 may be reviewed concurrently with a PD application. A preliminary plat for a PD shall only be approved following approval of the rezoning to PD. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the PD application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.3D below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. The PD application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, and noticed in accordance with Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures and Subsection 2.4.6. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. 
a.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the PD application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.3D below, and shall forward its recommendation to the City Council. 
b.  City Council Review and Decision. 
i.  The City Council may review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the PD application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.3D below. 
ii.  If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of the PD application, the rezoning shall become effective only by a three-fourths vote of all members of the City Council. 
iii.  The City Council may also remand the PD application back to the Director or the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration. 
iv.  If the City Council remands the PD application back to the Director or Planning and Zoning Commission, additional public hearings will be required before final adoption. 
c.  Protest Procedure. 
i.  The rules governing amendment over protest are contained in TLGC, Chapter 211. The Director may prescribe forms for protest petitions. 
ii.  Property owners within 200 feet of a proposed rezoning, as indicated on the most recently approved city tax roll, may file a written protest against the rezoning. If written protests are received by owners of 20 percent or more of the area within 200 feet of the proposed rezoning, approval shall require three-fourths vote of the City Council for a rezoning to become effective. In such case, a supermajority vote shall not be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
a.  Adoption of a Planned Development District. At the time a PD zoning document is approved by the City Council, it becomes an integral part of this DDC for that PD district established by the city on the property. All future development within the adopted PD district shall thereafter be in conformity with the PD zoning document for that property. 
b.  Future Development. Upon adoption of the PD district, the applicant may proceed with the development of the property in accordance with the PD zoning document and, the PD development standards document by applying for preliminary and final plat(s) approval in accordance with the phasing plan in the PD district. 
c.  Administration and Enforcement. 
i.  While ownership of a project may subsequently be transferred (in whole or in part), PD zoning will continue to be implemented and maintained on the total acreage of the PD district. It is the responsibility of the owner to notify all prospective purchasers of the existence of the PD district and the PD development plan. 
ii.  In the event that the applicant has failed to comply with the conditions adopted by the City Council in conjunction with the approved PD zoning document, the city may proceed in accordance with Section 1.6: Enforcement. 
d.  Amendments to a Planned Development. 
i.  Generally. 
a.  The applicant or its successors may request amendments to the PD zoning document and or PD development standards document. 
b.  Amendments to the approved PD documents shall be delineated as major or minor amendments, according to the criteria set forth in this subsection. 
c.  Amendments to the approved PD documents will not affect development units not included in the proposed amendment. 
d.  Upon receipt of a PD amendment application, the Director shall determine if the proposed amendment constitutes a major or minor amendment subject to the criteria in subsections ii and iii below. 
ii.  Major Amendments. 
a.  An amendment will be deemed major if it involves any one of the following: 
1.  A change in the overall PD district boundary; 
2.  A significant change to the approximate boundary of one or more development unit(s) from that approved in the PD district, as determined by the Director. A change to an individual development unit generally shall be deemed to be significant if it represents a 10 percent increase to the approximate gross area of the development unit as approved in the PD district; 
3.  An increase of 10 percent or more of the approved number of projected dwelling units or gross leasable area (GLA) for an individual development unit; 
4.  Any change in land use or density that is likely to negatively impact or burden public facilities and utilities infrastructure as determined by the Director; 
5.  Any change in land use or density that is likely to negatively impact or burden mobility adjacent to the PD district or to the overall major street system; or 
6.  Any other proposed change to the development plan, which substantively alters one or more components of the PD district. 
b.  If the Director determines the amendment to be major, the amendment request shall be processed under the rezoning procedure described in Subsection 2.7.2. 
iii.  Minor Amendments. 
a.  Amendments not meeting one or more of the criteria listed above for major amendments shall be considered minor. If the Director determines the amendment to be minor, the Director may administratively act on the amendment and attach stipulations or conditions of approval thereto, to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
b.  At least 15 days prior to consideration of a requested minor amendment by the Director, notice of the proposed minor amendment shall be mailed to each owner of property wholly or partly within 200 feet of the affected development unit(s) to which the amendment relates. 
c.  If written protest to any minor amendment is received from any notified property owner within 10 days of the notification mailing date and such protest cannot be resolved, then the minor amendment shall be reclassified as a major amendment. No additional application shall be required; however, all provisions governing major amendments shall then apply. 
d.  If written protest is not received as described above, the Director shall render a decision on the minor amendment request. 
e.  The Director's decision shall be final unless appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to Subsection 2.4.8. 
iv.  Administrative Decision Appeals. 
a.  The applicant or a property owner within 200 feet may appeal an action or decision by the Director on minor amendments to the Planning and Zoning Commission within 10 days from the date of the Director's decision. 
b.  Appeals shall be in writing on a form provided by the Director and shall include only the specific items being appealed. 
D.  Rezoning to PD Approval Criteria. In reviewing a proposed rezoning to a PD district, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether and to what extent the proposed PD district: 
1.  Complies with the goals of the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Complies with this DDC, except where modifications are expressly authorized through the PD zoning document, the PD development standards document, and in the PD development plan map; 
3.  Provides a greater level of building design quality, community amenities, and connectivity than would be required if the project were not being developed in a PD district; 
4.  In the case of proposed residential development, that the development will promote compatible buildings and uses and that it will be compatible with the character of the surrounding area; 
5.  In the case of proposed commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational and other non-residential uses or mixed-uses, that such development will be appropriate in area, location, and overall planning for the purpose intended; and 
6.  The provisions for public facilities such as schools, fire protection, law enforcement, water, wastewater, streets, public services and parks are adequate to serve the anticipated population within the PD district.  
2.7.4 - Zoning Text Amendment. 
A.  Purpose. This subsection describes the review and approval procedures for amending the text of this DDC to respond to changed conditions or changes in public policy, or to advance the general welfare of the city. 
B.  Applicability. A zoning text amendment shall be initiated by the Director, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the City Council. 
C.  Zoning Text Amendment Procedure. Figure 2.7-4 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of a zoning text amendment. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.7-4: Summary of Zoning Text Amendment Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. Not required. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Citizen Participation is recommended in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3B: Citizen Participation. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. A zoning text amendment application shall be prepared by the Director. If the zoning text amendment is initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, the Director shall prepare the application at the request of the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the zoning text amendment application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.4D below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. The zoning text amendment application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, and noticed in accordance with Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures and Subsection 2.4.6. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. 
a.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the zoning text amendment application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.4D below, and shall forward its recommendation to the City Council. 
b.  City Council Review and Decision. 
i.  The City Council may review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the zoning text application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.4D below. 
ii.  If the City Council remands the application back to the Director or Planning and Zoning Commission, additional public hearings may be required prior to final action. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply with the following modifications: 
a.  Approval of a zoning text amendment authorizes the approved revision to the text only. A zoning text amendment shall not authorize specific development activity. 
b.  A zoning text amendment shall remain valid until the revised text of the DDC is subsequently amended in accordance with this Subsection 2.7.4. 
D.  Approval Criteria for Code Text Amendments A DDC text amendment is a legislative decision by the City Council. Prior to recommending approval or approving a proposed DDC text amendment, the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider whether and to what extent the proposed amendment: 
1.  Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, other adopted plans, and other city policies; 
2.  Does not conflict with other provisions of this DDC or other provisions in the Municipal Code of Ordinances; 
3.  Is necessary to address a demonstrated community need; 
4.  Is necessary to respond to substantial changes in conditions and/or policy; and 
5.  Is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this DDC.  
2.7.5 - Annexation. 
Annexation into the Denton city limits may occur pursuant to the procedures outlined in TLGC, Chapter 43 and § 212.172; and City of Denton Charter, Section 1.03; and any other applicable city ordinance.  
2.8 - Flexibility and Relief Procedures 
 
2.8.1 - Variance. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  This section describes the process for gaining relief from the strict application of the DDC, where literal enforcement of the DDC will result in an unnecessary hardship and where the variance is necessary to develop a specific parcel of land which cannot otherwise be developed in the same manner allowed for other similar parcels due to unique conditions on the property. 
2.  The variance procedure may not allow a use in a zoning district where it is not currently permitted, or alleviate inconveniences or financial burdens imposed on landowners. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Any property owner seeking relief from this DDC may request a variance when the strict application of the DDC would meet the approval criteria listed in Subsection 2.8.1D. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall decide all requests for variances. 
2.  Any property owner seeking relief from Subpart B, Chapter 33: Signs and Advertising Devices, of the Code of Ordinances, may request a variance when the strict application of the standards in Subpart B, Chapter 33, of the Code of Ordinances would meet the approval criteria listed in Subsection 2.8.1D. 
C.  Variance Procedure. The following variance procedure is established to comply with TLGC, §§ 211.008 and 211.009. Figure 2.8-1 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of variances. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.8-1: Summary of Variance Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. 
a.  The variance application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
b.  Initiation of a variance application may be made by recommendation of the Director or application by the property owner or their authorized agent. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the variance application and prepare a staff report and recommendation to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.1D, below. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. Variance applications shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
5.  Review and Decision. 
a.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall review and approve or deny the variance application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.1D below. 
b.  After closing the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall take action consistent with this DDC and state law. A concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be required to approve a variance application. 
c.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provision of this DDC. 
6.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
a.  Notice of Decision. The Director shall provide written notification of the Zoning Board of Adjustment's decision to the applicant. 
b.  Expiration of Variance. If the property owner has not commenced development or obtained the required permits to carry out the approved variance within 24 months of the variance approval, the variance shall automatically expire. 
c.  Non-Transferable. An approved variance shall apply only to the property or structure described in the approval and shall not be transferable to any other property or structure. 
d.  Appeals. The decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment is final and may be appealed to a district court or county court of law within 10 days after the date the decision is filed, in accordance with the procedures contained in TLGC, Chapter 211. 
e.  Suspension and Revocation of a Variance. 
i.  When the City determines there is a failure to comply with any term, condition, or requirement made as a condition of approval of the variance, the City Council may direct the Building Official or Director, as appropriate, to suspend the variance pending compliance with the terms, conditions, or requirements under which the variance was approved. 
ii.  Notice of suspension or revocation of a variance shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt requested. 
iii.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing no later than 45 days after notification. If the Zoning Board of Adjustment determines there is a failure to comply with any term, condition, or requirement made as a condition of the variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals may revoke the variance or take such action as it considers necessary to ensure compliance. 
iv.  A decision to revoke a variance is effective immediately. Notice of the decision by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be sent by certified mail. 
D.  Variance Approval Criteria. 
1.  In reviewing a variance application, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall find that all of the following exist: 
a.  Special circumstances or conditions apply to the parcel for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such parcel and do not apply generally to other parcels in the same district or neighborhood and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this DDC would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such parcel; 
b.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the district or neighborhood in which the parcel is located; 
c.  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose; 
d.  The literal enforcement and strict application of the provisions of this DDC will result in an unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the general provisions and intent of this DDC and that in granting such variance the spirit of the DDC will be preserved and substantial justice done; 
e.  The granting of a variance is not solely for the purpose of mitigating a financial hardship; and 
f.  The condition or feature that creates the need for the variance did not result from the owner's actions. 
2.  Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any natural object, or use their property, in violation of the airport zoning regulations prescribed Section 4.5, MAO - Municipal Airport Overlay District, shall provide a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace.  
2.8.2 - Minor Modification. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The minor modification procedure is intended to allow minor modifications or deviations from the dimensional or numeric standards of this DDC. 
2.  Administrative adjustments are intended to provide greater flexibility when necessary, without requiring a formal zoning amendment. 
3.  The minor modification procedure is not a waiver of current standards of this DDC and shall not be used to circumvent the variance procedure. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Allowed Modifications and Deviations. The minor modification procedures shall apply to the standards and limitations established in Table 2.8-A: Allowable Minor Modifications. 
2.  Prohibited Modifications and Deviations. The minor modification procedure shall not apply to any proposed modification or deviation that result in: 
a.  A change in permitted uses or mix of uses; 
b.  A deviation from the use-specific standards in Section 5.3: Use-Specific Standards; 
c.  A deviation from sensitive area protection standards in Section 7.4, Environmentally Sensitive Areas; 
d.  A change to a development standard that is already modified through a separate minor modification or variance; 
e.  A change to a development standard that is already exempted from maximum building height pursuant to Subsection 3.7.5B; minimum setbacks pursuant to Subsection 3.7.3D; or maximum building coverage pursuant to Subsection 3.7.6; or 
f.  Requirements for public roadways, utilities, or other public infrastructure or facilities. 
3.  Table of Allowable Minor Modifications. An application for a minor modification that is not related to a request for "reasonable accommodation" under the Federal Fair Housing Act or the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act may request only the types of adjustments shown in Table 2.8-A: Allowable Minor Modifications. 
Table 2.8-A: Allowable Minor Modifications 
DDC Standard 	Allowable Minor Modification (maximum percentage) 
Site Standards 	
Lot area, minimum 	10 
Building coverage, maximum 	10 
Lot Dimensional Standards 	
Front setback, minimum 	10 
Side setback, minimum 	10 
Rear setback, minimum 	10 
Encroachment into setback, maximum 	10 
Building Standards 	
Minimum unit sizes 	10 
Development Standards 	
Fence or wall height, maximum 	10 (1 foot maximum) 
 
4.  Reasonable Accommodations Under the FFHA. 
a.  In response to a written application identifying the type of housing being provided and the portions of the Federal Fair Housing Act that require that reasonable accommodations be made for such housing, the Director is authorized to take any of the following actions in order to provide reasonable accommodations without the need for a rezoning or variance: 
i.  Modify any facility spacing, building setback, height, building coverage, or landscaping requirement by no more than ten percent; or 
ii.  Reduce any off-street parking requirement by no more than one space. 
b.  The city may be required to accommodate any requests for reasonable accommodations under the FFHA, regardless of whether or not such request otherwise qualifies as a minor modification. 
c.  The Director may approve a type of reasonable accommodation different from that requested by the applicant if the Director concludes that a different form of accommodation would satisfy the requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act with fewer impacts on adjacent areas. 
d.  The decision of the Director shall be accompanied by written findings of fact as to the applicability of the Fair Housing Act, the need for reasonable accommodations, and the authority for any reasonable accommodations approved. 
e.  Requests for types of accommodation that are not listed above may only be approved through a variance or rezoning process. 
5.  Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000 (RLUIPA). 
a.  The Director may grant minor modifications in order to eliminate a substantial burden on religious exercise as guaranteed by the Federal Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000, as amended. 
b.  In no circumstance shall the Director approve an adjustment that allows a religious assembly use, or any uses, structures, or activities accessory to it, in a zoning district where this DDC prohibits such use or accessory use, structure, or activity. 
c.  A person may claim that a provision of the DDC substantially burdens the person's free exercise of religion. In making such a claim a person shall give written notice to the city by certified mail with return receipt requested, according to the provisions of Texas Civil Practice & Remedies Code § 110.001, et seq. (Vernon Supp. 2001). 
d.  The Director may grant a waiver or partial waiver of the provisions of the DDC according to federal or state law to accommodate a person's free exercise of religion. 
6.  Limitations on Minor Modifications. Except when requested as a reasonable accommodation for Federal Fair Housing Act ("FFHA") purposes, a request for a minor modification shall not be used to further modify a development standard that, as applied to the subject property, already qualifies as an exception to, or modification of, a generally applicable development standard required under Subchapter 7: Development Standards. 
C.  Minor Modification Procedure. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  An application for a minor modification shall only be submitted and reviewed concurrently with an application for a specific use permit, temporary use permit, site plan approval, or plat approval (minor, preliminary, final, conveyance, or replat). 
b.  Each code standard in Table 2.8-A shall be considered a separate minor modification request as it relates to the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.2D, but multiple modifications may be considered in one minor modification application. 
2.  Review and Decision. 
a.  Where the concurrently reviewed application requires review and approval by the Director, the Director shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the modification in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.2D. The Director may refer the minor modification to the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to making a decision. 
b.  Where the concurrently reviewed application requires review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, the Commission or Council, as applicable, shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the modification in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.2D. 
3.  Effect of Approval. Approval of a minor modification authorizes only the particular modification of standards approved, and only to the subject property of the application. 
4.  Expiration of Minor Modification. A minor modification shall automatically expire if the associated development application is denied or if approval of the concurrently reviewed application expires, is revoked, or otherwise deemed invalid. 
D.  Minor Modification Approval Criteria. In reviewing a proposed minor modification, the decision-making body shall consider the general approval criteria in Subsection 2.4.5 and whether and to what extent the minor modification is of a technical nature that: 
1.  Compensates for an unusual site condition; 
2.  Eliminates a minor inadvertent failure to comply with a DDC standard; or 
3.  Protects a sensitive resource, natural feature, or community asset; and 
4.  The minor modification will not produce an adverse change to the character of the neighborhood.  
2.8.3 - Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a remedy whereby persons claiming to have been aggrieved by a decision of the Director or other administrative official in administering this DDC may appeal that decision. 
B.  Applicability. Any person may appeal a decision of an administrative office or agency made in the administration or enforcement of this DDC. Appeals shall be made to the appropriate body as indicated in Table 2.2-A Summary of Development Review Procedures, and in accordance with state law. 
C.  Procedure. Figure 2.8-2 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of administrative appeals. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.8-2: Summary of Administrative Appeal Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is optional in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. An administrative appeal application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4, with the following modifications: 
a.  Time Limit. Appeals shall be made in writing and filed with the Director within 10 business days of the action or decision being appealed. 
b.  Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings from further action unless the Director determines that a stay would create adverse impacts to the health, safety, or welfare of the city or neighborhood. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the appeal application and prepare a staff report in accordance with the general approval criteria applicable to all applications in Subsection 2.4.5, with the following modifications: 
a.  Staff review shall only confirm that the application is complete and that the appeal is heard by the appropriate authority. 
b.  The staff report shall not make a formal recommendation. The report shall include necessary facts to warrant an appeal, which shall be provided by the appellant/applicant. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. An appeal shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council, and noticed in accordance with Subsection 2.4.6. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. 
a.  The appropriate decision-making body may affirm, reverse, or amend a decision or interpretation made by another decision-making body in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.3D below. 
b.  The appeal decision-making authority may reverse a previous decision in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from. 
c.  The appeal decision-making authority may attach conditions of approval on any appeal to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the city. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply. Any further appeals from the appropriate appeal decision-making authority shall be made to the courts in accordance with state law. 
D.  Appeals Approval Criteria. In considering an appeal, the appropriate decision-making body shall consider the approval criteria applicable to all applications in Subsection 2.4.5, and shall consider the following: 
1.  The facts stated in the application, as presented by the appellant and/or the Director; and 
2.  The requirements and intent of the applicable standards from this DDC compared to the written decision that is being appealed.  
2.8.4 - Alternative Environmentally Sensitive Area (ESA) Plan. 
A.  Purpose. The alternative ESA plan provides the option to address the ESA regulations through a flexible discretionary process using the procedure outlined in Section 2.7.2: Zoning Map Amendment. 
B.  Applicability. An alternative ESA plan is required when development deviates from regulations established in Section 7.4: Environmentally Sensitive Areas, and encroaches or removes protected ESAs. 
C.  Alternative ESA Plan Procedure. Figure 2.8-3 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of alternative ESA plans. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.8-3: Summary of Alternative ESA Plan Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Citizen Participation is recommended in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3B: Citizen Participation. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. 
a.  Generally. 
i.  The alternative ESA plan application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
ii.  The Director may require additional information deemed appropriate and necessary to process the application. 
b.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the alternative ESA plan application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with the general approval criteria applicable to all applications in Subsection 2.4.5, and the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.4D below. 
c.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. The alternative ESA plan application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and shall be noticed pursuant to Table 2.2-A: Summary of Development Review Procedures, and Section 2.4.6. 
d.  Step 5: Review and Decision. 
i.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the alternative ESA plan application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.4D below, and shall forward its recommendation to the City Council. 
ii.  City Council Review and Decision. 
a.  The City Council may review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the alternative plan application in accordance with the approval criteria in Subsection 2.8.4D below. 
b.  If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of the alternative ESA plan, the alternative plan shall become effective only by a three-fourths vote of all members of the City Council. 
iii.  Protest Procedure. 
a.  The rules governing amendment over protest are the same as for a zoning amendment and are contained in TLGC, Chapter 211. The Director may prescribe forms for protest petitions. 
b.  Property owners within 200 feet of a proposed rezoning, as indicated on the most recently approved city tax roll, may file a written protest against the rezoning. If written protests are received by owners of 20 percent or more of the area within 200 feet of the proposed rezoning, approval shall require three-fourths vote of the City Council for an alternative plan to become effective. In such case, a supermajority vote shall not be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
e.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Section 2.4.8 shall apply. The City Council decision is a final action and may not be appealed. 
D.  Alternative ESA Plan Approval Criteria. The City Council may approve the alternative ESA plan with conditions necessary to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development upon considering the factors and goals noted in this section. 
1.  Mitigation goals are obtained by creating, expanding, and/or improving ESAs. 
2.  Mitigation goals are obtained by preserving ESAs above the minimum requirements, exchanges between different types of ESAs, installing pollution prevention controls, and/or implementing best management practices or any other approaches that result in the improvement of the environment being impacted. 
3.  Areas offered as mitigation are linked to existing or planned open space or conserved areas to provide an overall open space system. 
4.  Development is arranged for maximizing access and utilization of the ESAs by citizens. 
5.  Areas offered as mitigation are placed either in a lot or lots that incorporate a permanent conservation easement, a preserved habitat, restrictive covenants, or such other legal mechanism to allow for the long term conservation of said areas. Such legal mechanisms shall limit any future land disturbing activity or construction within the ESAs, shall run with the land, and shall be binding upon all successors and assigns of the current owner. 
6.  The alternative ESA plan shall demonstrate that the property owner's alternative proposal results in a high-quality development meeting the intent of the standards in this DDC. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0024b, § 2(Exh. A), 3-3-2020)  
2.8.5 - Watershed Protection Permit Relief. 
A.  Purpose. The watershed protection permit allows a determination of whether the application of the standards in this DDC, as applied to a watershed protection permit and related development applications would, if not modified or other relief granted, constitute a regulatory taking under constitutional standards. 
B.  Applicability. A property owner or authorized agent may file an application for relief under this subsection following final decision to deny or conditionally approve an application for a watershed protection permit and related applications within 10 days. 
C.  Application Submittal and Processing. 
1.  The Director has the authority to establish requirements for applications in the Administrative Criteria Manual. No application shall be accepted for filing until it is complete and the fee established by the City Council has been paid. 
2.  Upon approval of an application in whole or in part by the City Council, the Director shall process the watershed protection permit, and related development applications, and the Director shall decide the applications consistent with the relief granted on the application, including any amendments to applicable standards approved by City Council. 
3.  A denial of an application by the City Council is a final determination. 
D.  Approval Criteria. In deciding whether to grant relief to the applicant, the City Council will consider whether there is any evidence from which it can reasonably conclude that the application of all or a part of the standards governing approval of a watershed protection permit under this DDC will deprive the applicant of all economically viable use of the land, based upon the following factors: 
1.  Whether the operations proposed are consistent with protecting the ecological integrity and environmental quality, including protection of surface and ground water sources, of potentially impacted environmentally sensitive areas (ESAs). 
2.  The nature and intensity of the uses allowed following application of the standards in the DDC to the watershed protection permit and related development applications, in comparison with the nature and intensity of the uses allowed without application of the standards. 
3.  Whether the standards of the DDC, when applied to the watershed protection permit and related development applications, allow an economically viable use of the land. 
4.  For applications in which it is alleged that there has been a devaluation of property, whether the adoption or application of standards in this DDC is the producing cause of any devaluation of the property. 
5.  The extent to which the applicant's expectations for economically viable uses have been realized through actual or anticipated development on land or an interest in land originally part of the same tract or parcel as the land for which relief is sought under the application. 
6.  The extent to which the applicant has taken advantage of any other relief measures provided by this DDC that would result in mitigation of economic impacts resulting from application of the standards in this DDC. 
7.  The extent to which the owner of the property had actual or constructive notice of regulations or proposed changes in the standards governing watershed protection permits. 
8.  Unique circumstances exist on the property on which the application is made related to size, shape, area, topography, surrounding conditions, and location that do not apply to other property in the vicinity. 
9.  Whether there are other alternative well site locations. 
10.  Any clam for relief pursuant to TLGC, Chapter 245. 
E.  Review and Decision. 
1.  In granting relief under the application, the City Council may waive or modify the standards to be applied to the watershed protection permit or related development applications, and may impose reasonable conditions on related development applications in order to implement the relief granted. 
2.  The City Council may also initiate an application for a zoning map amendment in order to afford the relief granted, provided that such application shall be decided in accordance with Subsection 2.7.2: Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning). In such case, the City Council's decision on the application shall not be considered final until the application for the zoning map amendment is decided. 
3.  The action taken by the City Council under this section shall not deprive the Planning and Zoning Commission or any responsible official of its final approval authority over subdivision plats and other development permits. 
4.  No application for local permit under TLGC, Chapter 245, will be allowed for a watershed protection permit.  
2.8.6 - Interpretations. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform mechanism for rendering formal written interpretations of this DDC. 
B.  Authority. Responsibility for making interpretations of provisions of this DDC is assigned as follows: 
1.  The Director shall be responsible for all interpretations of the zoning and subdivision provisions in the text of this DDC, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Interpretations as to which is the stricter and thus controlling provision in case of conflict with this DDC and other provisions of the Municipal Code of Ordinances; 
b.  Interpretations of compliance with a condition of approval; 
c.  Interpretations of whether an unspecified use falls within a use classification, use category, or use type allowed in a zoning district; and 
d.  Interpretations of the zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map. 
2.  The City Engineer shall be responsible for all interpretations of the floodplain management and engineering provisions in the text of this DDC. 
3.  The Building Official shall be responsible for all interpretations of building code provisions as they relate to this DDC, including interpretations relating to issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance. 
C.  Interpretation Procedure. Figure 2.8-4 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 2.4 that apply to the review of interpretations. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below: 
Figure 2.8-4: Summary of Interpretation Procedure
 
1.  Step 1: Pre-Application Activities. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is optional in accordance with Subsection 2.4.3. 
b.  Citizen Participation. Not required. 
2.  Step 2: Application Submittal and Processing. A request for interpretation shall be submitted and accepted, and may be revised or withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 2.4.4. 
3.  Step 3: Staff Review and Action. The Director, City Engineer, or Building Official (as applicable) shall review the request for interpretation and render a decision based on the standards in Subsection 2.8.6D. The decision shall be in the form of a written interpretation and the decision-maker shall consult with the City Attorney and affected City Officials before rendering the interpretation. 
4.  Step 4: Scheduling and Notice of Public Meetings/Hearings. Not required. 
5.  Step 5: Review and Decision. Not applicable. Review and decision is by the Director, City Engineer, or Building Official under Step 3. 
6.  Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 2.4.8 shall apply, with the following modifications: 
a.  Effect of Approval. The written interpretation shall be binding on subsequent decisions by the Director or other city administrative officials in applying the same provision of this DDC or the Zoning Map in the same circumstance, unless the interpretation is reversed or modified on appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals or a court of law. 
b.  Official Record of Interpretations. The Director shall maintain a record of written interpretations that shall be available for public inspection, on reasonable request, during normal business hours. 
D.  Interpretation Standards. 
1.  Statutory References. Unless otherwise specified, statutory references are to be construed as currently amended or superseded. 
2.  Text Provisions. Interpretation of text provisions and their application shall be based on the standards in Section 9.1, Rules of Construction, and the following considerations: 
a.  The clear and plain meaning of the provision's wording, as defined by the meaning and significance given specific terms used in the provision as established in Subchapter 9: Definitions, and by the common and accepted usage of the term; 
b.  The intended purpose of the provision, as indicated by purpose statements, its context and consistency with surrounding and related provisions, and any legislative history to its adoption; 
c.  The intent to give every provision meaning; 
d.  The general purposes served by this DDC, as set forth in Section 1.2: Purpose; and 
e.  Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  Unspecified Uses. Interpretation of whether an unspecified use falls within a use classification, use category, or use type allowed in a zoning district shall be based the standards in Section 5.2.4: Classification of New and Unlisted Uses, and the Comprehensive Plan. 
4.  Zoning Map Boundaries. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map shall be in accordance with the standards in Subsection 3.1.3B: District Boundaries, and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.  
2.9 - Historic Preservation Procedures 
 
2.9.1 - General Provisions. 
A.  Applicability. The following are the general provisions applicable to the creation of Historic Landmarks, Historic Districts, and Conservation Districts within the City of Denton, as defined under Subchapter 9: Definitions. 
B.  Public Hearings. 
1.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing as required in the same manner and with the same notice provisions as provided for zoning regulations in TLGC §§ 211.006—211.007, as amended, to consider any Historic Landmark, Historic District, or Conservation District designation ordinance after receiving a recommendation from the Historic Landmark Commission (HLC). 
2.  Within 30 days after the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall set forth in writing its recommendation, including the findings of fact that constitute the basis for its decision, and shall transmit its recommendation concerning the proposed ordinance to the City Council along with the recommendation of the HLC. 
C.  Notices. Any notice required to be given under this Subsection, if not actually delivered, shall be given by depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person or entity to whom such notice is to be given at his last known address. When notice is required to be given to an owner of property, such notice, delivered or mailed by certified or registered mail, may be addressed to such owner who has rendered his property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. 
D.  Recording of Decision. Upon passage of a Historic Landmark designation ordinance by the City Council, the City Secretary shall file a copy of the ordinance with the Denton County Tax Clerk. 
E.  Amendments. The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries created under the authority of this DDC concerning Historic Landmarks and Historic and Conservation Districts may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed pursuant to the public notice and hearing requirements, as amended, herein. If there is a written protest against such change signed by the owners of 30 percent or more, either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change or of the lots immediately adjoining the change and extending 200 feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except by a simple majority of the City Council. 
F.  Completeness Determination. Every application shall be subject to a completeness determination by the Historic Preservation Officer (HPO). Applications should be accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this DDC and all applicable city ordinances, rules, and regulations. An application deemed incomplete shall not bind the city as the official acceptance of the application for filing, and the incompleteness of the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the application. The HPO will make his/her completeness determination within 10 days from the date of receipt of the application. An email or comment in the city's permit tracking program is considered a determination in writing. Applications will be deemed complete on the 11th business day after the application is received.  
2.9.2 - Certificate of Appropriateness. 
A Certification of Appropriateness (COA) shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit. The COA shall be posted at the project site. A COA may be required for work not otherwise requiring a building permit. The COA shall be required in addition to, and not in lieu of, any required building permit. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  Application. Prior to commencement of any work for which a COA is required, the applicant shall file an application for a COA with the City Development Services Department. The application shall contain such information as is requested from a form prepared by the HPO. Applications will be subject to the completeness determination in this subchapter. 
2.  HPO Discretion. Upon receipt of an application for a COA, the HPO shall determine whether the application is to be administratively reviewed or reviewed by the HLC, using the requirements in this subsection. Generally, certificates of appropriateness for exclusively ordinary maintenance and minor exterior alternations may be administratively approved; however, the Director or the HPO may place a request for a COA on the agenda to be heard by the HLC at a public meeting based on the significance of the project or its potential for impact to a Historic District, Conservation District, or a Historic Landmark. 
3.  Expiration. The COA shall expire one year from the date of issuance; existing COAs shall expire one year from the adoption of this DDC. 
4.  Time Bar. After a final decision by the HLC is reached denying a COA, no further applications may be considered for the subject matter of the denied COA for one year from the date of the final decision, unless changed circumstances regarding the property or project are sufficient to warrant a new meeting, in the opinion of the HPO. The HLC may also waive the one-year requirement for resubmission, by a simple majority vote. 
5.  Amendment. A COA may be amended by submitting an application for amendment to the HPO. The application shall then be subject to the standard COA review procedure. 
6.  Emergency Procedure. If a structure requiring a COA is damaged and the Building Official determines that the structure or property will suffer additional damage without immediate repair, the Building Official may allow the property owner to temporarily protect the structure. In such a case, the property owner shall apply for a COA within 10 days of the occurrence that caused the damage. The protection authorized under this subsection must not permanently alter the architectural features of the landmark or of the structure in the Historic or Conservation District. 
7.  New Construction. Design for new construction on the site of a property, either individually designated as a Historic Landmark or located in a Historic or Conservation District, shall conform to applicable adopted design guidelines and a COA shall be required. 
8.  Appeal. An applicant may appeal the HPO's decision to deny a COA by submitting to the HPO a written request for appeal within 10 days of the decision. The written request for appeal starts the HLC Review procedure in this subchapter. 
9.  Compliance Required. In considering an application for a COA, the HPO and the HLC shall review it for compliance with The Secretary of Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties (The Standards), any applicable guidelines adopted by the City and any guidelines provided in this subchapter. 
10.  Sustainability Guidelines. The use of sustainable practices in design is encouraged and the HPO and HLC shall use the Secretary of Interior's Guidelines on Sustainability for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings as a guide for decisions related to renewable energy such as: solar technology, wind power, insulation, HVAC, and similarly related topics. 
11.  Building Code Requirements. Historic buildings may be exempted from building code requirements due to their status at the discretion of the Building Official. The Building Official may authorize certain exemptions in accordance with state law and the city's codes. 
B.  Administrative Review. The HPO may administratively approve or deny a COA if the proposed work meets the following criteria: 
1.  Ordinary Maintenance. Ordinary maintenance is defined as the process of stabilizing or repairing, deteriorated or damaged architectural features (including but not limited to roofing, windows, columns, siding, and repainting), and includes any work that does not constitute a change in design, material, color, or outward appearance, and includes in-kind replacement or repair. If the applicant is seeking a COA for ordinary maintenance only, the HPO may review the application to determine whether the proposed work complies with the regulations contained in this DDC and all applicable ordinances, and the HPO may administratively approve or deny the work. 
2.  Minor Exterior Alteration. Minor exterior alteration shall be defined as the installation of or alteration to signage, fences, gutters and downspouts, incandescent lighting fixtures, landscaping, restoration of original architectural features that constitute a change from existing conditions, painting of wood or other appropriate elements including a change in color and additions and changes not visible from any street, as determined by the HPO, to the rear of the main structure or to an accessory structure. If the applicant is seeking a COA to authorize minor exterior alterations only, the HPO may review the application to determine whether the proposed work complies with the regulations contained in this DDC and all applicable ordinances, and administratively approve or deny the application. 
3.  Conservation Districts. COAs for work in a Conservation District shall be approved by staff according to standards set when the Conservation District is created. Conservation Districts differ from Historic Districts in that they may be created to protect the physical attributes of an area. The preservation of architecture may or may not be a component of the regulations adopted for a given Conservation District. 
C.  Historic Landmark Commission Review. COAs for projects not subject to administrative review shall be approved or denied by the HLC at a public meeting pursuant to these procedures. 
1.  Effect of Approval. If a COA has been approved by the HLC, then a certificate will be issued to the applicant, and copies of the certificate will be filed with the Planning Division in the Development Services Department. 
2.  Deemed Approval. If final action has not been taken by the HLC within 75 days of the posting of the item on the HLC's agenda by the HPO, then the COA will be deemed approved and a certificate will be issued to the applicant. If all other requirements of this DDC and applicable regulations are met, and a building permit is required for the proposed work, the Building Official shall issue a building permit to the applicant for the proposed work. 
3.  Appeal. If a COA has been denied, the applicant may appeal the decision in writing to the City Council by filing a written notice with the City Secretary within 10 days of receiving the notice of the denial. City Council's decision is final and no further applications shall be considered. 
D.  Demolition or Removal. 
1.  Criteria. The HLC must consider the following criteria for a COA for demolition or removal: 
a.  The state of repair of the building; 
b.  The existing and/or potential usefulness, including economic usefulness of the building; 
c.  The purposes behind preserving the structure as an historic structure; and 
d.  The character of the neighborhood and all other factors it finds appropriate. 
2.  Appeal Period. Any applicant or the owner of any property located within 200 feet of any landmark or structure in a Historic or Conservation District requiring a COA for demolition or removal, and who is aggrieved by a ruling of the HLC concerning the landmark or structure in a Historic or Conservation District, under the provisions of this subsection may, within 60 days after the ruling of the HLC, appeal to the City Council. Following a public hearing to be held within 30 days of the filing of a notice of such appeal with the City Secretary, the City Council may, by a favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Council who are eligible to vote on the matter, uphold or overturn any ruling of the HLC made pursuant to this subsection. Applicants may not begin demolition or removal until after the appeal period has passed. 
3.  Posting of Sign(s). An applicant for a COA for demolition is required to post a sign at the project site pursuant to city's sign posting requirements established in the Administrative Criteria Manual.  
2.9.3 - Historic and Conservation District Designation. 
The City Council may designate buildings, structures, sites, areas, and lands in the city as part of a Historic or Conservation District and define, amend, and delineate the boundaries thereof. This is a zoning designation in addition to any other use designation. The Official Zoning Map shall reflect the designation of Historic and Conservation Districts. 
A.  Applications. Applications for consideration of a proposed Historic or Conservation District shall be based upon architectural, historical, archeological, or cultural importance or value and accompanied by the following information: 
1.  A map showing the boundaries of the proposed District and the location of each contributing resource identified by a number or letter designation; 
2.  Notation of state and national landmarks; 
3.  A list of specific buildings, structures, sites, areas, or lands of importance considered contributing to the District and a description of the particular importance or value of each such building, structure, site, area, or land; and 
4.  Sufficient photographs of each building, structure, site, area, or land of importance or value showing the condition, color, size, and architectural detail of each, and where possible: 
a.  Date of construction; 
b.  Builder or architect; 
c.  Chain of uses and ownership; 
d.  Architectural style; 
e.  Materials; 
f.  Construction technique; and 
g.  Recognition by state or national government as architecturally or historically significant, if so designated. 
B.  Procedures for Designation. 
1.  Initiation. Designation as a District may be initiated by the Historic Landmark Commission (HLC) or by written petition in the form prescribed by this subsection. Such a request shall designate clearly the land proposed to be included. 
2.  Applications. Requests for designation shall be made on a form obtained from the city. Completed applications shall be returned to the HPO for review and processing as applicable. The HPO is the administrative official with original jurisdiction to review applications and submitted written support for completeness. 
3.  Time Limits. Properly submitted applications shall remain valid for one year from the date it is deemed complete and thereafter shall be expired. 
4.  Petition Required. The applicant must submit with the application, a petition with signatures of more than 50 percent of the owners of the property within the proposed District who collectively own more than 50 percent of the land area within the proposed District. Property ownership shall be verified using the last certified tax rolls of the appropriate county tax assessor collector for the proposed area. For purposes of calculating the support of more than 50 percent of the property owners, each property as listed on the tax rolls shall be counted individually, regardless of whether an individual or group owns multiple properties within the proposed area. Properties owned by governmental entities shall not be counted in the more than 50 percent support requirement, although their written preference may be submitted to any board, commission, or to City Council for their consideration. Additionally, for properties owned by more than one party, only one property owner need submit written support in order for the HPO to count the property in the calculation. 
5.  Demolition and Exterior Alterations Prohibited. Any demolition or exterior alterations are prohibited for properties included in the area under consideration for designation while the application is being reviewed by the city. The Director may approve a permit for demolitions or exterior alterations on a case-by-case basis. 
6.  Decision. Once the HPO receives a completed application, the HPO must call a public hearing in front of HLC. The HLC shall make its recommendation for either approval or denial within 30 days from the date of the public hearing for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall schedule a public hearing to be held within 60 days of receipt of the HLC's recommendation and shall forward its recommendation for either approval or denial to the City Council. The City Council shall, at a public hearing, review and either approve or deny the proposed district. Upon passage of any ordinance designating an area, or removing the designation of a district, the city shall send notice of the fact by mail to the owner or owners of affected property. 
7.  Increasing Boundaries. Applications to increase the boundaries of a District shall be made following the same procedure for creating the district and may be made when one or more of the following criteria are met: 
a.  When buildings, structures, sites, areas, or lands of importance or value related to the district are requested for inclusion; or 
b.  When facts previously undisclosed to or unknown by the HLC are revealed which indicate that a particular building or site is possessed of special architectural, archeological, cultural, or historical importance or value. 
8.  Appeal. If the HLC determines at a public hearing that the area is not eligible for a District classification, it shall notify the applicant of the fact in writing. Notice is given by depositing the notice, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. The notice must be sent to the address shown on the application. The decision of the HLC that an area is not eligible for Historic or Conservation District classification may be appealed to the City Council. The City Council's determination of eligibility on appeal is final. If the City Council determines that the area is not eligible as a District classification, no further applications for a District classification may be considered, for the area of request, for two years from the date of the decision. A property owner in the area of the request may apply for a waiver of the two-year limitation and must show changes in circumstances that alter the facts and conditions upon which the first decision was determined. The HPO shall determine if the application may go forward. 
9.  Established Districts. Requirements of Subchapter 4: Overlay and Historic Districts, shall apply to the Historic or Conservation Districts, however, any conflict between this subsection and other provisions of Subchapter 4 shall be resolved in favor of this subsection. 
10.  Regulations. The ordinance creating the District may contain regulations, special exceptions, or procedures that the HLC considers necessary to conserve the distinctive atmosphere or character of the area, or to minimize potential adverse impacts which could result from the creation of the District. In addition, all property owners must conform to existing building codes and this DDC. 
C.  Approval Criteria. 
1.  The purpose of Historic and Conservation Districts is to geographically define areas possessing significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings, structures, sites, areas, or land which are united by architectural, historical, archeological, or cultural importance or significance for preservation purposes. They may also include a landmark or a group of landmarks. 
2.  Any District must meet two of the following criteria: 
a.  Include buildings, structures, or sites that have common character defining features and be of common form. 
b.  Include buildings, structures, or sites which are similar in size, massing, and scale. 
c.  Have a common streetscape or have similar spatial relationships or contain common visual qualities such as vegetation, vistas, orientation, set back, spacing, site coverage, exterior features, or materials. 
d.  Contains properties and an environmental setting that meets two or more of the criteria for designation of a landmark (see Subsection 2.9.4: Historic Landmark Designation). 
3.  Any District in the City of Denton that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places is presumed to be qualified for designation as a historic or conservation district or included as part of a larger Historic or Conservation District. 
4.  For designation as a Historic District, a minimum of 51 percent of buildings, structures, or sites in the proposed District must be 50 years of age or be of historical significance.  
2.9.4 - Historic Landmark Designation. 
The City Council may designate buildings, structures, sites, areas, and lands in the city as Historic Landmarks. This is a zoning designation in addition to any other use designation. A Historic Landmark does not have to be located in a Historic or Conservation District. The Official Zoning Map shall reflect the designation of Historic Landmarks. 
A.  Procedures for Designation. 
1.  The owner of the property seeking designation, or owner's representative, the Historic Landmark Commission (HLC), Planning and Zoning Commission, Historic Preservation Officer (HPO), or the City Council may initiate a Historic Landmark designation by filing an application with the HPO. 
2.  Requests for designation shall be made on a form obtained from the HPO. 
3.  Applications prepared and submitted by an authorized agent shall contain the signatures of the owner or owners unless created by resolution of the City Council or the HLC. 
4.  Applications shall be considered by the HLC at a regular meeting. The HLC shall make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding such designation. The Planning and Zoning Commission must make a recommendation to City Council for its consideration. The decision at City Council is final and cannot be appealed. 
5.  Historic Landmark Commission-approved medallions for designated structures may be prepared and, subject to the approval of the owners, may be affixed to individually designated Historic Landmarks. 
B.  Approval Criteria. The following criteria will be used in the designation of a Historic Landmark: 
1.  Character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city, state or the United States; 
2.  Recognition as a recorded state historic landmark, a national historic landmark, or entered into the National Register of Historic Places; 
3.  Reflects a distinguishing characteristic of an architectural type or specimen; 
4.  Identification as the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the city; 
5.  Reflects elements of architectural design, detail, material, or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural innovation; 
6.  Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites, or areas which are eligible for preservation according to a plan based on architectural, historic, or cultural motif; 
7.  Portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an area of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style; 
8.  Archeological value in that it has produced or can be expected to produce data affecting theories of historic or prehistoric interest; 
9.  Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social, ethnic, or historical heritage of the city, state, or the United States; 
10.  Location as the site of a significant historic event; 
11.  Identification with a person who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the city, state or the United States; 
12.  A building or structure that, because of its location, has become of value to a neighborhood, community area, or the city; or 
13.  Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride. 
C.  Permits Pending Designation. 
1.  From and after the date on which the question of whether or not a building, structure, or site within the city should be designated as an Historic Landmark is placed upon the agenda for any special or regular meeting of the HLC or from and after the date on which such agenda is posted in accordance with the provision of Chapter 551 of the Government Code (Texas Open Meetings Act), as amended, or from and after the date that the HLC approves or recommends a Preservation Plan or any amendment of any existing Preservation Plan which embraces or includes the building, structure, or site within the city, whichever date first occurs, no building permit allowing the construction, reconstruction, alteration, change, restoration, removal, or demolition of any exterior architectural feature of any building or structure then existing included or embraced in whole or in part within the scope of such agenda consideration or such preservation plan or such amendment thereof, as the case may be, and no permit allowing the demolition or removal of all or any part of any such building or structure may be issued by any official of the city nor, if no such permit is required, may any person or entity construct, reconstruct, alter, change, restore, remove, or demolish any exterior architectural feature of any such building or structure until the earliest of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  A final and binding COA for the removal or demolition, as may be appropriate, has been issued by the HLC; 
b.  The HLC fails to make a recommendation that some part or all of any such building or structure be designated an Historic Landmark or be included within an Historic Landmark or within a Preservation Plan or an amendment thereof within 60 days following the earliest of the dates described in this subsection, under the circumstances; or 
c.  A final and binding decision has been made by the City Council that no part of any such building or structure shall be designated an Historic Landmark or shall be included within any designated Historic Landmark. However, should the City Council fail to act within 90 days from the date an appeal is filed, the requested permit shall be granted. The 90-day time limitation may be waived by the appellant to allow the City Council an additional 30 days in which to act. 
2.  It shall be the duty of the HPO to furnish the Building Official with a copy or written notice of each such written order or such agenda or such Preservation Plan or amendment thereof, as the case may be, as promptly after the preparation thereof as is practicable. The failure to so furnish the Building Official with a copy or written notice thereof however, shall not have the effect of validating any building permit, removal permit or demolition permit issued without knowledge of any such written order or agenda. In any instance in which any such permit may not be required, it shall be the duty of the HPO to give notice of any such written order or such agenda or such Preservation Plan or amendment thereof to the owner of any building or structure included within the scope thereof, which notice shall be deemed complete when actually given, orally, or in writing, to such owner or when written notice there is deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered, with return receipt requested, addressed to such owner, whichever event first occurs. 
3.  Any permit issued to any person from or after the date of any such written order or such agenda or the approval or recommendation of such preservation plan or amendment thereof, as the case may be, shall be null, void, and of no force or effect until the earliest of the events described in subsections (1.a), (1.b), (1.c) above occur. 
4.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, no building permit, removal permit or demolition permit shall be issued by the Building Official for any structure located in a National Register District except as authorized by this subsection. The Building Official shall notify the HPO immediately of any application requesting a building permit, removal permit or demolition permit for a structure located in a National Register District. No such permit shall be issued by the Building Official before the HLC has made a recommendation, or scheduled the structure on its agenda, or before the expiration of 60 calendar days, whichever is sooner. If a structure is placed on an agenda item, it shall be scheduled for a public hearing as soon as property owners within the National Register District are notified.  
2.9.5 - Maintenance; Omission of Repairs. 
A.  The exterior of any structure in a designated District, any designated Historic Landmark and any building determined by the HLC to meet the criteria for Landmark designation shall be maintained to ensure structural integrity. 
B.  If the HLC finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the exterior of any structure in a designated District or any designated Historic Landmark is structurally unsound or in imminent danger of becoming structurally unsound, the HLC shall direct the HPO to notify in writing the owner of the structure of such fact. 
C.  Upon giving a 10 day written notice to the owner of record of such structure, the HLC shall hold a public meeting to determine if the structure is structurally unsound or in imminent danger of becoming structurally unsound. The HLC's report may include evidence of economic hardship or willful neglect. 
D.  At the conclusion of the meeting, if the HLC finds that the structure is structurally unsound or in danger of becoming structurally unsound and that no valid reason exists as to why the owner cannot or should not undertake to safeguard the structural soundness of the building, it shall in writing notify the owner of record of the finding. 
E.  The owner of record of a structure who has been notified by the HLC that such landmark is structurally unsound or in danger of so becoming, shall within 90 days of receipt of such notice, satisfy the HLC that reasonably necessary repairs to safeguard the structural soundness of the landmark have been effected. 
F.  If the HLC determines that the building is structurally unsound but there are valid reasons why the owner cannot or should not undertake to safeguard the structural soundness of the building, it shall forward to the City Council its recommendation as to what action, if any, should be taken on the structure. 
G.  Any applicant or interested person aggrieved by a ruling of the HLC under the provisions of this section may, within 60 days after the date of such ruling, appeal to the City Council.  
2.11 - Development Criteria Manual Procedure 
A.  Purpose. In order to optimize and facilitate the specification of safe, efficient, cost-effective design and development standards, this procedure for creating and updating Development Criteria Manuals is established. The intent is for design and development standards to be established quickly and efficiently, as a part of a collaborative dialog among land development professionals, both inside and outside the City. 
B.  Minimum Standards and Responsibility. The standards established by the Development Criteria Manuals and the procedures set forth herein are not intended to supersede any requirement for submission and staff approval of designs sealed by a professional having appropriate licensure. Design and development standards and procedures established in the Development Criteria Manuals under this Subsection are intended for use only as engineering and design guidelines, and to establish minimum standards. The responsibility for the sufficiency and appropriateness of any actual design shall remain the responsibility of the design engineer for the project, and the responsibility for the sufficiency of construction shall remain the responsibility of the contractor for the project. Users of the Development Criteria Manuals should be knowledgeable and experienced in the theories and application of the underlying standards or utilize someone who is knowledgeable and experienced. It is expected that all designs and construction of individual projects will meet or exceed these minimum standards. 
C.  Procedure. 
1.  Initial Approval. The baseline structure for each Development Criteria Manual is established by ordinance, using the Zoning Text Amendment Procedure found in Subsection 2.7.4. A Development Criteria Manual may be approved by the City Council following review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. At the public hearings, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council may hear comments from the public, outside professionals from the land development community, and staff. Approval should be based on comments made at the public hearing and other applicable federal, state and City laws and regulations. Approval shall be guided by the criteria set forth in Section 2.11D. below and any other requirements to be considered under applicable law. 
2.  Administrative Update. After initial approval, updates of the approved Development Criteria Manuals will proceed according to the following administrative procedure: 
a.  Staff will present the proposed update before the Planning and Zoning Commission at a work session. No additional public notification is required beyond posting of the item on the work session agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission. At the work session, the Planning and Zoning Commission may offer any suggestions or recommendations concerning the proposed update. 
b.  Following the work session, staff will post the proposed update on the City of Denton web site along with the current Development Criteria Manual and at City Hall at the location for posting notices of all public meetings, for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days. 
c.  During this thirty-day period, comments of interested persons and written protests or requests for review will be collected and staff will consider all comments filed and make an attempt to resolve all protests or requests for review within the thirty (30) calendar day period. 
d.  After the thirty (30) calendar day period, staff will present the proposed update before the City Council at a public hearing. The proposed update will be processed as an ordinance, requiring public hearing notification prior to the City Council meeting, that meet the content, timing, and other notices specification outlined in the Administrative Criteria Manual. 
3.  Legislative Updates. Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the City Council from making updates to the Development Criteria Manuals by ordinance including, without limitation, to establish fee schedules or to make other changes as they may deem to be necessary or appropriate. 
D.  Approval Criteria. The following criteria shall be considered as guidelines for approving updates to the Development Criteria Manuals: 
1.  Design Standards. Design and construction standards shall be set to establish a baseline that will promote the health, safety and welfare of the public and to promote cost-effective construction and design. 
2.  Public Improvements. The design standards for public improvements should strive to minimize the ongoing costs to operate and maintain public improvements and to provide for an appropriate service life, to minimize the future burden on the public. The standards shall also consider the positive impact that properly designed and maintained public improvements have on the economic development and the welfare of the City as a whole. 
3.  Private Improvements. The design standards for private improvements shall establish an appropriate baseline to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while promoting processes that are affordable and cost effective. The standards shall also encourage quality development with lasting value, and maintain or enhance the property value of the development and its neighborhood or surrounding area. 
4.  Aesthetics. Standards should promote aesthetics to the extent of recognizing the value and importance of maintaining or improving upon the neighborhood or surrounding area in a tasteful and compatible fashion, consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan, so as to maintain or improve property values and attract quality development. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0014a, § 3(Exh. B), 11-19-2019)  
Subchapter 3 - Zoning Districts  
3.1 - Purpose and Organization 
 
3.1.1 - Zoning Districts Established. 
Zoning districts are established as shown in Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations. Zoning districts are established by the city's adoption of the Official Zoning Map of City. An explanation of the transition from established zoning districts prior to the effective date of this DDC to the zoning districts in this DDC is provided in Appendix B: Zoning District Transition Table. 
Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations 
Zoning Districts 	Abbreviated Designation 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Residential Rural 	RR 
Residential 1 	R1 
Residential 2 	R2 
Residential 3 	R3 
Residential 4 	R4 
Residential 6 	R6 
Residential 7 	R7 
MIXED-USE DISTRICTS 
Mixed-Use Neighborhood 	MN 
Mixed-Use Downtown Core 	MD 
Mixed-Use Regional 	MR 
CORRIDOR DISTRICTS 
Suburban Corridor 	SC 
Highway Corridor 	HC 
OTHER NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
General Office 	GO 
Light Industrial 	LI 
Heavy Industrial 	HI 
Public Facilities 	PF 
PLANNED DISTRICTS 
Planned Development 	PD 
OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
Municipal Airport Overlay 	MAO 
Fry Street Overlay 	FSO 
Rayzor Ranch Overlay 	RZR 
Unicorn Lake Overlay 	ULD 
Bell Avenue Historic District 	BAH 
Oak-Hickory Historic District 	OHH 
West Oak Area Historic District 	WOH 
  
3.1.2 - Organization of this Subchapter. 
A.  Base Zoning Districts. 
1.  Sections 3.2 through 3.5 follow a common structure for describing the purpose and intent for each base zoning district, the applicable dimensional standards, and any district-specific standards. 
2.  Each base zoning district includes an illustration demonstrating the dimensional requirements for that district. The illustrations are not intended to represent a specific location, but rather reflect the general character of the district. 
3.  Each base zoning district includes a table of dimensional standards summarizing the most pertinent dimensional standards applicable to each district. The labels in the table correspond to the applicable illustration. These tables are illustrative only and do not identify all standards that may apply to a particular development. 
4.  If a standard shown in an illustration is inconsistent with the respective table of dimensional standards, the standards in the table shall govern. 
B.  Planned Development District. 
1.  Planned Development districts are established by the Zoning Amendment Procedure pursuant to Subsection 2.7.3: Rezone to a Planned Development (PD) District. Development in a PD district is subject to the standards included in or referenced in an approved plan. 
2.  Section 3.6 describes the general purpose of PD districts and sets forth base requirements applicable to all such districts, including the minimum development standards to be addressed in the district's plan and the means of modifying the standards of this DDC through a PD development approval.  
3.1.3 - Official Zoning Map. 
A.  Incorporation of Map. 
1.  The location and boundaries of the districts designated in this subchapter are established as shown on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map of City" (hereafter referred to as the "Zoning Map"), dated as of the effective date of this subchapter. 
2.  The signed originals of the Zoning Map shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Secretary and, by reference, are made a part of this subchapter as if fully incorporated. 
B.  District Boundaries. Unless otherwise specified, district boundaries are lot lines, the centerlines of streets, creeks, and railroad right-of-way, or such lines extended. 
C.  Digital Mapping. Digital maps, created through the use of geographic information system technology, containing registration points recorded on the Texas State Plane Coordinate System, as amended, may be used in the administration and enforcement of this subchapter, but shall not replace the paper originals of official maps required by this subchapter. 
D.  Boundary Clarification. 
1.  In the event that a zoning district boundary is unclear or is disputed, the Director shall determine the location of the zoning district boundary. 
2.  Any appeal of the Director's determination of the zoning district boundary shall be established by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Subsection 2.8.3: Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
E.  Amendments to the Zoning Map. 
1.  If, in accord with the provisions of this subchapter, changes are made in district boundaries portrayed on the Zoning Map, the date of such changes shall be promptly noted on the Zoning Map after the amendment has been approved by the City Council and duly noted in the minutes of the City Council meeting. 
2.  No changes shall be made to the Zoning Map except in conformance with the procedures set forth in Subsection 2.7.2: Zoning Map Amendment.  
3.1.4 - Annexed Territory. 
When any territory is brought into the jurisdiction of the City of Denton, by annexation or otherwise, such territory shall be subject to the development regulations of the RR (Residential Rural) district until the City Council designates another zoning district, after review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such recommendation and determination shall include consideration of surrounding uses as well as policies stated in the Comprehensive Plan. Initial annexation shall require compliance with the zoning procedure in Subsection 2.7.5: Annexation.  
3.2 - Residential Districts 
 
3.2.1 - RR - Residential Rural. 
A.  Purpose. The RR district is intended to provide and maintain areas of rural use within the city. Application of this district will ensure that farming, forest, environmental, and scenic areas are protected from incompatible development. This district includes farms and ranches as the predominant use with large lot rural residential and rural commercial uses. The RR district may be used as an interim zoning district for annexed property. 
Figure 3.2-A: RR District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  RR District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.2-A: RR District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	5 acres 	3.7.2: Lot and Site Requirements 
B	Lot width 	100 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	200 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	50 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	10 feet 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	65 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	15 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
  
3.2.2 - R1 - Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The R1 district is intended to preserve existing single-family neighborhoods and to ensure that any new development promotes conservation of scenic rural open space and is compatible with existing land uses, patterns, and design standards. The R1 district can be used as a transitional district between rural development and large lot residential neighborhoods. 
Figure 3.2-B: R1 District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  R1 District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.2-B: R1 District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (Minimum) 
A	Lot area 	32,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2: Lot and Site Requirements 
B	Lot width 	80 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	100 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	20 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	10 feet 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	40 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	30 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
  
3.2.3 - R2 - Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The R2 district is intended to preserve existing single-family neighborhoods. The R2 district is intended to ensure that any new development promotes walkability, access to parks, open space, and recreation amenities and is compatible with existing land uses and development patterns. The R2 district can be used as a transitional district between large lot residential neighborhoods and medium lot residential neighborhoods. 
Figure 3.2-C: R2 District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  R2 District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.2-C: R2 District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	16,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	80 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	100 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	20 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	10 feet 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	40 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	40 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
  
3.2.4 - R3 - Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The R3 district is intended to preserve existing single-family neighborhoods. The R3 district is intended to ensure that any new development promotes walkability, access to parks, open space, and recreation amenities and is compatible with existing land uses and development patterns. The R3 district can be used as a transitional district between large lot residential neighborhoods and medium lot residential neighborhoods. 
Figure 3.2-D: R3 District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  R3 District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.2-D: R3 District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	10,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	60 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	80 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	20 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	10 feet 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	40 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	50 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
  
3.2.5 - R4 - Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The R4 district is intended to accommodate a variety of housing types on lots designed to encourage walking to neighborhood-serving retail and other amenities such as parks and school facilities. This zoning district will ensure existing neighborhood character is maintained while also serving as a transition area between established single-family neighborhoods and mixed-use neighborhoods, commercial areas, and key corridors. 
Figure 3.2-E: R4 District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  R4 District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.2-E: R4 District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	7,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	50 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	80 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	20 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	5 feet 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	40 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	50 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
  
3.2.6 - R6 - Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The R6 district is intended to accommodate a variety of housing types on lots designed to encourage walking to neighborhood-serving retail and other amenities such as parks and school facilities. This zoning district will ensure existing neighborhood character is maintained while also serving as a transition area between established single-family neighborhoods and mixed-use neighborhoods, commercial areas, and key corridors. 
Figure 3.2-F: R6 District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  R6 District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.2-F: R6 District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	6,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	50 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	80 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	10 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	5 feet 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	40 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	60 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
  
3.2.7 - R7 - Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The R7 district is intended to accommodate a variety of housing types on lots designed to encourage walking to neighborhood-serving retail and other amenities such as parks and school facilities. This zoning district will ensure existing neighborhood character is maintained while also contributing to a safe environment for pedestrians and bicyclists. This district can also serve to support compatibility between single-family neighborhoods and higher-intensity mixed-use or nonresidential. 
Figure 3.2-G: R7 District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  R7 District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.2-G: R7 District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	4,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	50 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	80 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	10 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	5 feet 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	40 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	65 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
  
3.2.8 - Summary Table of Residential Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.2-H: Residential Districts Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	RR 	R1 	R2 	R3 	R4 	R6 	R7 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (Minimum) 
Lot area 	5 acres 	32,000 sq. ft. 	16,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	7,000 sq. ft. 	6,000 sq. ft. 	4,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
Lot width 	100 feet 	80 feet 	80 feet 	60 feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 	
Lot depth 	200 feet 	100 feet 	100 feet 	80 feet 	80 feet 	80 feet 	80 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
Front yard 	50 feet 	20 feet 	20 feet 	20 feet 	20 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
Side yard 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	
Rear yard 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
Building height (maximum) 	65 feet 	40 feet 	40 feet 	40 feet 	40 feet 	40 feet 	40 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
Building coverage (maximum) 	15 percent 	30 percent 	40 percent 	50 percent 	50 percent 	60 percent 	65 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 	If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures. 
  
3.3 - Mixed-Use Districts 
 
3.3.1 - MN - Mixed-Use Neighborhood. 
A.  Purpose. The MN district is provided to support compatibility between higher-intensity mixed-use areas and adjacent residential and commercial areas. This district contributes to a vibrant environment for pedestrians and bicyclists and includes varying densities of residential, neighborhood-serving retail, restaurants, commercial, and office uses that are sensitive to the surrounding built and natural context in scale and form. 
Figure 3.3-A: MN District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  MN District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.3-A: MN District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	2,500 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	20 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	50 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	10 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	None [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	None [1] 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	65 feet [1] [2] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	80 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
[2] Buildings between 41 and 65 feet shall require a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
  
3.3.2 - MD - Mixed-Use Downtown Core. 
A.  Purpose. The MD district is provided to allow for a variety of uses contributing to the economic viability of Downtown Denton. This district allows for moderate- and high-density residential, commercial, office, entertainment, and other uses tailored to encourage a greater level of activity while protecting the scale and strengthening the character of Downtown and Denton's historic core. This district contributes to a vibrant environment for pedestrians, bicyclists, and other modes of travel. 
Figure 3.3-B: MD District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  MD District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.3-B: MD District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	None 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	None 	
C	Lot depth 	None 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	None 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	None [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	None [1] 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	100 feet [1] [2] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	100 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
[2] Additional height may be allowed with a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP), and a viewshed study, if such study clearly demonstrates that any views of the Historic Courthouse are not blocked by the new structure(s) additional height. 
  
3.3.3 - MR - Mixed-Use Regional. 
A.  Purpose. The MR district is intended to provide a walkable urban center to augment the regional draw and image of Denton. Development may include national retailers, employment, restaurants, entertainment venues, and housing at the highest levels of scale and density within the City. This district ensures that development will complement and embrace existing viable uses, and raise the standard of design to increase regional draw, accommodate greater connectivity and mobility options, and create a sense of place. The MR district may be established in areas with the greatest regional access and is sensitive to the adjacent built and natural context. 
Figure 3.3-C: MR District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  MR District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.3-C: MR District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	None 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	None 	
C	Lot depth 	None 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	None 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	None [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	None [1] 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	100 feet [1] [2] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	90 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
	Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 		If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
[2] Additional height may be allowed with a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
  
3.3.4 - Summary Table of Mixed-Use Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.3-D: Mixed-Use Districts Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	MN 	MD 	MR 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (Minimum) 
Lot area 	2,500 sq. ft. 	None 	None 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
Lot width 	20 feet 	None 	None 	
Lot depth 	50 feet 	None 	None 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
Front yard 	10 feet 	None 	None 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
Side yard 	None [1] 	None [1] 	None [1] 	
Rear yard 	None [1] 	None [1] 	None [1] 	
Other Standards 
Building height (maximum) 	65 feet [1] [2] 	100 feet [1] [3] 	100 feet [1] [4] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
Building coverage (maximum) 	80 percent 	100 percent 	90 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Single-family detached dwelling, townhome, or duplex 	If approved prior to October 1, 2019, see Section 1.5.2I: Applicability of this DDC to Existing Residential Uses and Structures 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
[2] Buildings between 41 and 65 feet shall require a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
[3] Additional height may be allowed with a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP), and a viewshed study, if such study clearly demonstrates that any views of the Historic Courthouse are not blocked by the new structure(s) additional height. 
[4] Additional height may be allowed with a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
  
3.4 - Corridor Districts 
 
3.4.1 - SC - Suburban Corridor. 
A.  Purpose. The SC district is intended to provide moderate- to high-intensity commercial, office, and retail uses along high-traffic corridors. The SC district provides elevated building and landscape design, buildings oriented to the street, and appropriate buffering from adjacent neighborhoods. While the SC district is primarily auto-oriented, it provides a safe environment for pedestrians and cyclists. 
Figure 3.4-A: SC District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  SC District Dimensional Standards 
Table 3.4-A: SC District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	10,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	None 	
C	Lot depth 	None 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	20 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	5 feet [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet [1] 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	55 feet [1] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	80 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
  
3.4.2 - HC - Highway Corridor. 
A.  Purpose. The HC district is intended to provide high-intensity commercial uses along the city's busiest and most visible thorough-fares. The HC district applies to areas along highly visible commercial corridors in the city where elevated design and aesthetic qualities are desired. While the HC district is primarily auto-oriented, it provides a safe environment for pedestrians and cyclists. 
Figure 3.4-B: HC District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  HC District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.4-B: HC District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	10,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	None 	
C	Lot depth 	None 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	20 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	10 feet [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	15 feet [1] 	
Other Standards 
GG	Building height (maximum) 	100 feet [1] [2] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	80 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
[2] Additional height may be allowed with a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
  
3.5 - Other Nonresidential Districts 
 
3.5.1 - GO - General Office. 
A.  Purpose. The GO district is intended to provide locations for a variety of workplaces and complementary uses. Principal uses include office and research and development and related supporting uses. The GO district provides area for flexible office space to encourage the establishment of research and development enterprises, start-ups, and opportunities for business innovation. This district applies to areas throughout the city that are in close proximity to commercial use areas and employment hubs. 
Figure 3.5-A: GO District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  GO District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.5-A: GO District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	2,500 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	50 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	50 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	None 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	None [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet [1] 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	100 feet [1] [2] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	80 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
[2] Additional height may be allowed with a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
  
3.5.2 - LI - Light Industrial. 
A.  Purpose. The LI district is intended to provide locations for a variety of light industrial and employment uses such as light manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, warehousing and distributing, indoor and outdoor storage, and a wide range of supporting commercial uses and activities. The LI district provides a variety of transportation options for access including transit, bicycle, and pedestrian facilities. The LI district provides appropriate transitions to surrounding uses and lower-intensity districts, and is sensitive to the adjacent built and natural context. 
Figure 3.5-B: LI District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  LI District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.5-B: LI District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	5,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	50 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	50 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	10 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	5 feet [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	None [1] 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	75 feet [1] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	85 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
  
3.5.3 - HI - Heavy Industrial. 
A.  Purpose. The HI district is intended to provide locations suitable for development and operation of indoor and outdoor industrial, distribution, and manufacturing uses. The HI district applies to areas primarily west of Highway I-35 W near the Denton Enterprise Airport that supports the most intense industrial uses and may require access to major rail, truck, or aircraft shipping facilities. The HI district applies to areas that can accommodate the intensity of uses while also being sensitive to the adjacent built and natural context. 
Figure 3.5-C: HI District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  HI District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.5-C: HI District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	20,000 sq. ft. 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	100 feet 	
C	Lot depth 	200 feet 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	10 feet 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	20 feet [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	20 feet [1] 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	75 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	85 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Notes: 
[1] When adjacent to a zoning district in the Residential category pursuant to Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations, the minimum setback shall be 200 feet. 
  
3.5.4 - PF - Public Facilities. 
A.  Purpose. The PF district is intended to provide adequate lands for public and quasi-public community uses and services, including but not limited to fire stations, schools, libraries, community centers, hospitals, civic buildings, open space, parks, utilities, and other public-related facilities. 
Figure 3.5-D: PF District Dimensional Standards
 
B.  PF District Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.5-D: PF District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (minimum) 
A	Lot area 	None 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
B	Lot width 	None 	
C	Lot depth 	None 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
D	Front yard 	None 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
E	Side yard 	5 feet [1] 	
F	Rear yard 	10 feet [1] 	
Other Standards 
G	Building height (maximum) 	100 feet [1] 	3.7.5: Building Height 
	Building coverage (maximum) 	90 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
  
3.5.5 - Summary Table of Other Nonresidential Dimensional Standards. 
Table 3.5-E: Other Nonresidential Districts Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional Standards 	SC 	HC 	GO 	LI 	HI 	PF 	Additional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (Minimum) 
Lot area 	10,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	2,500 sq. ft. 	5,000 sq. ft. 	20,000 sq. ft. 	None 	3.7.2A: Minimum Lot Dimensions 
Lot width 	None 	None 	50 feet 	50 feet 	100 feet 	None 	
Lot depth 	None 	None 	50 feet 	50 feet 	200 feet 	None 	
Setbacks (Minimum) 
Front yard 	10 feet 	20 feet 	None 	10 feet 	10 feet 	None 	3.7.3: Setbacks 
Side yard 	5 feet [1] 	10 feet [1] 	None [1] 	5 feet [1] 	20 feet [2] 	5 feet 	
Rear yard 	10 feet [1] 	15 feet [1] 	10 feet [1] 	None [1] 	20 feet [2] 	10 feet 	
Other Standards 
Building height (maximum) 	55 feet [1] 	100 feet [1] [3] 	100 feet [1] [3] 	75 feet [1] 	75 feet 	100 feet 	3.7.5: Building Height 
Building coverage (maximum) 	80 percent 	80 percent 	80 percent 	85 percent 	85 percent 	90 percent 	3.7.6: Building Coverage 
Notes: 
[1] Buildings adjacent to a Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
[2] When adjacent to a zoning district in the Residential category pursuant to Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations, the minimum setback shall be 200 feet. 
[3] Additional height may be allowed with a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
  
3.6 - PD - Planned Development District 
 
3.6.1 - Purpose. 
This district is intended to provide an alternative zoning district and development process to accommodate substantial development for residential, commercial, professional, recreational, industrial, or other activities, including combinations of uses appropriately requiring flexibility under controlled conditions, not otherwise attainable under conventional base zoning districts.  
3.6.2 - Review Procedure. 
Planned developments may be approved pursuant to the procedure and approval criteria in Subsection 2.7.3: Rezone to a Planned Development (PD) District.  
3.6.3 - Planned Development Standards. 
A.  Unless specifically modified by the PD Plan during the rezoning to PD procedure established in Subsection 2.7.3: Rezone to a Planned Development (PD) District, the PD shall comply with all standards in this DDC, as amended. 
B.  Where the PD standards conflict with the standards in this DDC, the regulations of the approved PD plan shall control.  
3.7 - Measurements and Exceptions 
 
3.7.1 - Purpose. 
This section is intended to provide uniform measures for interpretation and enforcement of this DDC and to list any exceptions to the dimensional standards in this DDC.  
3.7.2 - Lot and Site Requirements. 
A.  Minimum Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Any lot that is created, developed, used, or occupied must meet the minimum lot dimensions for the applicable zoning district, unless otherwise established in this DDC. 
2.  Each townhome lot shall have a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet per unit, minimum lot width of 20 feet, and a minimum lot depth of 60 feet. Provided, however, the overall townhome development shall have a minimum land area equal to or greater in size than the minimum lot area that would be required for the development of the equivalent number of single-family dwelling units in the applicable zoning district. 
3.  Land needed to comply with the minimum lot dimensions or other standards in this DDC must not be sold or leased away from such lot. 
4.  New lots must meet the lot dimensions in this subchapter and must comply with Subchapter 8: Subdivisions. 
B.  Number of Principal Buildings or Uses per Lot. 
1.  No lot may contain more dwellings than are permitted by the applicable zoning district. 
2.  Only one principal building shall be located on a single lot for the following land uses: single-family detached dwelling; duplex; townhome; triplex; and fourplex. 
3.  Multiple buildings may be permitted on a single lot for multi-family, mixed-use, and nonresidential uses if each building and site development complies with this DDC. 
C.  Alternate Standards in Cluster Subdivisions. Alternate lot size, lot width, and setback standards may be approved through development of a cluster subdivision pursuant to Subsection 8.3.4, Cluster Subdivisions.  
3.7.3 - Setbacks. 
A.  Measurement of Setbacks. Every part of a required yard must be unobstructed from ground level to the sky unless otherwise exempted in this DDC. Setbacks are measured as stated in Subchapter 9: Definitions, under the term "setback." 
B.  Contextual Setbacks in Residential Zoning Districts. If structures on two or more abutting lots (even if separated by an alley or private way) have yards that are less than the required yard for the district, the yard for the subject lot may be calculated as the mean average of the yards of the abutting structures. 
Figure 3.7-A: Contextual Setbacks
 
C.  Corner Lots. On corner lots, the required front yard setback must be observed along both streets upon which the building is located. For purposes of measuring setbacks, an alley is not considered a street. 
Figure 3.7-B: Corner Lot Setbacks
 
D.  Exceptions to Setbacks. 
1.  The features listed in Table 3.7-A are permitted to project into the required setbacks of the applicable zoning district. The exceptions apply to all zoning districts unless otherwise stated. Any authorized projections must comply with all applicable building and fire codes. 
2.  Projections shall not extend or encroach into a public or private easement or right-of-way, nor obscure a required visual clearance area as described in Subsection 3.7.4. 
Table 3.7-A: Authorized Exceptions to Setbacks 
Permitted Projections 	Maximum Encroachment 
Accessibility ramps, lifts and access facilities 	May be located within required yards. Ramps shall not be located in the public right-of-way without approval by the City. 
Front porches and stoops 	In all residential zoning districts, unenclosed front porches and stoops may extend into the required front setback up to eight feet, provided no part of the porch is closer than five feet from the front property line. Railings or other features shall not deem a porch or stoop as enclosed. 
Garages, side or rear entry 	Side-entry garages may extend into the front yard setback, provided the garage is a least 10 feet from the front property line. Rear-entry garages may extend into the rear yard setback, provided the garage is at least 5 feet from the rear property line. 
Ground-mounted mechanical equipment 	May encroach five feet into required side and rear yards provided no element is located closer than two feet from any property line and the equipment complies with screening standards in Subsection 7.7.8, Walls, Fences, and Screening. 
Incidental architectural features 	Cornices, canopies, sunshades, chimneys, flues, belt courses, headers, sills, pilasters, lintels, bay or box windows, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features may project up to two feet into any required setback provided the projections are at least five feet from the property line. 
Roof eaves 	May encroach 18 inches into a required yard. 
Swimming pools 	A swimming pool on a lot with a single-family dwelling may be constructed no closer than five feet from the side and rear lot line and the swimming pool shall not be placed in the front yard and shall not encroach into or over an easement. A swimming pool on a lot with a single-family dwelling may be constructed no closer than five (5) feet from any other buildings and structures on the same lot. 
Uncovered balconies and fire escapes 	May encroach 18 inches into required side yard; four feet into required front or rear yard and shall comply with the applicable building coverage maximum. 
Uncovered porches, slabs, patios, walks and steps 	May encroach into required yards, but not closer than three feet from a rear or side property line, provided all components of the encroachment are no greater than 30 inches above finished grade. 
 
3.  Attached single-family dwellings sharing a common wall are not required to comply with side setback requirements, except for the outside walls of the end units. 
Figure 3.7-C: Attached Single Family Dwelling Setbacks
  
3.7.4 - Vision Clearance Area Requirements. 
No signs, structures, or vegetation in excess of two and one-half feet in height shall be placed in the vision clearance area as established in the Transportation Criteria Manual.  
3.7.5 - Building Height. 
A.  Measurement. Heights referred to in this DDC shall be measured as stated in Section 9.2: Definitions, under the term "height, building or structure." 
B.  Buildings Adjacent to Residential Districts. Buildings adjacent to any Residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 7.10.6: Building Height in Transition Areas. 
C.  Exceptions to Height Standards. 
1.  In the HC and GO districts, additional building height may be allowed with approval of a specific use permit (SUP). 
2.  In the MD district, additional building and WECS height may be allowed with an SUP and a viewshed study, provided such study clearly demonstrates that any views of the Historic Courthouse are not blocked by the new structures' additional height. 
3.  Agricultural structures permitted by this DDC shall be permitted to project beyond the height requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
4.  The features listed in Table 3.7-B shall be permitted to project beyond maximum height requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
Table 3.7-B: Authorized Exceptions to Height Standards 
Permitted Exceptions 	Maximum Encroachment 
Agricultural structures (i.e., barns, sheds, silos, etc.) 	No maximum. 
Church spires, belfries, cupolas, or domes not intended for human habitation 	May be 25 percent greater than the maximum allowed height. 
Parapet walls 	May extend above the maximum allowed height for residential buildings containing two or more dwelling units and for mixed-use and other nonresidential buildings. 
Building-mounted telecommunications, stairwells, elevator shafts, and rooftop mechanical equipment 	Building-mounted telecommunications, stairwells, elevator shafts, and rooftop mechanical equipment may extend above the maximum allowed height provided the equipment complies with screening requirements in Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening. 
Water towers, chimneys, flag poles 	No maximum. 
Telecommunications facilities 	Refer to Section 5.6: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
WECS facilities 	May extend 10 feet above the maximum allowed height; refer to Subsection 5.3.7: Public and Semi-Public Utility Uses. 
 
D.  Special Height Limitations in Airport Controlled Area. Building and structure height may be further limited according to Section 4.5: MAO - Municipal Airport Overlay District.  
3.7.6 - Building Coverage. 
A.  Building coverage referred to in this DDC shall be measured as stated in Section 9.2: Definitions, under the term "building coverage." 
B.  Agricultural buildings shall not count toward building coverage. 
C.  The maximum building coverage may be increased up to 10 percent for residential uses that provide a side- or rear-entry garage. 
D.  The maximum building coverage for townhome lots shall be 85 percent.  
3.7.7 - Floor Area and Square Footage. 
A.  All areas within a structure including interior storage areas, closets, living areas, and bathrooms, garages, and interior and exterior walls shall be included in the calculation of floor area of a structure. 
B.  Gross square footage of a structure shall be measured from the outside of the exterior walls and shall include the area of the walls. 
C.  When there is more than one use within a structure, the square footage of each use shall be determined by the gross square footage of the use, plus a portion of any areas used in common. Such common areas shall be pro-rated on the basis of the square footage of each use in the structure, excluding the common areas.  
Subchapter 4 - Overlay and Historic Districts  
4.1 - Purpose 
This subchapter establishes procedures and standards to allow the creation of Overlay and Historic Districts in Denton to protect and enhance specific lands and structures which, by virtue of their type or location, have characteristics which are distinct from lands and structures outside such special districts. The districts shall contain such reasonable and necessary requirements to ensure the protection and enhancement of said lands and structures.  
4.2 - Applicability of Underlying Zoning Districts 
4.2.1 Land within an Overlay or Historic District shall remain part of the underlying zoning district designation established in Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts, and may, in addition, lie in one or more overlay districts in accordance with the designation of each. 
4.2.2 Whenever any provision of the underlying zoning district is in conflict with the Overlay and/or Historic Districts, the provisions of the Overlay and/or Historic Districts shall govern.  
4.3 - Conflicts with Other Ordinances 
4.3.1 To the extent the provisions of this section conflict with any other ordinances of the City of Denton, the provisions of this section shall govern. All other regulations and ordinances of the City of Denton not in conflict with this section shall remain in full force and effect. 
4.3.2 Where the regulations of this section modify any provision of any other applicable ordinance, the words used in this section shall have the meaning defined in the provisions of the ordinance modified, unless the definition is otherwise provided in this section.  
4.4 - Creation and Amendments 
 
4.4.1 - Overlay Districts. 
The creation and amendments to an Overlay District shall be made pursuant to Subsection 2.7.4: Zoning Text Amendment, and Subsection 2.7.2: Zoning Map Amendment.  
4.4.2 - General Standards. 
Every recommendation to create or amend any Overlay or Historic District shall address the following, as applicable: 
A.  Statement of Purpose. 
1.  A statement of purpose specifying the nature of the special and substantial public interest and public welfare involved; 
2.  Objectives to be promoted by creation of the Overlay or Historic District; and 
3.  Imposition of the regulations and design standards proposed. 
B.  Proposed Boundary. Proposed district boundaries, depicted on one or more maps, including the Official Zoning Map of City, which shall include all other zoning regulations applicable to the property(s) proposed for inclusion in the district. 
C.  Proposed Regulations. 
1.  Regulations and/or design standards proposed to promote the special purposes of the Overlay or Historic District. 
2.  Regulations or design standards shall be designed to reasonably promote the purposes of the district, and may require or address any of the following, in addition to or in lieu of other regulations affecting property within the Overlay or Historic District: 
a.  Protection of features designated as being of special concern within the district; 
b.  Levels of permission for land use types within the district; 
c.  Special performance standards, use-specific standards, and development regulations; 
d.  Other matters as appropriate to promote the special public interests of the district.  
4.5 - MAO - Municipal Airport Overlay District 
 
4.5.1 - Purpose. 
The Municipal Airport Overlay (MAO) district is intended to regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural growth and the use of property in the vicinity of the Denton Enterprise Airport to prevent the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation. Application of this district will help prevent the encroachment of noise sensitive or otherwise incompatible land uses which may endanger the health, safety, and welfare of the owners, occupants, or users of the land. This district is also intended to implement state and federal rules associated with land uses in the vicinity of airports. Such state and federal rules shall apply within the MAO district.  
4.5.2 - Municipal Airport Overlay District Established. 
A.  Generally. The MAO district is the area generally located outside the airport boundaries and within a rectangle bounded by lines located no farther than one and one-half statute miles from the centerline of an instrument or primary runway and no farther than five statute miles from each end of the paved surface of precision instrument runways. Where only a portion of a lot or parcel is within the boundaries explained above, the entire parcel shall be subject to the MAO regulations. 
B.  Subdistricts Established. The MAO district imposes two types of overlay zoning districts that combine with existing and future zoning district regulations: 
1.  Airport Height Hazard District (AHHD). The Airport Height Hazard District (AHHD), as established in Subsection 4.5.8, establishes height limitations on structures and natural objects within an area generally traversed by the flight tracks of aircraft using the Denton Enterprise Airport. 
2.  Airport Compatibility Land Use District (ACLUD). The Airport Compatibility Land Use District (ACLUD), as established in Subsection 4.5.9, establishes land use compatibility regulations that prohibit certain types of land uses and that impose performance standards on other land uses that potentially are subject to noise impacts from aircraft operation in the vicinity of the airport.  
4.5.3 - Applicability. 
A.  The requirements of this Section 4.5, shall apply to all lands lying within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) as well as to lands within city boundaries. For properties in the ETJ, the AHHD and the ACLUD regulations constitute zoning district regulations that shall be administered through this DDC. 
B.  Nothing contained in Subsection 4.5.4, shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any natural object in excess of any of the height limits established in Subsection 4.5.8C. 
C.  When a parcel of land lies within more than one airport zoning subdistrict, or only a portion of a parcel lies within an airport zoning district, the provisions of the most restrictive regulations shall apply to the use of land and structures for the entire parcel, except when: 
1.  It is determined by the Director that a structure is located within a single airport zoning subdistrict, then the provisions of that subdistrict shall apply to such structure; or 
2.  It is determined by the Director that a structure is located outside any airport zoning district, then the provisions of the standard zoning district in which the structure is located shall apply.  
4.5.4 - Conflicts with Other Provisions. 
A.  Where there exists a conflict between any standard, restriction, limitation, requirement, or regulation prescribed by this section and any other applicable regulation, the provisions of this section shall govern and prevail; provided that the more stringent limitation or requirement shall control in the event of a conflict, with respect to the height of a structure or object of natural growth. 
B.  In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this DDC and any provision of state law, state law requirements shall prevail. 
C.  Consistent with TLGC, § 241.012, it is the intent of this section that federal laws or rules controlling the use of land located adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of an airport, as they may be amended from time to time, that impose more stringent limitations than are imposed under provisions herein set forth, shall be applied to any application submitted under this section until such time as the city is able to conform its airport zoning regulations to such law or rules.  
4.5.5 - Exemptions. 
Unless otherwise provided in this DDC, the following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
A.  Areas in the Horizontal Zone and Conical Zone. Any natural object(s) or structure(s) less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such object(s) or structure(s) would extend above the height limits established in Subsection 4.5.8C. 
B.  Areas in the Approach Zone. Any natural object(s) or structure(s) less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground at a horizontal distance more than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, except when such object or structure would extend above the height limit established in Subsection 4.5.8C.  
4.5.6 - Nonconformities. 
A.  Generally. Whenever the Director determines that a nonconforming structure or natural object within the area subject to this section has been abandoned or more than 50 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or natural object to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations of this DDC. In all other cases, the continuation, repair, reconstruction, or remodeling of non-conforming uses or structures shall be governed by Section 1.5, Nonconformities; provided, however, the Director shall apply the standards in this section. 
B.  Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this section shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or natural object not conforming to the regulations of this section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, for which a complete application was accepted for filing prior to the effective date of this section, which is consistent with existing regulations and for which construction is diligently pursued. 
C.  Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding Subsection 4.5.6B, the owner of any nonconforming structure or area is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance hereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Director, in order to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).  
4.5.7 - General Prohibition on Airport Hazards. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no person shall use land or water within any zone established by this DDC in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft; make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lighting; result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport; impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; create bird strike hazards; or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.  
4.5.8 - AHHD - Airport Height Hazard District. 
A.  District Established. There is hereby established an Airport Height Hazard District (AHHD) within that area lying beneath the Approach Surfaces, Transitional Surfaces, Horizontal Surface and Conical Surface of the Denton Enterprise Airport. The AHHD consists of the following subdistricts, which are depicted in Figure 4.5-1: Airport Height Hazard District Map, and which constitutes the zoning map for the district. 
Figure 4.5-1: Airport Height Hazard District Map
 
 
B.  Subdistrict Descriptions. The AHHD consists of the following subdistricts that are described by reference to definitions, rules, restrictions, and regulations, as may be amended from time to time, by the FAA, as follows: 
1.  Approach Zones. Approach zones for runways 18L-36R and 18R-36L hereby are established beneath the approach surfaces at each runway end on the Denton Municipal Precision Instrument Airport for landings and takeoffs. The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of 1,000 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of 200 feet beyond each end of each runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet beyond each end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
2.  Transitional Zones. Transition zones hereby are established beneath the transition surface adjacent to runways 18L-36R and 18R-36L, and to each approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces symmetrically located on either side of runways, have variable widths as shown in Figure 4.5-1: Airport Height Hazard District Map. 
3.  Horizontal Zone. The horizontal zone hereby is established at the area beneath the horizontal surface of the airport. 
4.  Conical Zone. The conical zone hereby is established as the area beneath the conical surface of the airport. 
C.  Height Limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall erect, alter, or maintain a structure, and no person shall allow a tree or other natural object to grow in excess of the applicable height limitations established herein for each airport height hazard subdistrict as follows: 
1.  Approach Zones. For runways 18L-36R and 18R-36L: 
a.  Beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface, one foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance; and 
b.  Beginning at a point 10,000 feet from the end of the primary surface and extending an additional 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline, one foot in height for each 40 feet in horizontal distance. 
2.  Transitional Zones. 
a.  Beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation (660 feet above mean sea level), one foot in height for every seven feet in horizontal distance; 
b.  Beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surfaces, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface, one foot in height for every seven feet in horizontal distance; and 
c.  Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, and beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline, one foot in height for every seven feet in horizontal distance. 
3.  Horizontal Zone. Within the horizontal zone, 150 feet in height above the airport elevation, or a height of 810 feet above mean sea level. 
4.  Conical Zone. From the periphery of the horizontal zone and at heights between 150 and 350 feet above the airport elevation, one foot in height for every 20 feet in horizontal distance.  
4.5.9 - ACLUD - Airport Compatibility Land Use District. 
A.  District Established. There is hereby established an Airport Compatibility Land Use District (ACLUD), consisting of two subdistricts (ACLUD-1 and ACLUD-2), the boundaries of which are shown in Figure 4.5-2: Airport Compatibility Land Use District Map, and which constitutes the zoning map for the district. 
Figure 4.5-2: Airport Compatibility Land Use District Map
 
B.  Prohibited Uses. The following uses shall be prohibited within the ACLUD: 
1.  Educational Facilities. All educational uses, including but not limited to, business or trade schools, college or universities, public schools, and private schools are prohibited in the ACLUD; provided, however, that the following educational facilities are permitted within the district: 
a.  Schools for flight instruction or for vocations associated with the airport, airplanes, or aviation related activities; and 
b.  Facilities for employee or client training or instruction related to services or products associated with the business of the entity providing such training or instruction and which is not the primary business of such entity. 
2.  Healthcare Facilities. Healthcare facilities, including specifically hospital services, elderly housing, group homes, and group homes for the disabled are prohibited within the ACLUD. 
C.  Subdistrict ACLUD-1. The following regulations apply within the ACLUD-1 subdistrict: 
1.  Compatible Land Uses. All land uses allowed within the underlying zoning district or, within the ETJ, any land use not otherwise prohibited by this section shall be allowed within the ACLUD-1 subdistrict, except for new residential uses, which are expressly prohibited. 
2.  Noise Mitigation. Any residential structure that was established prior to the effective date of this DDC and that is permitted to be repaired, rebuilt, or remodeled in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.5, Nonconformities, shall be repaired, rebuilt, or remodeled in compliance with the noise mitigation standards established in Subsection 4.5.10, Noise Mitigation. 
D.  Subdistrict ACLUD-2. 
1.  Compatible Land Uses. All land uses allowed within the underlying zoning district or, within the ETJ, and any land use not otherwise prohibited by this section shall be allowed within the ACLUD-2 subdistrict. 
2.  Performance Standards for Residential Uses. Property owners that propose to construct a new residential building, or who propose to repair, rebuild, or remodel an existing residential structure within the boundaries of the district, shall do one of the following: 
a.  Noise Mitigation Standards. Construct, repair, rebuild, or remodel the residential structure in accordance with the noise mitigation standards in Subsection 4.5.10, Noise Mitigation; or 
b.  Avigation Easement. Execute an avigation easement, approved as to form by the City Attorney, conveying to the City of Denton an unobstructed right-of-way for the passage of all aircraft and rights to cause within such easement such noise, vibration, fumes, dust, fuel particles and all other effects that may be caused by the operating or aircraft landing at, taking off from, or operating at, the Denton Enterprise Airport.  
4.5.10 - Noise Mitigation. 
A.  Noise mitigation shall be required in accordance with FAA requirements. 
B.  The Building Official may approve alternative standards upon the submission of plans signed by a qualified acoustical engineer certifying that the alternative standard will reduce outside noise levels to the day-night average sound level (Ldn) of 45 decibels (dB) or less inside the building.  
4.6 - FSO - Fry Street Overlay District 
 
4.6.1 - Purpose. 
The Fry Street Overlay District (FSO) is intended to promote the public peace, safety, cleanliness, and general welfare for community members and patrons of the FSO district by regulating off-street and remote parking, the location of solid waste containers, and the regulation of signs, setbacks, and residential and commercial density.  
4.6.2 - Fry Street Overlay District Established. 
A.  Generally. The FSO district, as established in Figure 4.6-1: Fry Street Overlay District Area Boundary and Subareas, is the area approximately 12.42 acres in size which is bounded by Welch Street to the east, Oak Street to the north, Ave. B to the northwest, Ave. A to the southwest, Mulberry Street to the south, and Hickory to the southwest. 
B.  Subareas Established. The FSO district is further divided into subareas A and B, as depicted in Figure 4.6-1: Fry Street Overlay District Area Boundary and Subareas. Each subarea is subject to distinct regulations as provided in this section. 
Figure 4.6-1: Fry Street Overlay District Area Boundary and Subareas
  
4.6.3 - Applicability. 
The requirements of this section, shall apply to all buildings, structures, sites, and properties within the FSO district as described in Subsection 4.6.2.  
4.6.4 - FSO District Dimensional Standards. 
The dimensional standards established in Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts, shall apply to the FSO district, except as modified in Table 4.6-A below: 
Table 4.6-A: Fry Street Overlay District Dimensional Standards 
Dimensional
Standards	Subarea A 	Subarea B 
	Residential 	Mixed-Use 	Nonresidential 	
Lot Dimensions (Minimum) 
Lot area 	6,000 sq. ft. 	None 	None 	
Lot width 	60 feet 			
Lot depth 	100 feet 			
Setbacks (Minimum) 
Front yard 	30 feet [1] 	30 feet [1] 	30 feet [1] 	
Side yard 	None 	None 	None 	
Rear yard 	10 feet 	10 feet [2] 	None 	
Other Standards 
Building height (maximum) 	3 stories [3] 			4 stories [4] 
Building coverage (maximum) 	50 percent 	80 percent 	100 percent 	
Floor/Area Ratio 	3:1 	3:1 [5] 	2:1 	
Residential Densities [6] 	Efficiency: 43.6 du/acre 
1 bedroom: 36.3 du/acre 
2 bedroom: 29.0.du/acre 
3 bedroom: 24.2 du/acre 
4 bedroom: 20.7 du/acre 
5 bedroom: 18.2 du/acre 			72.5 du/acre 
Notes: 
[1] Measured from the centerline of street. 
[2] Applies to all floors that include residential dwellings. 
[3] Overall building height (including HVAC equipment, roof systems, vent stacks, chimneys, etc.) shall not exceed 45 feet in height. 
[4] Overall building height (including HVAC equipment, roof systems, vent stacks, chimneys, etc.) shall not exceed 55 feet. Parking structures shall not exceed five stories, or 60 feet in height (mechanical equipment, including HVAC equipment, roof systems, vent stacks, and satellite dishes, may be mounted on the top story of parking structures, provided they are not visible from any adjacent public right-of-way). 
[5] For mixed-uses that include residential on the top floor of any structure. 
[6] Densities shown are maximum allowable, after observing all other site development standards (i.e., floor area ratio, building coverage, parking, height, setbacks, etc.). 
  
4.6.5 - Permitted Uses. 
In addition to the uses listed in Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, for each base zoning district, multifamily dwelling uses shall be allowed within the FSO district.  
4.6.6 - Development Standards. 
A.  Off-Street Parking. The standards established in Section 7.9, Parking and Loading, shall apply to the FSO district, except as follows: 
1.  Shared and/or Off-Site Parking. Remote off-street parking to serve a building or use within the FSO district may be provided on a tract or parcel of land provided that the required off-street parking space shall be within 1,000 feet of the building or use being served and shall provide convenient pedestrian access to the building or use being served. 
2.  Minimum Parking Required for Nonresidential Uses. Nonresidential uses including, but not limited to restaurant, retail, private club, and on-premises sale of beer and/or wine shall provide a minimum of one parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area, or one space for each six seats under maximum seating arrangements, whichever is greater. 
3.  Additional Standards for Subarea A. The minimum number of parking stalls required for multifamily residential development in Subarea A shall be: 
a.  Efficiency units: One and one-fourth (1.25) spaces per dwelling unit. 
b.  Units with one bedroom: One and one-half (1.50) spaces per dwelling unit. 
c.  Units with two or more bedrooms: One space per bedroom. 
d.  Fraternities, sororities, boarding and lodging houses: One space per bedroom. 
B.  Solid Waste Containers. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  Location. Solid waste containers shall be located off the street in centralized locations, to the rear of buildings served by each container, and shall be screened with devices made of masonry or wood. 
b.  Consolidation. Each owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of any business, commercial, or institutional property, or other property not served by residential solid waste collection service, shall contract with the city for shared or consolidated commercial solid waste collection and disposal services, unless otherwise required by ordinance. 
2.  Additional Standards for Subarea B. Development in Subarea B shall provide adequate area to accommodate two trash compactors to serve the subarea, in a location specified by the approved site plan for the subarea.  
4.6.7 - Additional Development Standards for Subarea B. 
A.  Landscaping. Subarea B shall provide landscaping as depicted in in Figure 4.6-2. Copies can be found in the Development Services Department. 
Figure 4.6-2: Fry Street Overlay District Subarea B Landscaping Plan
 
B.  Site Design. Construction shall substantially conform to the site plan shown below in Figure 4.6-3. Copies can be found in the Development Services Department. 
Figure 4.6-3: Fry Street Overlay District Subarea B Site Plan
 
C.  Parking Structures. Parking Structures shall be provided with a facade designed to mimic the adjacent buildings within the subarea, so as to assist in integrating the structure into the balance of the subarea, and to assist in camouflaging the structure from the public right-of-way. 
D.  Building Design. The following requirements shall apply to Subarea B, in addition to any other requirements in this DDC or other city ordinances: 
1.  Residential units fronting Welch Street shall incorporate sloped roof pitches. 
2.  Each principal facade or massing area shall incorporate a minimum of two of the features identified in Figure 4.6-4: Subarea B Architectural Image Board, including but not limited to: 
a.  Store front design; 
b.  Awnings; 
c.  Stoops on the street level; 
d.  Accent bay windows; 
e.  Cornice details; 
f.  Brick facades with flat roof lines; 
g.  The incorporation of a bench and street tree in front of the building; 
h.  Arch details; and 
i.  Shutters. 
Figure 4.6-4: Subarea B Architectural Image Board
  
4.6.8 - Sign Regulations. 
The provisions of Subpart B, Chapter 33: Signs and Advertising Devices, of the City Code of Ordinances, as hereafter amended, superseded, or replaced, shall apply, except as modified for each subarea below: 
A.  Wall Signs. 
1.  Subarea A. 
a.  Mounting and Orientation. All signs in Subarea A shall be wall mounted signs, mounted parallel with, and not perpendicular to, the face of the wall upon which the sign is secured. 
b.  Mixed-Uses with Residential Component. Signs associated with mixed uses in subarea A shall be allowed only on those stories of a building that include non-residential uses. 
2.  Subarea B. Wall signs in Subarea B may be mounted perpendicular to building faces, provided they do not encroach into public rights-of-way. 
B.  Ground and Monument Signs. 
1.  Subarea A. Ground and monument signs are prohibited in Subarea A. 
2.  Subarea B. Ground and monument signs may be allowed in Subarea B subject to the following standards: 
a.  Size and Location. Monument signs, not exceeding 15 square feet of effective area, may be permitted at entrances to mixed-use developments, as depicted in the site plan for Subarea B. (See Figure 4.6-3.) 
b.  Design. Signs in Subarea B shall be in a style and size consistent with the conceptual designs provided in Figure 4.6-5. 
Figure 4.6-5: Subarea B Conceptual Sign Renderings
  
4.6.9 - Minor Amendments. 
A.  Upon request of the applicant, the Director may authorize minor amendments to the site or landscape plan so long as such minor amendments do not change the land use or substantially change the character, development standards, or design of the development as shown on the approved site or landscape plans. For purposes of this provision, a "substantial change" shall mean a change which will increase the number of proposed dwelling units or bedrooms, height, or number of stories; or decrease the amount of required off-street parking spaces. 
B.  The Director shall make such authorization only in writing and such document shall be placed in the ordinance file governing the specific plan.  
4.7 - ULD - Unicorn Lake Overlay District 
 
4.7.1 - Purpose. 
The Unicorn Lake Overlay District (ULD) is intended to stabilize and improve property values, ensure compatibility of new construction with the existing scale and characteristics of surrounding properties, and balance the economic development goals and the environmental goals of the city.  
4.7.2 - Unicorn Lake Overlay District Established. 
The ULD district, as established in Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts, is the area depicted in Figure 4.7-1 below: 
Figure 4.7-1: Unicorn Lake District Area Boundary
  
4.7.3 - Applicability. 
The standards in this Section 4.7 shall apply to all property within the ULD district boundaries, unless specifically modified herein.  
4.7.4 - ULD District Dimensional Standards. 
The dimensional standards established in Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts, shall apply to the ULD district, except as modified in Table 4.7-A: Unicorn Lake Overlay District Dimensional Standards, below: 
Table 4.7-A: Unicorn Lake Overlay District Dimensional Standards 
Lot Dimensions (Minimum) 
Lot area 	5,000 sq. ft. for single-family uses; 3,500 sq. ft. for other uses 
Lot width 	30 feet 
Lot depth 	80 feet 
Setbacks (Minimum) 
Front yard 	10 feet 
Side yard 	5 feet for single-family uses; 6 feet for other uses [1] 
Side yard, adjacent to street 	10 feet 
Rear yard 	10 feet 
Other Standards 
Density (maximum - for subdivisions of more than 2 acres) 	The greater of 12 dwelling units per acre or 112 single-family dwelling units 
Dwelling size (minimum) 	2,500 sq. ft. [2] 
Building height (maximum) 	40 feet 
Building coverage (maximum) 	None for single-family uses; 60 percent other uses 
Landscaped area (minimum) 	15 percent for single-family uses; 40 percent other uses 
Notes: 
[1] The minimum yard for a non-single-family use abutting a single-family use or district shall be 10 feet, plus one foot for each foot of building height above 20 feet. 
[2] Any square footage under the roof shall be included except for covered patios and porches. 
  
4.7.5 - Permitted Uses. 
The land uses allowed in the MN zoning district as provided in Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, are allowed in the ULD district, and are restricted to the areas shown in the attachments in Ord. No. 2006-0139 from which this section derives and the following standards: 
A.  A maximum of 112 single-family dwelling units, and any accessory uses to such dwelling units, including an amenity center; 
B.  Gas wells, including drilling operations and uses accessory to gas wells; and 
C.  Administrative, professional, or government offices not to exceed a total of 8,000 square feet, and any accessory uses to such offices.  
4.7.6 - Development Standards. 
Any applicable regulations for development of property in the underlying zoning district are applicable to the ULD district with the following exceptions: 
A.  Private Streets. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  Except as otherwise provided by this DDC, private streets and sidewalks shall be designed and constructed according to public street standards. 
b.  In the event any of the standards of this section fall below any applicable city standards, the minimum standards set by ASHTO shall apply. For purposes of applying ASHTO standards, Clubhouse Drive shall be considered an urban collector. 
c.  A private street system with gated access may be constructed to serve the property. 
d.  Clubhouse Drive shall be a public street. 
2.  Deed Restrictions Required. 
a.  Prior to the recordation of any final plat allowing the construction of a private street system, deed restrictions for the property shall be recorded in the deed records of Denton County containing provisions in substantially the same form as the attachments in Ord. No. 2006-0139 from which this section derives: 
i.  Article II (and related definitional provisions); 
ii.  Section 4.10; 
iii.  The provisions of Section 6.02 requiring that liability insurance be obtained in an amount approved by the City, and naming the City as an additional insured; 
iv.  The provisions of Section 10.03 precluding amendment (without City consent) of any of the provisions which specifically require City consent to an amendment; and 
v.  Section 10.12. 
3.  Design Standards. Notwithstanding any other regulation to the contrary in this DDC or city criteria manuals, the following requirements shall apply to private streets: 
a.  The maximum street grade for Clubhouse Drive shall be eight percent. 
b.  The maximum street grade within 60 feet of an intersection shall be eight percent. 
c.  No traffic calming features are required. 
d.  Cul-de-sacs may be a maximum of 300 feet in length. Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum radius of 50 feet. 
e.  Barrier free ramps shall be required at intersection curb returns. 
f.  All private streets shall have a total minimum right-of-way of 50 feet. 
4.  Access and Connectivity. Discontinuity with other existing or future neighborhoods is unavoidable due to adjacent conditions and constraints including: 
a.  An existing subdivision to the west of the property that does not have street stubs to connect to; 
b.  Flood plain and lake areas to the east of the property, which present a significant physical barrier; and 
c.  State school property to the south of the property that does not, and likely will never, provide street connection points to the property. 
5.  The proposed ingress and egress for the property consists of two streets directly connecting to a collector roadway (Clubhouse Drive) that provides adequate ingress and egress for a development of 106 single-family lots. When developed for single-family uses, the property shall contain fewer units than allowed under the prior zoning, thus mitigating any concern regarding the number of ingress and egress points associated with the property. If the property is developed with any uses other than detached single-family uses, the adequacy findings of paragraph 4.7.6A.4 shall not apply. 
B.  Utilities. 
1.  All water and sewer lines that serve the property shall be publicly owned and maintained and shall be designed and built according to city standards. 
2.  A public utility easement or other adequate water and sewer easement shall be dedicated to the City of Denton for all water and sewer lines. 
3.  Utilities may be located within a public utility easement or other adequate water and sewer easement dedicated to the City of Denton as shown on the attachments in Ordinance No. 2006-0139 from which this section derives. 
4.  The city is not responsible for repairing damage to private streets resulting from city repairs to utilities located underneath the street paving. However, if the city makes such repairs, the city shall first give the home owners association the option of paying to upgrade the repair work so that the streets are repaired to city standards. 
C.  Pedestrian Access. Development within the ULD district is exempt from the requirement to provide pedestrian access by linking to any adjacent sidewalk(s), multi-use path(s), or public transportation stops. 
D.  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Building Orientation. The alternatives authorized under paragraph 7.10.5A.3 shall not apply to the ULD district. 
E.  Single-Family Building Design. 
1.  Orientation. Primary entrances shall face the street and sidewalk. 
2.  Architectural Variety. 
a.  No elevation shall be repeated more frequently than every fifth lot on the same side of the street. 
b.  No elevation shall be repeated on the lot directly across the street or next door to the lot directly across the street. 
3.  Building Mass and Form. Buildings shall incorporate at least three of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the residence: 
a.  Dormers; 
b.  Gables; 
c.  Recessed entries, a minimum of three feet deep; 
d.  Covered front porches; 
e.  Cupolas; 
f.  Architectural pillars or posts; 
g.  Bay window, a minimum 24-inch projection; 
h.  Clay tile, slate, copper, or high definition composition roofing materials; 
i.  Fireplace chimneys matching exterior finish of home; 
j.  Windows and doors made of wood, metal clad or metal with bronze anodized finish; 
k.  Decorative wrought iron or wood railings as extensions of the architecture of the home; 
l.  Trim and accent colors that are dark, rich earth tones that come from stains and refined woods, medium browns, or medium to dark greens; 
m.  Four to twelve (4:12) to twelve to twelve (12:12) single pitch roofs or double pitch roofs up to twelve to twelve (12:12), with shed roofs used only as secondary elements; and/or 
n.  A minimum 10 foot first floor wall height and minimum nine foot second floor wall height. 
4.  Garage Design. 
a.  For front-entry garages, the total width of the garage door(s) shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the ground floor building frontage, unless the garage door is located at least 30 feet behind the front of the house. 
b.  Attached front-entry garages shall not extend beyond the front building wall, except side load or J-swing garages. 
5.  Building Transparency/Windows. Windows shall be provided with trim or shall be recessed. Windows shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. 
6.  Building Materials. 
a.  Exterior finishes shall consist of the following materials: 
i.  Stone; 
ii.  Brick; 
iii.  Plaster with stone; and/or 
iv.  Wood. 
b.  Siding and exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS) shall be prohibited. 
F.  Tree Preservation. Development within the ULD is exempt from the standards in Subsection 7.7.4: Tree Preservation. 
G.  Buffer Requirements. 
1.  A minimum buffer of 50 feet in width, in the location shown on the attachments in Ordinance No. 2006-0139 from which this section derives, must be provided. Alterations to the required buffer area are prohibited except as necessary to do the following: 
a.  Accommodate drainage flows from adjacent and upstream property and meet all applicable city drainage requirements; 
b.  Construct a fence or wall along the boundary of the property; 
c.  Install a retaining wall along the east line of the buffer, if necessary; and 
d.  Remove dangerous, diseased, or dead trees from the buffer. 
2.  The only machinery that may be used in the required buffer to do the work in 1. above is machinery that is reasonably necessary and appropriate to the scope of work being performed, as determined by the Director. 
H.  Clubhouse Drive. No additional lanes are required on Clubhouse Drive to serve single-family development, whether an additional lane is for the purpose of providing a turn lane or bus lane or for any other purpose.  
4.8 - RZR - Rayzor Ranch Overlay District 
Please see Appendix A: Rayzor Ranch Overlay District, for development regulations governing the Rayzor Ranch Overlay District.  
4.9 - Historic Landmark Preservation and Historic Districts 
 
4.9.1 - Purpose. 
The City Council hereby finds as a matter of public policy that the protection enhancement, preservation and use of historic landmarks is a public necessity and is required in the interest of culture, prosperity, education and general welfare in order to: 
A.  Protect, enhance, promote, and perpetuate historic landmarks which represent or reflect distinctive and important elements of the city's and state's architectural, archeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and political history and to develop appropriate settings for such places; 
B.  Safeguard the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic landmarks by appropriate regulations; 
C.  Stabilize and improve property values in such locations; 
D.  Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; 
E.  Protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and visitors and provide incidental support and stimulus to business and industry; 
F.  Strengthen the economy of the city; 
G.  Promote the use of historic landmarks for the culture, prosperity, education, and general welfare of the people of the city and visitors of the city.  
4.9.2 - Penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, structurally alter, remodel, renovate, restore, demolish, raze, or maintain any building, structure or land with a historic landmark designation or located in a historic or conservation district in violation of the provisions of this DDC, and the city in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful construction, restoration, demolition, razing, or maintenance to restrain, correct or abate such violation to prevent any illegal act, business or maintenance in and about such premises. 
B.  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.6, Enforcement.  
4.9.3 - Enforcement. 
A.  No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, remodel, renovate, restore, demolish, raze, or maintain any building, structure or land with a Historic Landmark designation or a building, structure or land located in a locally designated Historic or Conservation District unless application is made for a Certificate of Appropriateness (COA) for said work and such a certificate is granted as provided in Subsection 2.9.2, and appropriate construction or demolition permits are obtained. 
B.  The city in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful construction, restoration, demolition, razing or maintenance to restrain, correct or abate such violation to prevent any illegal act, business or maintenance in an about such premises. 
C.  Other regulations applicable to Historic Landmarks, Conservation Districts, and Historic Districts as contained in this DDC shall continue to apply, except as specifically modified in this section.  
4.9.4 - Oak-Hickory Historic District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure the protection and preservation of the Oak-Hickory Historic District by providing regulations for the use, construction, alteration, repair, improvement and alteration of buildings, structures, properties and sites within the district. All properties within the district must comply with the underlying zoning district and use classification regulations. 
B.  Boundaries. The Oak-Hickory Historic District is generally bounded by Hickory Street to south, N. Welch Street to the west, Pearl Street to the north, and Williams Street to the east as established by Ordinance No. 87-224. Major Public Streets in the District are West Oak, West Hickory, Mounts, Denton, Pearl and Fulton Streets. 
Figure 4.9-1: Approximate Boundaries of the Oak-Hickory Historic District
 
C.  Architectural Requirements. Architectural requirements in the Oak-Hickory Historic District shall be as follows: 
1.  Principal Structure. The principal structure must be compatible in scale with principal structures existing in the district. The combined square footage of all structures on a given lot may not exceed 50 percent building coverage. Compatibility or the appropriateness with respect to additions or alterations to an existing structure shall be determined by comparison with historical photographs or documentation whenever available. 
2.  Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings which are visible from any public street, as determined by the Historic Preservation Officer, must be compatible with the scale, shape, roof form, materials, detailing and color of the main building. The combined square footage of all structures on a given lot may not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of said lot. Compatibility and or the appropriateness with respect to additions or alterations to an existing structure shall be determined by comparison with historical photographs or documentation whenever available. 
3.  Architectural Detail. Materials, colors, structural, and decoration elements and the manner in which they are used, applied or joined together must be compatible with nearby and adjacent structures. 
4.  Destruction. If the exterior of historic structures are to be altered and if previous alterations have modified the original design, then the alteration process shall return the structure to a form based on historic documentation. In the case of destruction by natural forces, replacement structures and or repairs shall conform with the original form based on historical documentation, or if none exists, shall conform in scale and proportion to the remaining structure and or the scale and proportion of structures similarly designed. 
5.  New Construction and Additions. Generally, all buildings must be placed so as to not adversely affect the rhythm of spaces between buildings on the block. Additions and or replacement buildings shall have a front setback that is the average of the adjacent lots of contributing buildings. 
6.  Chimneys. All chimneys must be compatible with the style of the proposed building. Chimneys must be constructed of brick, stucco, stone, or other materials compatible in texture, color, and style with the proposed main building. 
7.  Additions. All additions to a building must be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical characteristics, scale, shape, roof form, materials, detailing, and color of the existing building. 
8.  Color. Structures in the Oak-Hickory Historic District may be painted any color from the following paint manufacturer's preservation color pallets: Sherwin Williams America's Heritage Historical Exterior Colors Pallet, Valspar Paint National Trust Historic Colors, Pittsburgh Paints Historic Collection, or similarly intended pallets. Any paint brand is allowed. Fluorescent and metallic colors are not permitted on the exterior of any structure in the district. The Historic Preservation Officer may administratively approve repainting of homes in this District. 
a.  Dominant and Trim Colors. All structures must have a dominant color which shall not be of vivid saturation. The colors of a structure must be complementary to each other and the overall character of the main building. 
b.  Gutters and Downspouts. Gutters and downspouts must be of a color that matches or complements the color scheme of the main building. 
c.  Roof Colors. Roof colors must complement the style and overall color scheme of the structure. 
d.  Masonry and Brick Surfaces. Masonry and brick surfaces not previously painted must not be painted unless it is determined that: 
i.  The painting is absolutely necessary to restore or preserve the masonry or brick; or 
ii.  The color and texture of replacement masonry or brick cannot be matched with that of the existing masonry or brick surface. 
e.  Stain. The use and color of stain must be typical of the style and period of the structure. 
9.  Façade Materials. 
a.  Generally. The permitted façade materials are brick, wood siding, wood, stone, and stucco. The use of cementitious siding is also permitted on new construction and accessory buildings. Artificial facsimiles of these materials will be considered on a case-by-case basis as material technologies progress. All façade treatments and materials must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
b.  Wood Façades. Existing wood façades must be preserved as wood façades. 
10.  Front Entrances and Porches. 
a.  Detailing. Railings, moldings, tile work, carvings, and other detailing and architectural decorations must be applied in a manner typical of the style and period of the main building. 
b.  Enclosures. A front entrance or porch may not be enclosed with any material, including iron bars, glass, or mesh screening. 
c.  Façade Openings. New porches must not obscure or conceal any façade openings in the main buildings. 
d.  Floor Coverings. Carpeting is not permitted as a porch floor or step covering. Doormats are exempt from this requirement. 
e.  Style. Each proposed main building must have a front porch or entry treatment with a shape, roof form, materials, and colors that are typical of the style of the proposed main building. A front entry or porch must reflect the dominant horizontal and vertical characteristics of the proposed main building. 
11.  Roof Forms. 
a.  Material and Colors. Roof material and colors must complement the style and overall color scheme of the structure. 
b.  Patterns. Roof patterns must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
c.  Slope and Pitch. The degree and direction of the roof slope and pitch must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
d.  Skylights and Solar Panels. The HLC may allow skylights and solar panels on a building if their placement does not have an adverse effect on the architecture of a building or the District as a whole. Skylights are permitted on the rear of accessory buildings only. 
12.  Windows and Doors. 
a.  Front Façade Openings. The location and size of windows and doors in proposed façades must be compatible in scale with the typical style and period of the main building. 
b.  Glass. Reflective, tinted, and mirrored glass and plastic are not permitted in any opening. 
c.  Screen, Storm Doors, and Storm Windows. Screens, storm doors, and storm windows may be permitted if: 
i.  Their frames are painted to match or complement the color scheme of the main building; and 
ii.  They do not obscure significant features of the windows and doors they cover. 
d.  Security and Ornamental Bars. Security and ornamental bars are only permitted on the exterior of an accessory building, the rear façade of the main building and the interior of the building. 
e.  Shutters. Shutters must be typical of the style of the proposed main building and appear to be installed in a manner to perform their intended functions. 
f.  Style. All windows and doors in the front façade of the main building must be proportionally balanced in a manner typical of the style and period of the building. 
g.  Size. The size and proportion of window and door openings located on the front and sides of the main building must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
h.  Frames. The frames of the windows must be trimmed in a manner typical of the style and period of the building. 
i.  Openings. All windows, doors, and lights in the front and side façades of the main building must be typical of the style and period of the building. Sidelights must be compatible with the door. 
13.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor light fixtures must be compatible with the style and period of the main building and not obscure or conflict with significant architectural details of the building. 
D.  Fences. Fences are not mandatory; however, when installed or replaced, they shall comply with Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening, and shall require an administratively approved COA. 
1.  Color and Style. Fences must be of a color, style, and material that is compatible to the main building. 
2.  Masonry Columns and Bases. The color, texture, pattern, and dimensions of masonry and the color, width, type, and elevation of mortar joints in a fence column or base must match the masonry and mortar joints of the main building. 
E.  Signs. All signs located within the Oak-Hickory Historic District shall be subject to the provisions of Subpart B, Chapter 33, of the Code of Ordinances, except as modified as follows: 
1.  Signs Prohibited. Ground, roof, projecting, portable, and off-premises signs are prohibited. 
2.  Wall Sign Regulations. 
a.  Only one wall sign per premises is permitted. 
b.  No wall sign shall have a maximum dimension that is greater than two feet, measured along the greater distance of any one line which defines the effective area of the sign. 
3.  Address or Name Signs. The sign regulations of this section shall not apply to the signs or numbers which are used solely to identify the street address of the premises or they identify by name the occupants of a residential building. 
4.  Approval Procedure for Signs. No signs shall be constructed or located, and no existing wall sign shall be altered, until a COA is issued in accordance with the procedure applicable to alterations or changes of the exterior architectural features of buildings, and a sign permit is obtained as required by Subpart B, Chapter 33, of the Code of Ordinances. 
F.  Parking. The provisions of this DDC applicable to parking shall apply to the Oak-Hickory District, except as modified as follows: 
1.  Location. All off-street parking spaces for any building used as a multifamily dwelling or for a nonresidential use shall be located between the building fronting the public street and the rear property line. 
2.  Number of Parking Spaces. Each specified use shall provide the following number of parking spaces: 
a.  Multifamily buildings shall have a minimum of two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
b.  Nonresidential uses shall provide one and one-half times the number of parking spaces required for that use as established in Section 7.9: Parking and Loading.  
4.9.5 - Bell Avenue Historic District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of establishing the Bell Avenue Historic District is to safeguard the heritage of the City of Denton by preserving the Bell Avenue area of the city. The area contains landmarks, buildings, and/or sites which reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural or archeological history. The Bell Avenue Historic is also intended to: ensure compatibility of new construction and structural alterations with the existing scale and characteristics of surrounding properties; foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; and identify and promote the use of historic resources for the education, pleasure, and welfare of citizens of the City of Denton. 
B.  Boundaries. The Bell Avenue Historic District includes all the properties that front Bell Avenue between East University Drive and East Sherman Drive, as established by Ordinance No. 2005-099. 
Figure 4.9-2: Approximate Boundaries of the Bell Avenue Historic District
 
C.  Architectural Regulations. Architectural requirements in the Bell Avenue Historic District shall be as follows: 
1.  Principal Structures. Principal structures must be compatible in scale with principal structures existing in the district. 
2.  Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings which are visible from any public street, other than an alley, as determined by the Historic Preservation Officer, must be compatible with the scale, shape, roof form, materials, detailing, and color of the main building. 
3.  Architectural Detail. Materials, colors, structural, and decoration elements and the manner in which they are used, applied, or joined together must be compatible with nearby and adjacent structures. 
4.  Additions. All additions to a building must be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical characteristics, scale, shape, roof form, materials, detailing and color of the existing building. 
5.  Color. Colors of all structures should be complementary to each other and the overall character of the main building. The Historic Preservation Officer may administratively approve re-painting of homes in this District. 
6.  Façade Materials. 
a.  The permitted façade materials are brick, wood siding, wood, stone, and stucco. The use of cementitious siding is also permitted on new construction and accessory buildings. Artificial facsimiles of these materials will be considered on a case-by-case basis as material technologies progress. All façade treatments and materials must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
b.  Retain significant character defining wooden or metal façade elements. Examples include cornice brackets, gingerbread, decorative trim elements, ornamental barge/fascia board, and soffit. 
7.  Historic Architectural Elements. Historic architectural elements of the façade are to be preserved if they are still historically accurate at the time of the creation of the District. Every effort should be made to repair damaged portions of original materials. 
8.  Roof Material and Colors. Roof materials and colors must complement the style and overall scheme of the structure. 
a.  Existing roofs that are visible from the public right-of-way should retain their profile as it relates to shape and slope. Appropriate roof treatments include dimensional shingles, real or synthetic slate shingles, or standing seam metal. 
b.  Historic systems that are integral to the roof, such as flashing, and leader/conductor boxes, built-in gutters, downspouts or snow guards, should be retained and maintained on a regular basis, as these types of systems often were crafted of heavy gauge, resilient materials such as copper or zinc, and generally outperform modern materials, as well as retain a patina and contribute to the appearance of the structure. 
c.  Buildings that incorporate a sloped roof, such as a gable and/or hipped roof, often feature decorative elements that should be retained, including but not limited to, roof cresting, ridge caps, and finials. 
9.  Fencing. A certificate of appropriateness is not required to install a fence in the Bell Avenue Historic District; however fencing shall comply with Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening. 
10.  Doors. Replacement doors should be sized to fit in the existing opening. The opening should not be altered so as to accept either a smaller door (e.g., filling in excess space with material such as lumber, bricks, or cement blocks) or to facilitate a larger door or doors (e.g., knocking out part of the surrounding wall and reframing the opening). 
11.  Windows. 
a.  Window openings should not be altered to accommodate replacement windows (e.g., "blocking down" or "blocking in" the opening). 
b.  Replacement windows should relate to and be appropriate for the age and architectural style of the structure. 
c.  In situations where original windows remain, every effort should be made to repair such windows, rather than replace them outright.  
4.9.6 - West Oak Area Historic District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the West Oak Area Historic District is to ensure the protection and preservation of the West Oak Area Historic District by providing regulations for the use, construction, alteration, repair, improvement, and alteration of buildings, structures, properties and sites within the District. 
B.  Boundaries. The West Oak Area Historic District is generally bounded by Oak Street to the south, Thomas Street to the west, Houston Place to the north, and Jagoe Street to the east, as established by Ordinance No. 2008-136. 
Figure 4.9-3: Approximate Boundaries of the West oak Area Historic District
 
C.  Architectural Requirements. Architectural requirements in the West Oak Area Historic District shall be as follows: 
1.  Principal Structure. Principal structures must be compatible in scale with the principal structures existing in the district. 
2.  Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings which are visible from any public street, other than an alley, as determined by the Historic Preservation Officer, must be compatible with the scale, shape, roof form, materials, detailing, and color of the main building. 
3.  Architectural Detail. Materials, colors, structural, and decoration elements and the manner in which they are used, applied, or joined together must be compatible with nearby and adjacent structures. 
4.  Awnings. Metal and corrugated plastic awnings are only permitted on an accessory building or the rear façade of a main building, if not visible from any public street, other than an alley, as determined by the Historic Preservation Officer. Other awnings must be typical of any proposed structure and the character of the main building. 
5.  Building Placement. All buildings must be placed so as to not adversely affect the rhythm of spaces between buildings on the block. The front setback for new construction shall be 30 feet. Additions and or replacement buildings shall have a front setback that is the average of the adjacent lots of contributing buildings. 
6.  Chimneys. All chimneys must be compatible with the style of the proposed building. Chimneys must be constructed of brick, stucco, stone, or other materials compatible in texture, color and style with the proposed main building. 
7.  Additions. All additions to a building must be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical characteristics, scale, shape, roof form, materials, detailing, and color of the existing building. 
8.  Color. 
a.  Roof Colors. Roof colors must complement the style and overall color scheme of the structure. 
b.  Masonry and Brick Surfaces. Masonry and brick surfaces not previously painted must not be painted unless it is determined that: 
i.  The painting is absolutely necessary to restore or preserve the masonry or brick; or 
ii.  The color and texture of replacement masonry or brick cannot be matched with that of the existing masonry or brick surface; or 
iii.  The structure is not a contributing structure to the District and/or the brick and style of the building are not complimentary to such a degree that together they define an architecturally significant whole. 
c.  Certificate of Appropriateness. A COA shall not be required for exterior painting of structures in the West Oak Historic District; however, it is suggested that structures in the West Oak Historic District be painted colors from the following paint manufacturer's preservation color pallets: Sherwin Williams Preservation Pallet (including America's Heritage Historical Exterior Colors and Suburban Modern Historical Exterior Colors); Valspar Paint National Trust Historic Colors; Pittsburgh Paints Historic Collection; or similarly appropriate products. 
9.  Façade Materials. 
a.  Generally. The permitted façade materials are brick, wood siding, wood, stone, and stucco. The use of cementitious siding is also permitted on new construction and accessory buildings. Artificial facsimiles of these materials will be considered on a case-by-case basis as material technologies progress. All façade treatments and materials must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
b.  Wood Façades. Existing wood façades must be preserved as wood façades. 
10.  Front Entrances and Porches. 
a.  Detailing. Railings, moldings, tile work, carvings, and other detailing and architectural decorations must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
b.  Enclosures. A front entrance or porch may not be enclosed with any material, including iron bars, glass, or mesh screening. 
c.  Façade Openings. Porches must not obscure or conceal any façade openings in the main buildings. 
d.  Floor Coverings. Carpeting is not permitted as a porch floor or step covering. 
e.  Style. Each proposed main building must have a front porch or entry treatment with a shape, roof form, materials, and colors that are typical of the style of the proposed main building. A front entry or porch must reflect the dominant horizontal and vertical characteristics of the proposed main building. 
11.  Roof Forms. 
a.  Material and Colors. Roof material and colors must complement the style and overall color scheme of the structure. 
b.  Patterns. Roof patterns must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
c.  Slope and Pitch. The degree and direction of the roof slope and pitch must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
d.  Skylights and Solar Panels. The Historic Landmark Commission may allow skylights and solar panels on a building if their placement does not have an adverse effect on the architecture of a building or the district as a whole. 
12.  Windows and Doors. 
a.  Front Façade Openings. The location and size of windows and doors in proposed façades must be compatible in scale with the typical style and period of the main building. 
b.  Glass. Reflective, tinted, and mirrored glass and plastic are not permitted in any opening. 
c.  Screen, Storm Doors and Storm Windows. Screens, storm doors, and storm windows may be permitted if: 
i.  Their frames are painted to match or complement the color scheme of the main building; and 
ii.  They do not obscure significant features of the windows and doors they cover. 
d.  Security and Ornamental Bars. Security and ornamental bars are only permitted on the exterior of an accessory building, the rear façade of the main building, and the interior of the building. 
e.  Shutters. Shutters must be typical of the style of the proposed main building and appear to be installed in a manner to perform their intended functions. 
f.  Style. All windows and doors in the front façade of the main building must be proportionally balanced in a manner typical of the style and period of the building. 
g.  Size. The size and proportion of window and door openings located on the front and sides of the main building must be typical of the style and period of the main building. 
h.  Frames. The frames of the windows must be trimmed in a manner typical of the style and period of the building. 
i.  Openings. All windows, doors, and lights in the front and side façades of the main building must be typical of the style and period of the building. Sidelights must be compatible with the door. 
13.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor light fixtures must be compatible with the style and period of the main building and not obscure or conflict with significant architectural details of the building. 
14.  Fencing. A certificate of appropriateness is not required to install a fence in the West Oak Historic District; however fencing shall comply with Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening. 
D.  Signs. A Special Sign District is hereby established, imposing additional regulations upon all signs located within the West Oak Area Historic District subject to the additional provisions of Subpart B, Chapter 33, of the Code of Ordinances, except as modified as follows: 
1.  Additional Wall and Stake Sign Regulations. 
a.  Number of Wall Signs. Only one wall sign per premises is permitted. 
b.  Size. No wall sign shall have a maximum dimension which is greater than two feet, measured along the greater distance of any one line which defines the effective area of the sign. 
2.  Address or Name Signs. The sign regulations of this section shall not apply to the signs or numbers which are used solely to identify the street address of the premises or they identity by name the occupants of a residential building. 
3.  Approval Procedure for Wall Signs. No new signs shall be constructed or located and no existing sign shall be altered until a sign permit is obtained pursuant to Subpart B, Chapter 33, of the Code of Ordinances, and a COA is issued in accordance with the procedure applicable to alterations or changes of the exterior architectural features of buildings, as provided for in this DDC. 
E.  Parking. The provisions of this DDC applicable to parking shall apply to the West Oak Area District, except for the following modifications: 
1.  Location. All off-street parking spaces for any building used as a multifamily dwelling or for a nonresidential use shall be located between the building fronting the public street and the rear property line. 
2.  Number of Parking Spaces. Each specified use shall provide the following number of parking spaces: 
a.  Multifamily buildings shall have a minimum of two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
b.  Nonresidential uses shall provide one and one-half times the number of parking spaces required for that use as established in Section 7.9, Parking and Loading.  
Subchapter 5 - Use Regulations  
5.1 - Purpose and Organization 
 
5.1.1 - Purpose. 
This subchapter identifies the land uses allowed in the Denton zoning districts and establishes the standards that apply to certain uses (use-specific standards).  
5.1.2 - Organization. 
This subchapter is organized as follows: 
A.  Section 5.2: Table of Allowed Uses, lists the uses allowed by zoning district and provides cross-references to applicable use-specific standards. 
B.  Section 5.3: Use-Specific Standards, establishes the unique standards applicable to certain land uses. 
C.  Section 5.4: Accessory Uses and Structures, establishes standards applicable to uses and structures that are accessory to the principal use of the property and/or structure. 
D.  Section 5.5: Temporary Uses and Structures, establishes standards applicable to non-permanent (temporary) structures and uses. 
E.  Section 5.6: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, establishes standards applicable to wireless telecommunications facilities.  
5.2 - Table of Allowed Uses 
Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, lists the uses allowed in the base zoning districts. All uses are defined in Subchapter 9: Definitions. Development or use of a property for any other use not specifically allowed in Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, or otherwise approved under the appropriate procedure is prohibited. 
 
5.2.1 - Explanation of Table Abbreviations. 
A.  Permitted By-Right Uses. A "P" in a cell indicates that the use is permitted by right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this DDC. 
B.  Specific Use Permit Required. An "S" in a cell indicates that the use is only permitted in the respective zoning district if approved as a specific use in accordance with the procedures in Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
C.  Prohibited Uses. A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited in the respective zoning district. 
D.  Use-Specific Standards. Regardless of whether or not a use is allowed by right or with approval of a specific use permit, additional standards may be applicable to that use. Use-specific standards are identified and cross-referenced in the last column of Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses. Uses marked with a "+" following the "P" or "S" in a zoning district indicates that use-specific standards apply to that use type in that zoning district. For example, "P + " indicates that a use is permitted by-right, but that additional standards apply in that zoning district.  
5.2.2 - Organization of Table. 
In Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, land uses are classified into general use categories and specific uses based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, and site conditions. This classification provides a systematic basis for assigning present and future land uses into appropriate zoning districts.  
5.2.3 - Table of Allowed Uses. 
Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses 
P = permitted S = specific use permit required Blank cell = use prohibited + = use-specific standards apply 
	Residential 	Mixed-Use 	Corridor 	Other Nonresidential 	Use-Specific Standards 
	RR 	R1 	R2 	R3 	R4 	R6 	R7 	MN 	MD 	MR 	SC 	HC 	GO 	LI 	HI 	PF 	
Residential Uses 
Household Living 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 									5.3.3A 
Townhome 					S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 							5.3.3B 
Duplex 					S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 							5.3.3C 
Triplex 						P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 							5.3.3C 
Fourplex 						P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 							5.3.3C 
Multifamily Dwelling 							S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 				5.3.3D 
Tiny Home Development 	Subject to approval of a planned development (PD); see 5.3.3E 
Work/Live Dwelling 	P+ 						P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	S+ 	S+ 				5.3.3F 
Manufactured Home Development (HUD Code) 						S+ 	S+ 										5.3.3G 
Group Living 
Chapter House 							S 	S 								P 	
Community Home 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 							5.3.3I 
Dormitory 							S 	S 	P 								
Elderly Housing 						S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P 	P 			P 				5.3.3H 
Group Home 	S+ 			S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 							5.3.3I 
Public, Institutional, Religious, and Civic Uses 
Community and Cultural Facilities 
Airport, City-Owned 																P 	
Cemetery, City-Owned 																P 	
Club or Lodge 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S+ 	P+ 	P 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.4A 
Community Service 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Day Care, Adult or Child 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P+ 			5.3.4B 
Funeral and Internment Facility 									S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Homeless Shelter 	S+ 						S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 						P+ 	5.3.4C 
Landfill, City-Owned 																P 	
Park, Playground, Open Space 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Religious Assembly 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.3.4D 
Educational Facilities 
Business or Trade School 								P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 		5.3.4E 
College or University 									P 	P 			P 				
School, Private 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	
School, Public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Healthcare Facilities 
Hospital Services 										P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 				5.3.4F 
Medical Clinic 								S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 			5.3.4G 
Medical Office 							P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 			5.3.4H 
Commercial Uses 
Agricultural and Animal Uses 
General Agriculture 	P 	S+ 												S+ 	P 		5.3.5A 
Commercial Stable 	P 	S+ 	S+ 														5.3.5B 
Community Garden 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	S 	
Kennel 	P+ 	S+ 	S+ 								P+ 	P+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.5C 
Urban Farm 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Veterinary Clinic 	P 	S 	S 					P 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			5.3.5D 
Recreation and Entertainment 
Amenity Center 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Indoor Recreation Facility 	P 							P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Outdoor Recreation Facility 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
RV Park 	S+ 		S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 							S+ 	P+ 		5.3.5E 
Food and Beverage Services 
Bar, Tavern, or Lounge 								S+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			5.3.5F 
Mobile Food Court 								S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 		5.3.5G 
Private Club 	P+ 							P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 			P+ 	P+ 		5.3.5H 
Restaurant 								P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			5.3.5I 
Restaurant, with Drive-Through 								S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 			5.3.5J 
Office, Business, and Professional Services 
Administrative, Professional, and Government Office 				S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	5.3.5K 
Bank or Financial Institution 							S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			5.3.5L 
Musician Studio 								P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.5M 
Credit Access Business 								S+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			5.3.5N 
Printing, Copying, and Publishing Establishment 								S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Personal Services 
Laundry Facility, Industrial 												S 	S 	P 	P 		
Laundry Facility, Self-Service 							S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		5.3.5O 
Personal Service, General 								P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Tattoo and Body Piercing Parlor 									P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 					5.3.5P 
Retail Sales 
Building Materials and Supply Store 											S 	P 		P 	P 		
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, Less than 5,000 Square Feet 							S+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	5.3.5Q 
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, Between 5,000 Square Feet and 15,000 Square Feet 								P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, More than 15,000 Square Feet 								S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.5R 
Smoke Shop 									P 	P 	P 	P 					
Lodging Facilities 
Bed and Breakfast 	P+ 				S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 						5.3.5S 
Boarding or Rooming House 								S 	P 	P 	P 						
Hotel 								P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Motel 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Short-Term Rental 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 									5.3.5T 
Vehicles and Equipment 
Auto Wash 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Automotive Fuel Sales 								S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.5U 
Automotive Repair Shop, Major 										P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.5V 
Automotive Repair Shop, Minor 								S+ 		P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.5W 
Automotive Sales or Leasing 												P 					
Automotive Wrecking Service, Impound Lot, Junkyard, and Salvage Yard 														S+ 	P+ 		5.3.5X 
Equipment Sales and Rental 												S+ 		S+ 	P+ 		5.3.5Y 
Parking Lot as a Principal Use 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Travel Plaza 												P 		P 	P 		
Adult Entertainment Establishments 
Sexually Oriented Business 															S+ 		5.3.5Z 
Industrial Uses 
Manufacturing and Processing 
Craft Alcohol 
Production 								S 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 		5.3.6A 
Feedlot, Slaughterhouse, or Packaging Plant 	S 														S 		
Food Processing, Less than 2,500 Square Feet 								P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.6B 
Food Processing, More than 2,500 Square Feet 								S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.6C 
Gas Well 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	Subchapter 6: Gas Wells 
Manufacturing, Artisan 								P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		5.3.6D 
Manufacturing, Low-Impact 									S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 		5.3.6E 
Manufacturing, Medium-Impact 													S 	S 	P 		
Manufacturing, High-Impact 															S 		
Commercial Incinerator, Transfer Station 															S 		
Storage and Warehousing 
Outdoor Storage 														S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	5.3.6F 
Self-Service Storage 								S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.3.6G 
Storage of Hazardous Materials 															S 		
Warehouse and Wholesale Facility 										S+ 	S+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 		5.3.6H 
Public and Semi-Public Utility Uses 
Basic Utilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Power Stations, Electric Substations, Interchanges, and Switch Stations 	P+ 							P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.3.7A 
Solar Collector as Principal Use 	S+ 												S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	5.3.7B 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) 															S+ 	S+ 	5.3.7C 
Wireless Telecommunications 	See Section 5.6: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
Accessory Uses 
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 									5.4.4A 
Donation Box 																	5.4.4B 
Home Occupation 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 						5.4.4C 
Outdoor Storage, Accessory 												P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.4.4D 
Sale of Produce and Plants Raised on Premises 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.4.4E 
Solar Collector, (Ground- or Building-Mounted) 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.4.4F 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS), Small (Ground-Mounted) 	P+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.4.4G 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS), Small (Building-Mounted) 	P+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	S+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	0 
Temporary Uses 
Temporary Storage Containers and Other Portable Storage Units 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.5.6A 
Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant, Temporary 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.5.6B 
Farmer's Market or Open Air Market 								P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.5.4 
Field or Construction Office 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.5.6C 
Seasonal Sales 								P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 		5.5.4 
Special Event 								P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.5.4 
Portable Wireless Telecommunications Facility 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.5.4 
 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0012a, § 2(Exh. A), 11-5-2019; Ord. No. DCA19-0023a, § 2(Exh. A), 1-7-2020; Ord. No. DCA19-0025a, § 2(Exh. A), 2-4-2020; Ord. No. DCA19-0027a, § 2(Exh. A), 2-4-2020)  
5.2.4 - Classification of New and Unlisted Uses. 
The following procedure shall apply if an application is submitted for a use category or use type that is not specifically listed in Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses. Submission and approval of such an application shall be required prior to approval of any other permit or development approval associated with the use. 
A.  Director Determination of Appropriate Use Category and Use Type. The Director shall determine the appropriate use category and use type for the proposed use. In such determination, the Director shall consider the potential impacts of the proposed use including the nature of the use and whether it includes dwellings, sales, processing, storage, operations, employment characteristics, nuisances, requirements for public utilities, and transportation requirements. 
B.  Establish Use-Specific Standards if Necessary. During the initial determination, the Director shall also determine whether or not additional use-specific standards are necessary to reduce potential impacts to the surrounding properties or the community. 
C.  Post-Determination Actions. 
1.  Appeals of administrative decisions shall be made pursuant to the procedures under Subsection 2.8.3: Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
2.  If the determination of an appropriate use category and use type results in a finding that the use, structure, or activity will be a common use or would create confusion by remaining unlisted, the Director may initiate an application for a DDC text amendment pursuant to Subsection 2.7.4: Zoning Text Amendment, to revise Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, accordingly. Until final action is taken on the DDC text amendment application, the use determination by the Director shall be binding.  
5.3 - Use-Specific Standards 
 
5.3.1 - Generally. 
A.  Applicability. Use-specific standards in this section shall apply to all zoning districts unless otherwise stated. 
B.  Cross-References in Table of Allowed Uses. All uses with use-specific standards as indicated in the right-hand column of Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, shall comply with the applicable standards in this section. All development shall also comply with the applicable standards in Subchapter 6: Development Standards, and other relevant provisions of this DDC. 
C.  Resolution of Conflicting Standards. In case of a conflict between these use-specific standards and the standards in Subchapter 6: Development Standards, or other relevant provisions in this DDC, these use-specific standards shall govern, unless otherwise stated. 
D.  Maximum Persons Occupying a Dwelling. No single dwelling unit shall have more than four unrelated persons residing therein, nor shall any "family" have, additionally, more than four unrelated persons residing with such family. Hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments, boarding houses, chapter house, and dormitories are exempt from this requirement. Additionally, any organization or institutional group that receives federal or state funding for the care of individuals is exempt from this requirement.  
5.3.2 - Performance Standards for All Uses. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  General. Unless exempted elsewhere in this DDC, the performance standards in this Subsection 5.3.2, shall apply to all uses in all zoning districts. 
2.  Gas Wells. The standards in this Subsection 5.3.2 shall not apply to gas wells and/or gas well drilling and production as authorized in Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. 
B.  Smoke and Particulate Matter. All operations and uses shall comply with federal, state, and county emissions standards. 
C.  Odorous Matter. No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter in violation of Subpart A, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17: Property Maintenance, Article II: Noise and Odors, Section 17-21: Odors. 
D.  Hazardous or Explosive Hazard Material. 
1.  A specific use permit shall be required for any use involving the storage, handling, or use of hazardous materials when the quantity is in excess of the exempt amount or maximum allowable per control area, as specified in the Building or Fire Code. 
2.  Notwithstanding the above regulations regarding hazardous materials storage, any substance designated as highly hazardous and requiring a state or federal permit shall only be permitted in the HI zoning district, and shall require specific use permit approval. 
E.  Toxic and Noxious Matter. No operation or use shall emit a concentration across any property line that will exceed 10 percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the State Department of Health in Threshold Limit Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3, a copy of which is hereby incorporated by reference and is on file in the office of the Building Official. 
F.  Vibration. No operation or use shall at any time create earth-borne vibration beyond any property line if the source operation exceeds the limits of displacement set forth in the following table: 
Table 5.3-C: Vibration Displacement Thresholds 
Frequent Cycles per Second 	Displacement in Inches 
	LI and HI Zoning Districts 	All Other Zoning Districts 
0 to 10 	0.002 	0.001 
10 to 20 	0.0016 	0.0008 
20 to 30 	0.001 	0.0005 
30 to 40 	0.0006 	0.0004 
 
G.  Noise. No operation shall emit noise beyond the thresholds established in Subpart A, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17: Property Maintenance, Article II: Noise and Odors, Section 17-20: Noise. 
H.  Glare. No use or operation shall be located or conducted in such a manner that produces intense glare or direct illumination across any property line, nor shall any light be of an intensity that creates a nuisance or detracts from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
I.  Evidence of Compliance. The Director shall require such evidence of ability to comply with appropriate performance standards and mitigation measures as deemed necessary prior to issuance of a building permit and certificate of occupancy.  
5.3.3 - Residential Uses. 
A.  Single-Family Detached Dwelling 
1.  Single-family detached structures shall comply with the design standards established in Section 7.10.3: Single-Family Detached, Duplex, Townhome, Triplex, and Fourplex Dwelling Site and Building Design. 
2.  A specific use permit is required prior to the placement of a manufactured home HUD-code on any lot. 
B.  Townhome. 
1.  Each individual dwelling unit shall have a separate entrance facing the street frontage to which the building address is assigned. Buildings on corner lots may have entrances facing either street frontage. 
2.  Each dwelling shall have direct access to a street or alley. 
3.  Townhome structures shall comply with the design standards established in Section 7.10.3: Single-Family Detached, Duplex, Townhome, Triplex, and Fourplex Dwelling Site and Building Design. 
4.  Each individual dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 900 square feet of living space floor area. 
C.  Duplex, Triplex, and Fourplex. 
1.  Each individual dwelling unit shall have a separate exterior entrance and separate utility meters. 
2.  Duplex, triplex, and fourplex structures shall comply with the design standards established in Section 7.10.3: Single-Family Detached, Duplex, Townhome, Triplex, and Fourplex Dwelling Site and Building Design. 
3.  Each individual duplex dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 900 square feet of living space floor area. 
4.  Each individual triplex or fourplex dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 600 square feet of living space floor area. 
D.  Multifamily Dwelling. 
1.  In the MN, MD, and MR zoning districts, the ground floor fronting a public street shall have a minimum wall height of 12 feet. 
2.  Multifamily buildings shall comply with the design standards established in Section 7.10.4: Multifamily Site and Building Design. 
3.  Each individual dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 400 square feet of living space floor area. 
E.  Tiny Home Development. Tiny home developments shall be developed as part of a Planned Development and meet the following standards: 
1.  Design and Layout. 
a.  The minimum project size for tiny home development is 10,000 square feet. 
b.  Tiny home developments shall have a minimum of four dwelling units. 
c.  Each individual dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 300 square feet of living space floor area and a maximum of 500 square feet of living space floor area. 
d.  Parking shall be located at the side or rear of each principal structure or in a separate designated shared parking area. 
e.  A shared open space containing a minimum of 10 percent of the project area shall be provided. 
f.  Each tiny home dwelling unit shall be separated by a minimum of ten feet. 
2.  Operation and Ownership. 
a.  Each tiny home dwelling unit shall be on a permanent foundation and shall be connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
b.  One accessory storage structure less than 100 square feet may be permitted for any unit that is part of a tiny home development approval. 
c.  One accessory storage structure less than 600 square feet may be permitted as a shared maintenance storage facility for the tiny home development. Said structure shall be enclosed on all sides and separated from other structures by a minimum of five feet. 
d.  Access drives within a tiny home dwelling development shall be constructed to city standards. 
e.  Tiny home projects shall be organized as condominium developments meeting all requirements of Texas state law. 
f.  Individual lots or portions of the site may not be subdivided for sale, except as allowed as part of a condominium development under Texas state law. 
g.  Applicants proposing tiny home dwellings shall enter into a development agreement with the city requiring the condominium or other property owner's association to maintain all streets, utilities, and infrastructure that is not dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
F.  Work/Live Dwelling. 
1.  Size and Location. 
a.  The residential component of a work/live dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent of the total gross floor area. 
b.  The residential component shall be located above or behind nonresidential portions of the structure. 
c.  The residential dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 400 square feet of living space floor area. 
2.  Ownership. The nonresidential use shall be owned and operated by a resident of the work/live dwelling. Individuals that do not reside at the work/live dwelling may be employed by the owner. 
G.  Manufactured Home Development (HUD Code). 
1.  Dimensional and Design Standards. 
a.  The minimum lot area required for a manufactured home development (HUD Code) shall be 10 acres. 
b.  Each stand shall provide a minimum area of 5,000 square feet; however, no such stand shall be less than 40 feet in width nor less than 100 feet in depth. 
c.  The minimum front yard setback shall be 15 feet from the nearest corner of the manufactured home to the front line of the stand. 
d.  No manufactured home shall be closer than 15 feet to any adjoining public right-of-way. 
e.  For other structures, the minimum front yard setback shall be at least 15 feet. 
f.  The minimum distance between manufactured homes shall be 20 feet on the side and 16 feet on the front and rear. 
g.  The area beneath the manufactured home structure shall be concrete to provide adequate support for the placement of the structure. 
h.  Manufactured home development (HUD code) shall comply with the perimeter fencing standards established in Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening. 
2.  Minimum Dwelling Size. Each individual dwelling shall have a minimum of 400 square feet of living space floor area. 
3.  Parking. 
a.  Parking shall be located at the side or rear of the principal structure. 
b.  Required off-street parking shall be concrete, and all other parking areas shall be constructed of all-weather materials and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other structures and for public parking within the development. 
c.  A minimum parking area of 160 square feet per manufactured home space shall be provided for the storage of boats or vehicles in excess of two per manufactured home unit to minimize on-street parking and to facilitate the movement of emergency vehicles into and through the development. 
4.  Recreation Area. 
a.  All manufactured home developments shall have at least one recreation area, located in an area that is free of traffic hazards, easily accessible to all residents of the development, and centrally located (where topography permits). 
b.  Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools and community buildings, shall be provided that will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele the development is designed to serve. 
c.  Not less than eight percent of the gross development area shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally in a central location. In large developments, this may be decentralized. Recreation areas include space for community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation and child play areas and swimming pools, but not including vehicle parking, commercial, maintenance and utilities areas. 
d.  When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares, and parking areas. 
5.  Accessory Uses. Manufactured home developments may include accessory service buildings associated with the development including: utilities; management office; repair shop; equipment storage; sanitary facilities; laundry facilities; and recreation facilities. 
6.  Access and Traffic Circulation. 
a.  Internal streets in manufactured home developments shall be privately owned, built, and maintained, and shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all stands and parking spaces and to facilities for common use of residents of the development. 
b.  An internal street or common access route shall be provided to each stand. All internal streets or common access routes shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width from back of curb to back of curb. The internal streets shall be continuous and connect with either outer streets in the development, public streets, or in the alternative, shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum radius of 40 feet. All other streets shall have a minimum radius at intersections of 30 feet. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed 1,000 feet in length. 
c.  All streets shall be constructed of at least two inches of asphalt, six inches of lime subgrade and with standard or surmountable curbs. Alternative materials for street construction may be approved by the City Engineer as long as the alternative exceeds the standards in this section or those established in a city criteria manual. 
d.  Internal streets shall be maintained free of excessive cracks, potholes, and other hazards at the expense of the licensee. Inspection of the streets shall occur at least yearly in conjunction with other city inspections of the manufactured home development. The inspections shall be made by the City Engineer and shall cover the hazards listed in this subsection. 
e.  All streets within the development shall be numbered or named in an approved manner. 
f.  Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at 90 degrees and at locations that will eliminate or minimize interference with the traffic on those public streets. Design of the interior streets shall be approved by the traffic engineer with respect to horizontal and vertical alignment, access points to city streets, parking locations, and internal access for emergency vehicles. 
7.  Utilities and Services. 
a.  All utility lines shall be installed underground in manufactured home developments. 
b.  Water and sewer connections shall be made to the public supply of water in accordance with city standards. 
c.  All water piping, fixtures, and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and city regulations and requirements. 
d.  Individual water meters shall be provided for each manufactured home dwelling. 
e.  All manufactured home developments shall comply with the city's residential solid waste regulations. 
H.  Elderly Housing. 
1.  In the R6, R7, and MN zoning districts, elderly housing shall be limited to a maximum of 55,000 square feet per lot. 
2.  Assisted living facilities may be subject to additional standards in Subsection 5.3.3I. 
I.  Group Home and Community Home. 
1.  Purpose. The city supports the rights of handicapped persons to live in stable, affordable housing in settings that maximize community integration and opportunities for acceptance. The city desires to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, and practices to afford handicapped persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The city supports decentralization as a method of assuring that handicapped persons are allowed to reside in a neighborhood, which retains its residential character. Unregulated and unlicensed homes for handicapped persons may not necessarily provide adequately for the health and safety of the residents. The city desires to protect the health and safety of its handicapped citizens and to provide a regulatory scheme for group homes for the handicapped. 
2.  Use and Operation. The use and operation of a Community Home for Disabled Persons that meets the qualifications of this subchapter is a use by right and is authorized in any residential zoning district as long as there is no more than six residents and two supervisors, regardless of the legal relationship of those persons to one another and the community home is not within one-half mile of an existing community home. The residents of the community home may not keep, either on the premises of the home or on a public right-of-way adjacent to the home, motor vehicles in numbers that exceed the numbers of bedrooms in the home. 
3.  Qualification. To qualify as a Community Home for Disabled Persons the entity must comply with Chapter 123, of the Texas Human Resources Code and the following regulations: 
a.  Operation. A community based residential home may be operated by: 
i.  The Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation; 
ii.  A community center organized under Chapter A, Subchapter 534, of the Texas Health & Safety Code; 
iii.  An entity subject to the Texas Non-Profit Corporation Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann art. 1396-1.01, et seq. (Vernon 1997), as amended; 
iv.  An entity certified by the Texas Department of Human Services as a provider under the medical assistance program serving persons in intermediate care facilities for persons with mental retardation; or 
v.  An assisted living facility licensed under Chapter 247, of the Texas Health & Safety Code, provided that the exterior structure retains compatibility with the surrounding residential dwellings. 
b.  Licensing. The community home must meet all applicable federal, state, and local licensing requirements. 
c.  Site Plan Required. The community home must provide a site plan that clearly shows compliance with the following criteria: 
i.  Any single-family dwelling unit proposed to be used as shared group housing for the handicapped shall provide the following: 
a.  To house one handicapped person per bedroom, the dwelling unit shall provide 100 square feet of space per bedroom. 
b.  To house two handicapped persons per bedroom, the dwelling unit shall provide 120 square feet of space per bedroom. 
ii.  Any single-family dwelling unit proposed to be used as shared group housing for handicapped persons shall provide for a separate bedroom for the care provider(s). 
4.  Specific Use Permit Required. 
a.  Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, construct, alter, extend, or expand any assisted living facility, group home for handicapped persons, or institution within the limits of the city without a valid permit issued by the city in the name of such person for the specific occupation, construction, alteration, or extension of the assisted living facility, group home, or institution proposed. 
i.  Transfer. The permit shall be specific to the person named in the application for the permit and shall not be transferred without the prior written consent of the city through the issuance of a new permit. 
ii.  Expiration of Permit. If the proposed occupation, construction, alteration, or extension is not commenced within one calendar year from the date the permit for such occupation, construction, alteration, or expansion was issued, said permit shall automatically expire, unless the city approves an extension of time or issues a new permit. 
b.  Application and Fee Requirements. All applications and required fees for assisted living facilities, group home, or institution permits shall be made in accordance with the Application Criteria Manual and shall contain the following: 
i.  Name and address of the applicant; 
ii.  Location and legal description of the property where the assisted living facility or group home will be located; and 
iii.  Documentation that the assisted living facility, group home for handicapped persons, or institution has met federal, state, and local licensing requirements. 
c.  Site Plan Requirements. Any structure proposed to be used for shared group housing for the handicapped shall provide the square footage in each bedroom: 
i.  To house one handicapped person per bedroom, the dwelling unit shall provide 100 square feet of space per bedroom. 
ii.  To house two handicapped persons per bedroom, the dwelling unit shall provide 120 square feet of space per bedroom. 
iii.  Any structure proposed to be used for an assisted living facility, group housing for handicapped persons, or institution shall provide for a separate bedroom for the care provider(s). 
d.  Issuance of Permit. In considering the application, the city may take into account the proposed location of the assisted living facility, group home for handicapped persons, or institution in relation to the present and anticipated land use and development. After review of the application and, upon determining that the application and the proposed, assisted living facility, group home for handicapped persons, or institution complies with this subchapter and other applicable laws, codes, and regulations, the permit shall be issued. 
e.  Denial of Permit/Hearing. Any person whose application for a permit under this subchapter has been denied, may, within 10 days of the denial, request, in writing, a rehearing on the matter and offer additional evidence if desired. A denial of a request for rehearing, or a denial upon rehearing, shall be final and binding. No new application for a permit shall be accepted within one year of the denial, unless the denial upon rehearing, or the denial for rehearing, is without prejudice to the refilling of same. 
f.  Permit Exemption. The permit requirement is for the use and occupancy of assisted living facilities, group homes, or institutions and does not include community homes for disabled persons. 
5.  Licenses. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or maintain, or permit to be established, operated, or maintained, upon any property owned or controlled by such person any assisted living facility, group home for handicapped persons, or institution within the limits of the city unless such person holds a valid license issued in accordance with the Administrative Criteria Manual. 
6.  Location of Assisted Living Facility, Group Home for Handicapped Persons, or Institution. No other assisted living facility, group home for handicapped persons, or institution shall be located within a radius of 600 feet of another licensed facility, home, or institution as determined by the city. 
7.  Inspections. 
a.  Compliance Inspection. Any duly authorized inspector of the city, including, but not limited to the Building Official, Health Official, Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Police Chief, or Tax Assessor-Collector shall be permitted to make reasonable inspections of any assisted living facility, group home, or institution to determine compliance with this DDC and other applicable city ordinances. 
b.  Right of Entry. Any duly authorized inspector of the city, as set forth in subsection, a shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this subchapter. The inspector should seek the permission of a lawful adult occupant prior to entry. Upon refusal of entry, the city shall have all available remedies at law to gain entry, including but not limited to a court order showing probable violation of state or local law. 
8.  Notices, Hearings, and Orders. 
a.  Notice of Violations; Requirements of Notice; Suspension and/or Revocation. Whenever it is brought to the attention of the city that there has been a violation of any provision of this subchapter, the city shall give notice of such alleged violation to the permittee or licensee, or their respective agent, and each resident of the facility as provided. The notice shall: 
i.  Be in writing; 
ii.  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
iii.  Allow a reasonable time of not less than 30 days nor more than one year, based upon the nature and severity of the violation and having due regard for the safety and protection of the community, for the performance of the corrective measures required; 
iv.  Be served upon the permittee or licensee, or the permittee or licensee's agent; provided, however, that the notice shall be deemed to have been properly served upon the permittee, licensee, or their respective agents, when a copy has been sent by mail to the permittee's, licensee's, or their respective agent's, last known address, or when the permittee or licensee, or respective agent, has been served with the notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and 
v.  Contain an outline of remedial action, when, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. If the violation is not remedied in accordance with the notice, and a breach of the subchapter continues, then the city, may suspend and/or revoke any permits or licenses issued in addition to any punishment provided. Residents of the facility shall be notified by mail of any notice of violations or orders by regular mail and/or posting of the notice in common areas of the facility. 
b.  Vacation of Residents/Cessation of Operations. The notice shall also specify vacation by the residents for the period of suspension or as ordered by the city upon revocation. The city may order the immediate vacation and cessation of operations if the same is found to be in the best interest of the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
9.  Compliance Required. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee or licensee to ensure that all requirements of this subchapter are met and maintained. Any violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter shall subject the permittee or licensee to the general penalty provisions of this DDC.  
5.3.4 - Public, Institutional, Religious, and Civic Uses. 
A.  Club or Lodge. 
1.  Operation. Club or lodge facilities shall be owned or operated by a non-profit or social welfare organization that is tax-exempt as described in the Internal Revenue Code (IRC), Section 501(c)(4). Such facilities shall be for special educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
2.  R7 and MN Zoning District. 
a.  Uses are limited to no more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. A specific use permit is required for additional square footage for a club or lodge. 
b.  Drive-through service is prohibited. 
c.  Within a club or lodge, restaurant areas shall not exceed 5,000 square feet per lot. 
3.  MR Zoning District. 
a.  Uses are limited to no more than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. 
b.  Drive-through service is prohibited. 
c.  Within a club or lodge, restaurant areas shall not exceed 5,000 square feet per lot. 
4.  LI and HI Zoning Districts. Uses are limited to no more than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. 
B.  Day Care, Adult or Child. In the LI zoning district, day care is only allowed as an accessory use to the primary business within the same structure. Such accessory use shall be limited to serving only those employees or owners of the business or businesses within the same structure. 
C.  Homeless Shelter. 
1.  Separation. Unless municipal consent is granted under paragraph (3) below, a person may not construct or operate a homeless shelter within 1,000 feet of another homeless shelter or a public or private school. For purposes of this standard, distance is measured along the shortest straight line between the nearest property line of the homeless shelter and the nearest property line of another homeless shelter or a primary or secondary school, as appropriate. 
2.  Notice. 
a.  A person who intends to construct or operate a homeless shelter shall: 
i.  Post notice of the proposed location of the shelter at that location; and 
ii.  Provide notice of the proposed location of the shelter to the governing body of the municipality within the boundaries of which the shelter is proposed to be located. 
b.  The person shall post and provide the notice required by paragraph (a) above before the 61st day before the date the person begins construction or operation of the homeless shelter, whichever date is earlier. 
3.  Municipal Consent. 
a.  Municipal consent to the construction or operation of a homeless shelter subject to paragraph (1) above is considered granted unless, before the 61st day after the date notice is received by the city under paragraph C.2., the city determines by resolution after a public hearing that the construction or operation of a shelter at the proposed location is not in the best interest of the city. 
b.  The City Council may rescind a resolution adopted under paragraph (a) above. 
D.  Religious Assembly. A religious assembly use may include accessory or subordinate uses and structures associated with its religious mission, such as: rectories, convents, meeting halls, offices for administration of the institution, schools, educational facilities, dormitories for students, parsonages, dwelling units for religious organization personnel, recreational facilities, day care facilities, arenas or production studios, or any combination of such optional uses, provided that: 
1.  Any accessory or subordinate uses are secondary to an active primary religious assembly use located on the same premises, regardless of whether such uses are owned, operated, managed, supported, or endorsed by, or otherwise affiliated with, any religious organization, mission or belief, and regardless of whether any religious message, teachings, customs, celebrations, ceremonies, rituals, rites, worship, or content are provided in conjunction with such uses; and 
2.  Any uses having a residential component, such as rectories, convents, parsonages, dormitories and dwelling units, shall be located within an accessory structure, secondary to the main religious assembly use. The principal structure may not be used for any such residential use. 
E.  Business or Trade School. 
1.  MN and MD Zoning Districts. Uses are limited to no more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. 
2.  MR and SC Zoning Districts. Uses are limited to no more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. 
F.  Hospital Services. In the MR and SC zoning districts, main entries and ambulance loading zones shall not face residential zoning categories. 
G.  Medical Clinic. In the MN, MD, and SC zoning districts, uses are limited to no more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. 
In the MN, MD, MR, and SC zoning districts, main entrances and ambulance loading zones shall not face residential zoning categories. 
H.  Medical Office. 
1.  R7 Zoning District. Uses greater than 10,000 square feet requires a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
2.  MN Zoning District. Uses are limited to no more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. 
3.  MD and SC Zoning Districts. Medical Office uses with more than 25,000 square feet per lot shall require a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0012a, § 2(Exh. A), 11-5-2019; Ord. No. DCA19-0023a, § 2(Exh. A), 1-7-2020; Ord. No. DCA19-0023b, § 2, 1-14-2020)  
5.3.5 - Commercial Uses. 
A.  General Agriculture. The keeping of livestock and other animals shall be subject to the standards in Subpart A, Chapter 6: Animals, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Commercial Stable. In the R1 and R2 zoning districts, livestock are limited to two animals on parcels one to three acres in size. Additional animals may be added at a rate of one per each acre over three. 
C.  Kennel. 
1.  Enclosed Building Requirement. The parts of a building where animals are boarded shall be fully enclosed, with solid core doors and no operable windows, and shall be sufficiently insulated so no unreasonable noise or odor can be detected off premises. 
2.  Kennels with Outdoor Facilities. Outdoor facilities, including outdoor runs, shall not be located within 150 feet of any adjacent property unless such adjacent property is owned by the operator of the kennel. 
D.  Veterinary Clinic. In the MD zoning district, veterinary clinics are limited to no more than 5,000 square feet per lot. 
E.  RV Parks. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  Occupation by a single user shall not exceed a period of six months. 
b.  The principal business of a RV park shall be to provide sites for RVs, camper vehicles, and travel trailers. Mobile homes designed to meet residential building codes are prohibited. 
c.  Plumbed sanitary facilities shall include a minimum of one men's and one women's toilet, lavatory, and shower for each 25 RV spaces that provide water and sewer hookups, and one men's and one women's toilet, lavatory, and shower for each 15 RV spaces that that do not provide water and sewer hookups. 
d.  One sanitary dump station with water facilities shall be provided for every RV park. 
2.  Site Design Standards. 
a.  RV parks shall have a minimum land area of one-half acres. 
b.  The maximum density for an RV park is 25 recreational vehicle stalls per one acre of gross land area. 
c.  Recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and from all other structures by a minimum of 10 feet. For the purposes of such measurement, any accessory to a recreational vehicle, such as an awning or individual storage facility, shall be considered as part of the recreational vehicle. 
d.  No recreational vehicle shall be closer than 20 feet to the property line adjoining a public right-of-way nor closer than 15 feet to any residential zoning district as established in Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations. 
3.  Access and Circulation. 
a.  Entrances and exits may not be accessed through a residential zoning district as established in Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations, nor require traffic movement to or from the RV park through a residential zoning district. 
b.  Access to a lot may be provided via a public access easement. There shall be no minimum required street frontage. 
c.  Two-way and one-way traffic drive-aisle widths shall conform to the dimensional standards in this DDC and the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
4.  Parking. Each RV space shall include parking for a recreational vehicle. Additional off-street parking shall be provided at community sanitary facilities. 
5.  Accessory Uses. RV parks may include the following accessory uses: service buildings associated with the campground or RV park including utilities, management office, repair shop, equipment storage, sanitary facilities, and laundry facilities; recreation facilities; equipment rentals; concessions; camping supply sales; and up to two residential dwelling units or permanent recreational vehicles for the purpose of housing a resident manager and caretaker. 
F.  Bar, Tavern, or Lounge. 
1.  The storage of raw and/or spent materials associated with crafting of alcoholic beverages shall be kept in a fully enclosed structure, building, or container. 
2.  The distribution of manufactured or alcoholic beverage products is prohibited. 
G.  Mobile Food Court. 
1.  Operation. 
a.  Participating mobile food businesses or other authorized vendors shall obtain a business license and any other permits or approvals as required by the Municipal Code of Ordinances prior to operation at a mobile food court. 
b.  All activities associated with a mobile food court must comply with all health department requirements. 
c.  All proposed activities shall be conducted on private property owned or otherwise controlled by the applicant. 
d.  The proposed mobile food court shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the public way. 
e.  Live music shall conform to established noise standards in the City of Denton. 
2.  Design. 
a.  A minimum lot or parcel area of 2,000 square feet is required to operate a mobile food court. 
b.  All dimensional and development standards of the underlying zoning district shall be met prior to approval of a mobile food court. 
c.  Hard surface paving at the vehicular entrance to the mobile food court, and for each individual mobile food business is required. Alternatives to asphalt and cement may be approved as part of the specific use permitting process. 
d.  The mobile food court shall not occupy required parking stalls of any principal use of the site. 
H.  Private Club. 
1.  RR, MN, and MD Zoning Districts. 
a.  Private clubs shall be limited to sit down only, no more than 100 seats, and no more than 4,000 square feet of restaurant area. 
b.  Drive up service is prohibited. 
2.  MR, SC, LI, and HI Zoning Districts. Uses are limited to no more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
I.  Restaurant. 
1.  In the MN zoning district, restaurants shall not exceed 10,000 square feet per lot. 
2.  The storage of raw and/or spent materials associated with crafting of alcoholic beverages shall be kept in a fully enclosed structure, building, or container. 
3.  The distribution of manufactured or alcoholic beverage products is prohibited. 
J.  Restaurant, with Drive-Through. All drive-through facilities shall comply with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual; Subsection 7.9.7: Loading Areas and Drive-Throughs; and the off-street parking, loading, and stacking requirements established in Section 7.9: Parking and Loading. 
K.  Administrative, Professional, and Government Office. 
1.  R3, R4, and R6 Zoning Districts. Administrative, professional, and government office uses shall not exceed 10,000 square feet per lot. 
2.  R7 Zoning District. Uses greater than 10,000 square feet require a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
3.  MN and MD Zoning Districts. Administrative, professional, and government office uses with more than 25,000 square feet per lot shall require a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
L.  Bank or Financial Institution. 
1.  R7 Zoning District. 
a.  Drive-through facilities are prohibited. 
b.  Banks or financial institutions shall only be allowed as part of a mixed-use building. 
2.  MN, and MD Zoning Districts. Drive-through facilities require a specific use permit approval pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
M.  Musician Studio. Musician studios shall conform to established noise standards in the City of Denton. 
N.  Credit Access Business. 
1.  Credit access businesses shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another credit access business, measured in a direct line from property line to property line. 
2.  Credit access businesses shall register with the city pursuant to City Ordinance 2013-073. 
O.  Laundry Facility, Self-Service. 
1.  R7 Zoning District. Self-service laundry facilities shall only be permitted as an accessory use to multifamily dwellings, and such use shall be located within a multifamily structure. 
2.  MN, MD, and MR Zoning Districts. Individual self-service laundry facilities shall not exceed 2,500 square feet per lot. 
P.  Tattoo and Body Piercing Parlor. Tattoo and body piercing parlors shall comply with licensing and certification requirements of the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
Q.  General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, Less than 5,000 Square Feet. In the R7 zoning district, general retail shall only be allowed as part of a mixed-use building. 
R.  General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, More than 15,000 Square Feet. In the LI and HI zoning districts, general retail uses with more than 25,000 square feet per lot shall require a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
S.  Bed and Breakfast. 
1.  Size and Number of Guest Units. 
a.  In the RR, R4, R6, R7, and MN zoning districts, the maximum number of guest units for any bed and breakfast establishment shall be five. 
b.  In all other zoning districts, the maximum number of guest units for any bed and breakfast establishment shall be eight. 
2.  Location and Operation. 
a.  Bed and breakfast establishments shall be within 200 feet of a collector or arterial street. Distances shall be measured along a public street or alley access to the site from the arterial or collector street. 
b.  The business owner or manager shall be required to reside on the property or on an adjacent property. 
T.  Short-Term Rental. 
1.  Registration Requirements. No person shall advertise, offer to rent, or rent, lease, sublease, license, or sublicense a residential property within the city as a short-term rental for which a registration has not been properly made and filed with the Development Services Department. Registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the city for such purpose and shall specifically require the following minimum information: 
a.  Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the property owner of the short-term rental property; 
b.  Verification that the proposed short-term rental property is the applicant's primary residence; 
c.  Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the designated local emergency contact; 
d.  The maximum number of occupants permitted for the dwelling unit or sleeping room in accordance with Subsection 5.3.1D: Maximum Persons Occupying a Dwelling; 
e.  A submission of a sketch floor plan of the dwelling with dimensional room layout; and 
f.  A site plan/survey of the property indicating maximum number of vehicles that can be legally parked on the property, without encroaching onto streets, sidewalks or alleys, other public rights-of-way or public property. 
2.  Operation. 
a.  External Signage. There shall be no external on-site or off-site advertising signs or displays indicating the property is a short-term rental. 
b.  Limit on Occupants Allowed. No more than two adult guests per bedroom, plus no more than two additional adults shall be allowed when renting a property as a short-term rental, except that there shall be a maximum occupancy of 10 persons, adults and children. 
c.  Limits on Number of Vehicles. There shall be a maximum of one vehicle per bedroom, or the maximum number of vehicles that can be accommodated within the garage and driveway, without extending over the public rights-of-way (alleys and sidewalks), whichever is less. 
d.  Advertisements and Contracts. Any advertisement of the property as a short-term rental and all rental contracts must contain language that specifies the allowed maximum number of occupants and maximum number of vehicles. 
e.  Other Restrictions. It is unlawful: 
i.  To operate or allow to be operated a short-term rental without first registering, in accordance with this DDC, the property in which the rental is to occur; 
ii.  To advertise or offer a short-term rental without first registering, in accordance with this DDC, the property in which the rental is to occur; documented advertisement of the subject property as a short-term rental, online or offline, shall be considered evidence of a violation of this DDC; 
iii.  To operate a short-term rental in any location that is not the registrant's primary residence; 
iv.  To operate a short-term rental that does not comply with all applicable city and state laws and codes; 
v.  To operate a short-term rental without paying the required hotel occupancy taxes; 
vi.  To offer or allow the use of a short-term rental for the sole or primary purpose of having a party venue; 
vii.  To fail to include a written prohibition against the use of a short-term rental for having a party in every advertisement, listing, or other publication offering the premises for rent; and 
viii.  Permit the use of short-term rental for the purpose of: housing sex offenders; operating a structured sober, recovery or other purpose living home or similar enterprise; selling illegal drugs; selling alcohol or another activity that requires a permit or license under the Alcoholic Beverage Code; or operating as a sexually oriented business. 
3.  Brochure and Safety Features. 
a.  Informational Brochure. Each registrant operating a short-term rental shall provide to guests a brochure that includes: 
i.  The registrant's 24-hour contact information; 
ii.  A local responsible party's 24-hour contract information if the owner is not within the city limits when guests are renting the premises; 
iii.  Pertinent neighborhood information including, but not limited to, parking restrictions, restrictions on noise and amplified sound, and trash collection schedules; and 
iv.  Information to assist guests in the case of emergencies posing threats to personal safety or damage to property, including emergency and non-emergency telephone numbers for police, fire, and emergency medical services providers and instructions for obtaining severe weather, natural or manmade disaster alerts and updates. 
b.  Safety Features. Each short-term rental registrant shall provide, in the premises, working smoke detectors in accordance with adopted codes, at least one working carbon monoxide detector and alarm, and one working fire extinguisher. The premises shall, otherwise comply with all applicable City regulations, including but not limited to Building and Fire Codes. 
4.  Notification of Approval of Short-Term Rental. Within 10 days of the approval of a short-term rental, the city shall send notice to all property owners within 100 feet of the subject property, and shall include the 24-hour complaint line, and pertinent information about standards regulating short-term rentals. 
5.  Registration Term, Fees, and Renewal. 
a.  All short-term rental registrations approved under this DDC shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of its issuance. 
b.  The fee for registration of a short-term rental is identified in the Administrative Criteria Manual. 
c.  Upon receipt of an application for renewal of the registration, the Director may deny the renewal if there is reasonable cause to believe that: 
i.  The registrant has plead no contest to or been convicted of a violation of any ordinance of the city, or any state, or federal law on the premises or has permitted such a violation on the premises by any other person; or 
ii.  There are grounds for suspension, revocation, or other registration sanction as provided in this DDC or other applicable city codes. 
6.  Right to Inspect Premises. The City of Denton reserves the right, with reasonable notice to the owner, to inspect the residential premises to determine compliance with this DDC as well as other applicable city codes. 
a.  If only a portion of the premises is offered for rent, then that portion, plus shared amenities and points of access, may be inspected. 
b.  If, upon completion of an inspection, the premises are found to be in violation of one or more provisions of applicable city codes and ordinances, the city shall provide written notice of such violation and shall set a re-inspection date for a violation to be corrected prior to its occupancy. 
U.  Automotive Fuel Sales. 
1.  Storage of equipment, auto parts, and supplies used in servicing vehicles shall be maintained entirely within an enclosed structure. 
2.  Open storage of wrecked or inoperable cars, discarded tires, auto parts, or similar materials shall be prohibited. 
V.  Automotive Repair Shop, Major. 
1.  All repairs, services, and storage shall be conducted within an entirely enclosed structure. 
2.  Open storage of wrecked or inoperable cars, discarded tires, auto parts, or similar materials shall be prohibited. 
3.  Sales of vehicles shall be prohibited. 
W.  Automotive Repair Shop, Minor. 
1.  Storage of vehicles on the premises shall not exceed 30 days. 
2.  Storage of equipment, auto parts, and supplies used in servicing vehicles shall be maintained entirely within an enclosed structure. 
3.  Open storage of wrecked or inoperable cars, discarded tires, auto parts, or similar materials shall be prohibited. 
4.  Sales of vehicles shall be prohibited. 
X.  Automotive Wrecking Service, Impound Lot, Junkyard, and Salvage Yard. 
1.  Automotive wrecking services, impound lots, junkyards, and salvage yards shall comply with the Texas Administrative Code regarding vehicle storage facilities. 
2.  Stored vehicles shall be screened from public view from all rights-of-way, residential zoning districts, and residential uses. 
3.  Stored vehicles shall not be located within the floodplain, water-related habitat, riparian buffers, or other environmentally sensitive areas. 
4.  Best management practices addressing stormwater quality must be implemented and maintained on-site. Management practices must attain the pollutant removal capabilities recommended for parking areas in the Integrated Storm Water Management (ISWM) Manual, as published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, or similar practices consistent with low impact development (LID) approaches. This standard does not apply to automotive wrecking service, impound lot, junkyard, or salvage yard establishments that do not provide outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, parts, or other materials. 
5.  Any expansion of a nonconforming salvage yard shall require a specific use permit. 
Y.  Equipment Sales and Rental. 
1.  Maintenance of equipment shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
2.  Unenclosed storage of inoperable or wrecked equipment or materials shall be prohibited. 
3.  All other unenclosed stored equipment shall be screened from public view from all rights-of-way, residential zoning districts, and residential uses. 
Z.  Sexually Oriented Business. 
1.  Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of this subsection to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this subsection have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this subsection to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
2.  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the City Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's a.m., 120 C. Ct. 1382 (2000), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to: Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue, Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and also on findings from the "Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses" (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the City Council finds: 
a.  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
b.  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this section as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
c.  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those that provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
d.  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
e.  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
f.  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
g.  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
h.  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
i.  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
j.  The findings noted in paragraphs (a) through (f) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
k.  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
l.  The general welfare, morals, health, and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this section. 
3.  Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses. The location regulations of this subsection are enacted pursuant to the authority of TLGC, Chapter 211. All other provisions of this subsection are enacted pursuant to the city's police power and the authority of Article XI, Section 5, of the Texas Constitution. Sexually oriented businesses shall comply with the following separation requirements: 
a.  A sexually oriented business shall not operate adjacent to an arterial street and within 1,000 feet of the following uses: 
i.  A school, church, adult or child day care, elderly housing facility, hospital, public park or playground, residential zoning district, or lot devoted to a residential use; or 
ii.  Another sexually oriented business. 
b.  The distance between shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior walls of the structures in which the sexually oriented business is located to the nearest property line. 
c.  Only one sexually oriented business is allowed in a building, structure, or portion of a building or structure. 
4.  Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies. 
a.  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
b.  A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
5.  Additional Regulations for Nude Model Studios. 
a.  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
b.  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or view of persons of the opposite sex. 
c.  A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
6.  Additional Regulations for Adult Theaters and Adult Motion Picture Theaters. 
a.  A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
b.  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he or she knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
c.  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or view of persons of the opposite sex. 
7.  Additional Regulations for Adult Motels. 
a.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in Subchapter 9: Definitions. 
b.  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not comply with the location requirements of this subsection, he or she rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person, and, within 10 hours from the time the room is rented, he or she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. The terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean that act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
8.  Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or Videos. 
a.  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," shall comply with the following requirements: 
i.  The establishment shall provide for one or more manager's stations, none of which shall exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The manager's stations shall be designed to provide a monitoring location for the operators or employees of the establishment during business hours and to exclude members of the general public. The interior of the premises shall be configured so that there is an unobstructed view from a manger's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
ii.  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside any part of the premises. 
iii.  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified subsection (a)(i) above, remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the establishment that does not have an unobstructed view from a manager's station. 
iv.  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place in which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
v.  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
b.  A person having a duty as provided in subsections (a)(i) through (a)(v) above commits an offense if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
9.  Defenses to Enforcement. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
a.  By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; 
b.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
c.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
d.  In a structure: 
i.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
ii.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
iii.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
e.  It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
f.  Each day on which a violation occurs shall be separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0023a, § 2(Exh. A), 1-7-2020)  
5.3.6 - Industrial Uses. 
A.  Craft Alcohol Production. In the MD, MR, and SC zoning districts: 
1.  On-premise consumption or retail sales shall be required to operate a craft alcohol production establishment. 
2.  Areas used for production, bottling, packaging, storing, and other manufacturing related activities shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. Additional square footage shall require specific use permit approval pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
3.  The storage of raw and/or spent materials shall be kept in a fully enclosed structure, building, or container. 
4.  The establishment shall operate in full compliance with all rules and regulations of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
B.  Food Processing, Less than 2,500 Square Feet. 
1.  MN, MD, MR, and SC Zoning Districts. Only on-premises sales shall be allowed. Distribution, warehousing, or wholesaling activities are prohibited. 
2.  All Zoning Districts. If the proposed use is within 200 feet of a residential zoning district, approval is subject to a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
C.  Food Processing, More than 2,500 Square Feet. 
1.  MN, MD, MR, and SC Zoning Districts. Only on-premises sales shall be allowed. Distribution, warehousing, or wholesaling activities are prohibited. 
2.  All Zoning Districts. If the proposed use is within 200 feet of a residential zoning district, and greater than 5,000 square feet per lot, then approval of a specific use permit shall be required pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
D.  Manufacturing, Artisan. In the MN and MD zoning districts: 
1.  Artisan manufacturing uses shall be limited to 10,000 square feet per lot. 
2.  If within 200 feet of a residential zoning district or residential use, artisan manufacturing uses shall be limited to 5,000 square feet per lot, unless a specific use permit is approved pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP), and permits the use to exceed 5,000 square feet per lot. 
3.  All activities shall occur entirely within an enclosed structure. 
E.  Manufacturing, Low-Impact. 
1.  In the MD Zoning District, uses are limited to a maximum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. 
2.  In the MR, SC, and HC Zoning Districts, uses with more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot shall require a Specific Use Permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
3.  In the MD, MR, SC, HC, and GO Zoning Districts, all activities shall occur entirely within an enclosed structure. 
F.  Outdoor Storage. 
1.  Generally. No outdoor storage use shall constitute an automotive wrecking service, impound lot, junkyard, or salvage yard. 
2.  Location and Screening of Storage. 
a.  No outdoor storage operation shall be located in front of a principal building. 
b.  Materials stored outdoors shall be setback at least five feet from all property lines. 
c.  Materials shall not be stored in areas intended for vehicular or pedestrian circulation. 
d.  Outdoor storage shall be opaquely screened from public view pursuant to screening standards in Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening. 
G.  Self-Service Storage. 
1.  Building Materials. 
a.  Except for fenestrations, as noted in subsection (1)(b) below, each elevation shall be constructed of 100 percent masonry, stone, architectural concrete block with integrated color (split-face CMU), stucco, or concrete tilt-wall (colored or stamped). 
b.  The materials in subsection (1)(a) above shall not apply to fenestrations such as doors, windows, glass, and entryway treatments. 
c.  Glass shall not account for more than 70 percent of the exterior wall area. 
2.  Doors. Overhead bay doors and/or storage unit doors shall not be visible from adjacent properties or public right-of-way. 
3.  Fencing and Buffers. 
a.  Fencing materials shall be limited to masonry and wrought iron and shall comply with Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening. 
b.  Landscape buffers shall be provided in accordance with Section 7.7.6: Compatibility Landscape Buffer Requirements. 
4.  Other Activities. 
a.  No business activity other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises. 
b.  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
H.  Warehouse and Wholesale Facility. In the MR and SC zoning districts, uses shall be limited to a maximum of 55,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0025a, § 2(Exh. A), 2-4-2020)  
5.3.7 - Public and Semi-Public Utility Uses. 
A.  Power Stations, Electric Substations, Interchanges, and Switch Stations. 
1.  Compliance with Electric Standards. Electric substations and switch stations shall comply with the standards in Section 7.13: Electric Standards. A site plan demonstrating substantial conformance with all the applicable design standards identified in Section 7.13: Electric Standards, shall be submitted. 
2.  Procedures for Review. An applicant shall submit an application for a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2: Specific Use Permit (SUP), unless it is able to meet all the following requirements: 
a.  Use of the property is associated with a City Council approved Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) or other City Council approved Master Plan. 
b.  A public hearing was held at the City Council for the selection of the site to include: 
i.  Written notice of the public hearing was provided to property owners within 200 feet and physical addresses within 500 feet of the subject property at least 12 days prior to the public hearing; 
ii.  A sign advertising the public hearing was posted on or adjacent to the property at least 12 days prior to the public hearing; and 
iii.  Proposed screening wall location and design were reviewed and approved by the City Council. 
c.  A neighborhood meeting was held at least 15 days prior to the public hearing at City Council for the acquisition of the site. 
B.  Solar Collector as a Principal Use. Solar collectors shall conform to all height, setback, and landscaping requirements within their respective zoning district. The following additional standards apply to all solar collectors: 
1.  All solar collector systems shall be in compliance with all currently adopted building codes; 
2.  Solar collector systems that use concentrator technologies and have not incorporated anti-glare measures into the system or installation shall be placed in areas so that the concentrated solar glare shall not be directed onto inhabited adjacent properties or roadways; and 
3.  The design of the solar collector system shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping similar to their background or the existing natural environment to the most reasonable extent possible without prohibiting the installation. 
C.  Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS). 
1.  For All Wind Energy Systems. 
a.  No tower shall be lit, except to comply with Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) standards. 
b.  All wiring between the wind system and the substation shall be buried underground. 
c.  All proposed wind systems shall conform to established noise standards in the City of Denton. 
2.  For Large Wind Energy Systems. 
a.  The minimum acreage for a large wind system shall be established based on the setbacks of the turbine(s) and the height of the turbine(s); 
b.  All turbines located within the same large wind system property shall be of a similar tower design, including the type, number of blades, and direction of blade rotation; 
c.  Large wind systems shall be setback at least one and one-half times the height of the turbine and rotor diameter from the property line. Large wind systems shall also be setback at least one and one-half times the height of the turbine from above ground telephone, electrical lines, and other uninhabitable structures; 
d.  Towers shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above ground level.  
5.4 - Accessory Uses and Structures 
 
5.4.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for accessory uses and structures that are incidental and subordinate to principal uses. These standards are intended to minimize adverse impacts on surrounding properties and the community.  
5.4.2 - Accessory Uses and Structures Allowed. 
All principal uses allowed in a zoning district pursuant to Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, shall be deemed to include those accessory uses, structures, and activities typically associated with that use, unless specifically prohibited in this section. Accessory uses and structures are subject to the standards in this section and any applicable use-specific standards for the associated principal use in Section 5.3: Use-Specific Standards. Typical accessory uses are included in the use definitions in Subchapter 9: Definitions.  
5.4.3 - General Standards for Accessory Uses and Structures. 
A.  The combined square footage of the principal structure and accessory structure(s) shall not exceed the zoning district maximum building coverage specified in Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts. 
B.  Accessory structures, with the exception of non-residential detached carports, gas station canopies, gas station car wash facilities, and security/entry booths, are prohibited in front and side yards. Accessory structures for public or private schools may be located in side yards, but shall not be located in front yards. 
C.  Where permitted, accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of three feet from all property lines. 
D.  No portion of an accessory structure may be located in, or encroach upon, any easement. 
E.  All accessory structures that require a building permit shall be architecturally compatible with its associated principal structure and/or screened from view of abutting properties and public rights-of-way. 
F.  Where permitted, accessory outdoor storage shall be located to the rear of the principal structure, shall be subject to the screening standards in Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening, and shall be limited to goods or materials sold or used on the premises as part of the principal use of the property.  
5.4.4 - Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses. 
A.  Accessory Dwelling Unit. Accessory dwelling units ("ADUs") shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Generally. 
a.  Only one ADU shall be allowed per lot. 
b.  ADUs shall only be permitted on lots where the principal use is a single-family detached dwelling. 
2.  Size. 
a.  ADUs on Lots Smaller than 10,000 Square Feet. 
i.  ADUs shall not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the principal dwelling unit on the lot. 
ii.  ADUs shall not exceed 1,000 square feet per lot. 
b.  ADUs on Lots 10,000 Square Feet or Larger. ADUs shall not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the principal dwelling unit on the lot. 
3.  Location and Design. 
a.  ADUs may be attached or detached units. 
i.  Attached ADUs shall be fully attached to or within the principal structure on the lot. "Attached" shall mean at least one-quarter of the total wall area or the floor or ceiling of the ADU shall be fully connected to a wall, floor, or ceiling of the principal residential structure. 
ii.  Detached ADUs shall be located to the side or rear of the principal dwelling unit. 
b.  ADUs shall have a separate exterior entrance from the principal dwelling unit and shall contain cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities. 
4.  Public Services and Utilities. Separate water or sewer service for the ADU shall not be allowed. Separate metering of other utilities is allowed. 
5.  Ownership Requirements. Ownership of the ADU may not be legally severed from ownership of the associated lot and any other structures on such lot. 
B.  Donation Box. A donation box shall not restrict the use or access to any parking spaces that are required for the principal use on the lot. 
C.  Home Occupations. Home occupations shall comply with the following: 
1.  General. 
a.  A home occupation shall be permitted only when it is an accessory use to a single-family detached, duplex, or townhome dwelling unit. 
b.  A home occupation shall not involve any external structural alteration of the dwelling unit. 
2.  Employees. The home occupation shall be operated by the person(s) residing in the principal dwelling. No more than two employees that do not reside on the property shall be allowed on the premises at any given time. 
3.  Patrons. No more than four patrons shall be allowed on the premises at one time. 
4.  Hours of Operation. No home occupation shall remain open for visitation by patrons between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
5.  No External Display of Products. There shall be no external display of products or any other externally visible evidence of the home occupation. 
6.  Outdoor Storage and Activities. 
a.  No outdoor storage of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment associated with a home occupation shall be allowed. 
b.  All activities related to the home occupation shall be operated entirely within the principal dwelling unit. Outdoor activities are strictly prohibited. 
7.  Signage. Home occupations shall not be allowed to place an advertisement, sign, or display on or off the premises. 
8.  Product Sales. A home occupation may include the sale of products on the premises, provided compliance is maintained with all other standards in this subsection. 
9.  Prohibited Equipment and Materials. There shall be no chemical, mechanical, or electrical equipment on the premises, other than that normally found within a dwelling unit. 
10.  Parking and Business-Related Vehicles (Vehicles Marked or Equipped Commercially). No on-street parking of business-related vehicles shall be allowed at any time. No business vehicles larger than a van, panel truck, or pickup truck shall be permitted to park overnight on the premises. The number of business-related vehicles shall be limited to one. 
11.  Allowable Home Occupations. Any use not listed in subsection (C)(12) below shall be deemed an allowable home occupation so long as the use is allowed pursuant to Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, and complies with the standards of this DDC. 
12.  Prohibited Home Occupations. The following uses are examples of home occupations that shall be prohibited: 
a.  Retail sales; 
b.  Medical doctors, or any practice of physical and/or medical application, including chiropractors; 
c.  Dentists; 
d.  Minor or major automobile or equipment repair; 
e.  Commercial greenhouses or nurseries; and 
f.  Animal grooming. 
D.  Outside Storage, Accessory. In addition to complying with all EPA regulations, the International Fire Code, and all other applicable ordinances, statutes, rules and regulations, outdoor storage: 
1.  Shall be confined to the side or rear yard only, and shall be opaquely screened from public view, using screening materials pursuant to Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening; and 
2.  Shall be set back at least five feet from the property line, and maintained so as to not create a nuisance to the public or any adjoining property. 
E.  Sale of Produce and Plants Raised on Premises. 
1.  Permitted Sales. Only the sale of produce or plants grown on-site shall be sold. 
2.  Hours of Operation. The sale of produce and plants shall only be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
3.  Structures. No permanent structures shall be erected for the sale of produce and plants. 
F.  Solar Collector, (Ground- or Building-Mounted). 
1.  If the solar collector is not flush with the roof, the applicant shall minimize the visibility of the collector from a public street, park, or open space to the most reasonable extent possible without prohibiting the installation. 
2.  Ground-mounted collectors are allowed as an accessory structure and shall only be located outside of required setbacks. 
3.  Ground-mounted accessory solar collectors shall not exceed the height of the principal structure on the lot or parcel. 
G.  Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS), Small (Ground-Mounted). 
1.  Generally. 
a.  An individual ground-mounted WECS shall be set back from the property line and the principal structure at least one and one-half times the height of the WECS structure. 
b.  The height limit for an accessory WECS shall be the height limit in the underlying zoning district, as long as the WECS meets the setback established in subsection (1)(a) above. 
c.  The distance between the ground and the rotor blade (when the rotor blade in its lowest position) shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
2.  RR and R1 Zoning Districts. 
a.  Lots where the proposed WECS will be located shall have a minimum lot area of two acres. 
b.  A maximum of one WECS per lot is permitted by right; more than one WECS per lot shall require approval of a specific use permit pursuant to Subsection 2.5.2, Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
H.  Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS), Small (Building-Mounted). Rooftop WECS shall be considered an accessory use if the following are satisfied: 
1.  The maximum height of the rooftop WECS does not exceed a height of 10 feet above the roof or the top of a parapet, whichever is higher. The height shall be measured from the base of the WECS where it is mounted on the building to the highest point of the arc of the blades' elevation. If the WECS does not use blades, then height is measured from the base of the WECS where it is mounted on the building to the highest point of the WECS; 
2.  The WECS is securely attached to the structure in compliance with all currently adopted Building Codes; and 
3.  The blade rotor plane shall be at least four feet away from any window and at least 12 feet above any patio with human access. 
Figure 5.4-A: Building-Mounted WECS Height
  
5.4.5 - Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Structures. 
A.  Swimming Pools. Discharge of swimming pools and backwash filters must be plumbed to the sanitary sewer.  
5.5 - Temporary Uses and Structures 
 
5.5.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to allow certain uses and structures of a limited duration subject to specified conditions. This section is intended to ensure that such uses or structures do not negatively impact surrounding properties and are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period.  
5.5.2 - Temporary Uses and Structures Allowed. 
The Director may permit temporary uses in accordance with Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses, and according to any applicable use-specific standards.  
5.5.3 - Approval Process for Temporary Uses and Structures. 
A.  General. 
1.  Prior to establishing a temporary use or structure, a temporary use permit shall be approved pursuant to Subsection 2.5.3: Temporary Use Permit. 
2.  Neither the granting of a temporary use permit, nor compliance with its terms, shall constitute a defense to prosecution under any law or ordinance, other than as stated in this section. A temporary use permit serves only to conditionally permit the temporary use of property, provided that the permittee strictly complies with all permit requirements and restrictions. 
B.  Conditions. 
1.  The Director may prescribe reasonable conditions upon a temporary use permit to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, with particular attention to areas proximately located to the permitted temporary use. Such conditions may include specific performance standards, noise mitigation measures, lighting restrictions, restrictions on hours of operation, odor control measures, off-street parking requirements, traffic restrictions, and other standards designed to minimize adverse impacts on surrounding areas. 
2.  The Director may condition issuance of a temporary use permit upon either or both of the following: 
a.  The applicant's demonstration of full compliance with all applicable permitting, licensing, surety, insurance, and performance standards of any governmental, administrative, or regulatory body exercising jurisdiction over the requested temporary use; and/or 
b.  The applicant's posting of bonds or other securities in an amount, and of a type, reasonably sufficient to remediate, repair, and restore any public lands, infrastructure, or easements, or any public or private floodplains or environmentally sensitive areas, which could foreseeably suffer damage, directly or indirectly, as a consequence of the requested temporary use, regardless of whether such damages are actually caused by the applicant or by third-party participants in the temporary activity. 
C.  Posting the Temporary Use Permit. The applicant shall post the permit issued by the city in a prominent location on the site where the temporary use is established. 
D.  Revocation of a Temporary Use Permit. The Director may revoke a temporary use permit if it is determined that: 
1.  The applicant misrepresented any material fact on his or her application, or supporting materials; 
2.  The temporary use fails or ceases to comply with applicable standards or criteria for issuance of a permit; 
3.  The operation of the temporary use violates any applicable statute, law, ordinance, or regulation; or 
4.  The operation of the temporary use constitutes a nuisance or poses a real or potential threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public.  
5.5.4 - General Standards for Temporary Uses and Structures. 
A.  Compliance with this DDC. Temporary uses and structures are subject to the dimensional standards in Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts, and the development standards in Subchapter 7: Development Standards, unless otherwise stated in this section. 
B.  Compatibility. Temporary uses shall be compatible in intensity, characteristics, and appearance with existing land uses in the surrounding area of the proposed location. Factors such as location, access, traffic generation, noise, light, dust control, and hours of operation shall be considered. 
C.  Required Licenses. The applicant shall obtain all necessary licenses required by this DDC and by state law. 
D.  Operation and Development. All temporary uses, except occasional sales, shall comply with the following: 
1.  Location. 
a.  Temporary uses shall comply with applicable setback requirements. In situations where temporary storage containers and other portable storage units are used for loading and unloading purposes and the only placement location is on an existing driveway, temporary storage containers and other portable storage units may encroach into a required setback. 
b.  Display, sales, and other temporary use-related activities shall be conducted on private property and not on public land or rights-of-way, unless specifically permitted in writing by the Director. 
2.  Access and Circulation. 
a.  Vehicular access points, public roads and rights-of-way, and pedestrian or bicycle paths shall not be damaged or obstructed. Public roads may be closed for a temporary special event where specifically authorized by the City Council. 
b.  Temporary structures and all associated devices shall be of a temporary nature, movable, and shall not block visibility for vehicles or pedestrians on or off the lot so as to create a safety hazard. 
c.  Temporary uses and structures may occupy required off-street parking only if specified and approved as part of a temporary use permit. 
3.  Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be compatible with the adjacent land uses. 
4.  Maintenance and Clean Up. The applicant shall guarantee that all trash and debris generated by the temporary use will be removed within 24 hours at no expense to the city. 
5.  Signs. Signs shall comply with Subpart B, Chapter 33, Signs and Advertising Devices, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
E.  Occasional Sales. No more than three occasional sales may be allowed upon the premises of a residential dwelling in any 12-month period (limited to one sale every four months), with a limit of three days per time, per lot.  
5.5.5 - Annual Permit Allowance and Renewal Periods. 
A.  An applicant may renew, or receive a new temporary use permit for the same activity on the same lot in accordance with the following limitations: 
Table 5.5 -D: Summary of Temporary Use Permit Allowance 
Temporary Use 	Permits Per Year 	Days Per Permit 
Storage Containers and Other Portable Storage Units [1] 	3 	30 days 
Farmers Market 	1 	180 days 
Seasonal Sales 	No limit 	30 days (per event) 
Occasional Sales 	4 	3 (per event) 
Special Events 	No limit 	21 days (per event) 
Field or Construction Office 	[2] 	[2] 
Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant 	3 	60 days 
Notes: 
[1] Temporary storage containers and other portable storage units located within a nonresidential zoning district are allowed one permit per calendar year, with a limit of 180 days per lot. 
[2] Field or construction offices may be approved no sooner than 30 days prior to the start of construction and shall be removed within 30 days after completion of the work for which the construction permit has been issued. 
 
B.  All uses not specifically listed in the table above shall be permitted for a maximum period of 30 days per calendar year, per lot, subject to Director approval. Applicants may not obtain a permit for a temporary use for the same lot if that site has exceeded the time limitation for that calendar year.  
5.5.6 - Additional Standards for Specific Temporary Uses and Structures. 
A.  Temporary Storage Containers and Other Portable Storage Units. 
1.  Temporary storage containers and other portable storage units shall be located on an improved surface, but may not be located in any part of a fire lane, required parking space, maneuvering lane, public right-of-way, or visibility triangle. 
2.  The property where the temporary storage container or other portable storage unit is located shall contain a principal structure, and the storage container or other portable storage unit will be considered accessory to the principal structure. 
3.  Storage containers and other portable storage units that are less than 120 square feet, located in a rear yard, and are screened from public view are not required to obtain a temporary use permit. 
B.  Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant, Temporary. 
1.  Permit Requirements. Applicants for a permit to operate a temporary concrete or asphalt batching must submit a letter from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) indicating that the proposed facility is exempt from the permitting procedures under the standard exemption, as amended. 
a.  Concrete Batching Plants. 
i.  When both wastewater and stormwater discharges will be generated on-site, concrete batch plants must be permitted under TCEQ discharge permit TXG110000. 
ii.  When only stormwater discharges will be generated on-site, concrete batch plants may be included in construction stormwater permit TXR150000 for the construction site, if located at the construction site. 
2.  Location. 
a.  Temporary concrete batching plants (including associated stationary equipment and stockpiles) shall be located at least 300 feet from any recreational area, school, residence or other structure not occupied or used solely by the owner of the property upon which the facility is located. This distance limitation does not apply to structures within the boundaries of the project for which the facility is to pour concrete, provided that the facility is located on or contiguous to the project. 
b.  Temporary asphalt batching plants shall be located at least one-half mile from any recreational area, school, or residence, or any other structure not occupied or used exclusively by the owner of the property upon which the facility is located. 
3.  Operational Standards. 
a.  The facility shall be operated in a manner that eliminates unnecessary dust, noise, and odor (including, with limitation, covering trucks, hoppers and chutes, loading and unloading devices, mixing operation and maintaining driveways and parking areas free of dust). 
b.  All stockpiles shall be sprinkled with water or dust suppressant chemicals, or both, as necessary to achieve maximum control of dust emissions. The stockpile sprinkler system shall be operable at all times. 
c.  Spilled cement and fly ash used in the batch shall be cleaned up immediately and contained or dampened to minimize dust emissions due to wind erosion and vehicle traffic. 
d.  All open-bodied vehicles transporting material from a dry batch plant to the paving mixer shall be loaded with a layer of sand on top, and the truck shall be covered with a tarp to minimize the emission of dust under existing conditions. 
e.  The applicant shall clear the site of all equipment, material, and debris upon completion of the project. 
4.  Hours of Operation. The facility may operate only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, from June 1 to September 30; 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, from October 1 to May 31; 8:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. on Saturdays; and 1:00 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. on Sundays. 
5.  Revocation of Permit. In addition to the criteria established in Subsection 5.5.3D, the Director may terminate or revoke a temporary use permit for a concrete or asphalt batching plant for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The facility fails to comply with any of the requirements as listed in this subsection; or 
b.  The facility violates any of the standards as listed on the standard exemption list adopted by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), as amended. 
6.  Additional Approval Required for Off-Site Temporary Batch Plants. A Specific Use Permit (SUP) is required for all temporary batching facilities grinding, mixing, or otherwise preparing concrete, asphalt, or its ingredients or products for transportation to another site other than the site on which the batching facility is being located. 
C.  Field or Construction Office. 
1.  Field or construction offices may only be approved for licensed contractors working on construction projects for which permits have been issued. They shall be located on the same property and within the same project area where the work is being performed and shall not encroach into any public right-of-way. Field or construction or offices shall be required to meet all applicable state and local building and set-up codes. 
2.  Field or construction offices may not be used as a dwelling unit or residence. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0027a, § 2(Exh. A), 2-4-2020)  
5.6 - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
 
5.6.1 - Purpose and Goals. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to establish guidelines regulating the location of telecommunication towers and antennas with the objective of minimizing their number, to protect and promote public safety, and to mitigate any adverse visual impacts on the community, while promoting the provision of telecommunications service to the public. 
B.  The goals of these regulations are to: 
1.  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
2.  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas; 
3.  Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
4.  Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option, rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
5.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
6.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
7.  Enhance the ability of providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; and 
8.  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.  
5.6.2 - Compliance with Telecommunications Act. 
A.  The regulations contained in this DDC have been developed under the following general guidelines as provided in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996: 
1.  Cities have local authority over "placement, construction, and modification" of cellular telephone facilities and other personal wireless telecommunication service facilities; 
2.  Regulations "shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services;" 
3.  Regulations "shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;" 
4.  "Denial shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence;" and 
5.  Cities may not "regulate the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental or radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Federal Communication Commission regulations concerning such emissions." 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, telecommunications towers and antennas, when permitted by federal law and the laws of the State of Texas, shall be regulated and governed by the use regulations and requirements of this section.  
5.6.3 - Applicability. 
All new towers and antennas within the corporate limits of the city shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in paragraphs (A) and (B) below: 
A.  Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas. This section shall not govern any tower or installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet in height and that is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
B.  Pre-Existing Towers or Antennas. Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this DDC, except the requirements of subsections 5.6.7A, B, and H.  
5.6.4 - General Provisions. 
A.  Applications. All applications for rezoning or a specific use permit for a telecommunications tower, antenna, or other facility to provide a telecommunications service shall include a completed supplemental information form provided by the city regarding said facilities. In addition to any information required for applications for a specific use permit, applicants shall submit the following information: 
1.  A detailed master antenna plan, clearly indicating the location of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, and other information deemed necessary by the Director. 
2.  A legal description of the property and leased land, if applicable. 
3.  The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties. 
4.  The separation distance from other towers shown on an updated site plan or map. 
5.  A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials. 
6.  Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination. 
B.  Platted Lots. Unless an exception is granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, telecommunications facilities requiring rezoning or a specific use permit, including towers and related equipment buildings, shall be located on a platted lot. 
C.  Technical Assistance. When a rezoning or specific use permit is required to comply with the provisions of this section, and when the technical information provided by the applicant is beyond the technical capacity of city staff to review, the applicant, in addition to the usual application fee, shall reimburse the city for the actual cost to the city for the services of a technical expert to review the application and/or information supplement, up to a maximum of $5,000. 
D.  Pre-Application Meetings. Prior to leasing or purchasing facilities, the telecommunications service provider is encouraged to meet with the Director or his or her designee to determine if the location will require a specific use permit or other approvals, and to review the merits of potential locations. 
E.  Master Antenna Plan. To facilitate co-location and coordination of telecommunication sites, the city shall, within 30 days of its effective date, notify the providers of telecommunications services, as that term is defined by federal law, of the enactment of this section. Said providers shall, within 90 days of the date of such notice, provide the city with their respective master antenna plans. Said plans shall include detailed maps, showing the locations and characteristics of all telecommunications towers and antennas serving any portion of the city and indicating coverage areas for current and, to the extent possible, future telecommunications towers and antennas. Providers shall also provide the city with any updates to the above documents within 90 days of their creation.  
5.6.5 - Allowed Telecommunications Uses. 
Table 5.6-E: Allowed Telecommunications Uses 
P = permitted S = specific use permit required Blank cell = use prohibited
+ = use-specific standards apply 
	Residential 	Mixed-Use 	Corridor 	Nonresidential 	Use-Specific Standards 
	RR 	R1 	R2 	R3 	R4 	R6 	R7 	MN 	MD 	MR 	SC 	HC 	GO 	LI 	HI 	PF 	
New Lattice, Other Towers 
0 to 50 feet 								P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Over 50 feet 								S 		S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
New Monopole Tower 
0 to 85 feet 								P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Over 85 feet 								S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Alternative Mounting Structures 
0 to 100 feet 	S 							P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Over 100 feet 	S 							S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Antennae-Only Mountings 
Building-Mounted Panels 	P 							P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	5.6.6A 
Building-Mounted Whips 	P+ 							P 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	5.6.6B 
Electric Distribution Poles 	P 							P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Roof-Mounted Arrays 	P+ 							P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	5.6.6C 
Dish Antenna Mountings 
Building/Roof-Mounted Under 1m Diameter 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Building/Roof-Mounted Under 2m Diameter 	P 							P+ 	P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	5.6.6D 
Building/Roof-Mounted Over 2m Diameter 									P+ 	P+ 	P 	P 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	5.6.6E 
Ground-Mounted Under 3m Diameter 	P 							P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Ground-Mounted Over 3m Diameter 								P 	P+ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	5.6.6F 
  
5.6.6 - Telecommunications Use-Specific Standards. 
A.  Building-Mounted Panels. 
1.  MD Zoning District. 
a.  Panels shall be mounted to a nonresidential or multifamily structure. 
b.  Panels shall be designed as "stealth" or otherwise camouflaged or concealed from view from a public or private right-of-way or residential zoning district. 
2.  MN, MR, and GO Zoning Districts. Panels shall be designed as "stealth" or otherwise camouflaged or concealed from view from a public or private right-of-way or residential zoning district. 
B.  Building-Mounted Whips. 
1.  RR Zoning District. 
a.  Whips shall be mounted to a nonresidential or multifamily structure. 
b.  Whips shall be designed as "stealth" or otherwise camouflaged or concealed from view from a public or private right-of-way or residential zoning district. 
2.  MD Zoning District. Whips shall be mounted to a nonresidential or multifamily structure. 
C.  Roof-Mounted Arrays. Arrays shall be mounted to a nonresidential structure with more than 5,000 square feet of floor area. 
D.  Building/Roof-Mounted Under 2m Diameter. 
1.  MD Zoning District. Antenna shall be mounted to a nonresidential or multifamily structure. 
2.  MN, MR, and GO Zoning Districts. Antenna shall be mounted to a nonresidential structure with more than 5,000 square feet of floor area. 
E.  Building/Roof-Mounted Over 2m Diameter. In the MD, MR, and GO zoning districts, antenna shall be mounted to a nonresidential structure with more than 100,000 square feet of floor area. 
F.  Ground-Mounted Over 3m Diameter. In the MD zoning district, antenna shall be mounted to a nonresidential structure with more than 5,000 square feet of floor area.  
5.6.7 - Telecommunications Towers. 
A.  Applicable Federal and State Standards. All telecommunications towers and antennas shall be erected and operated in compliance with current FCC and FAA rules and regulations and other applicable federal, state, and local standards. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. 
B.  Structural Standards. Telecommunications tower structures must conform to the most current revision of EIA 222 standards. Guyed telecommunications towers shall be designed and located so that if the structure should fall it would avoid habitable structures and public streets. To insure structural integrity, the owners of the tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of Subpart B, Chapter 28: Building and Building Regulations, of the Municipal Code of Ordinances, and all applicable state or local building codes and safety regulations, as well as the regulations published by the Electronic Industries Association (EIA) as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the tower into compliance with these standards. 
C.  Co-Location. Towers shall be designed and built to accommodate a minimum of two cellular or PCS providers, if over 75 feet in height. The owner of the tower must certify to the city that the tower is available for use by other telecommunications service providers on a reasonable and nondiscriminatory basis. 
D.  Fencing. Security fencing shall be installed by a wrought iron or steel chain link fence with evergreen hedge, or a masonry wall, each not less than six feet in height. The exterior of equipment buildings and/or metal equipment cabinets visible from residential areas or public rights-of-way must have a neutral aggregate finish or be painted to reflect the color and character of adjoining structures or blend with adjacent landscaping and other surroundings. 
E.  Setbacks. All telecommunication towers as well as guys and guy anchors shall be located within the buildable area of the lot and not within required front, rear, or side setbacks. Telecommunication towers in excess of 400 feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 2,600 feet from the right-of-way of all controlled access federal and state roadways designated as freeways to provide unobstructed flight paths for helicopters. 
F.  Signage. Except as otherwise permitted in this section, no signage, lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks in excess of 200 square inches shall be placed on or affixed to any part of a telecommunications tower, antenna, antenna array, equipment building, or security fencing other than as required by FCC regulations or other applicable law. 
G.  Lighting. Except as otherwise permitted in this DDC, no signals, lights, or illumination of any kind shall be permitted on or directed toward any tower unless required by the FCC, the FAA, or other appropriate public authority. 
H.  Abandonment. 
1.  In the event the use of any wireless communication facility, which would include any telecommunications tower or other antenna support structure, has been discontinued for a period of 360 days, the antenna support structure shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the Building Official, who shall have the right to request documentation from the owner/operator regarding the issue of usage. 
2.  Upon determination of abandonment, the owner/operator of the antenna support structure shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Building Official notifying the owner/operator of such abandonment. If said antenna support structure is not removed within 90 days, the Building Official may cause it to be removed at the owner's expense.  
5.6.8 - Tower Location. 
A.  Historical/Cultural. Except for compatible alternative mounting structures that effectively camouflage or conceal the presence of telecommunications antennas, telecommunications facilities should not be located on or within 300 feet of property zoned historic or property included in a national or local historic zoning district. In addition, said facilities should, wherever possible, be located so as to ensure that historic or culturally significant vistas, and landscapes are protected and that the views of and vistas from architecturally and/or historically significant structures are not impaired or diminished. 
B.  Residential Zoning. Except as provided in Table 5.6-E, telecommunications towers are not permitted in any residential zoning district and must be a minimum of a three to one distance to height ratio from a single-family residential use and one to one distance to height ratio from a multifamily use. 
C.  Towers Permitted by Right. Free standing monopole telecommunications towers 85 feet or less in height are permitted except as provided in Table 5.6-E, except for the MD zoning district and other applicable sections of this subchapter. 
D.  Towers Requiring a Specific Use Permit. All telecommunication towers to be located in the MD zoning district are permitted with a specific use permit. Telecommunication towers in excess of 50 feet in height and monopole towers in excess of 85 feet in height are permitted, except as provided in Table 5.6-E. 
E.  Tower Spacing. Any new telecommunications tower in excess of 180 feet in height must be located a minimum of one mile from any existing tower in excess of 180 feet in height. 
F.  Alternative Mounting Structures. 
1.  New alternative mounting structures 100 feet or less in height are permitted, except as provided in Table 5.6-E, and other applicable subsections of this section. 
2.  New alternative mounting structures in excess of 100 feet in height are permitted, except as provided in Table 5.6-E, and other applicable subsections of this section. 
3.  Alternative mounting structures must be similar in color, scale, and character to adjoining buildings or structures, or blend with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to them so as to generally avoid the creation of unique visual objects that stand out in the environment.  
5.6.9 - Antenna Mounting. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to promote public safety and maintain order and harmony within the city's business, cultural, and residential zoning districts by restricting the size and location of telecommunication antennas. The objective is to avoid the creation of visual distractions, prevent obstructions to the view of pedestrians and motorists on public thoroughfares, and to insure the structural integrity of supporting structures. 
B.  Whip and Panel Antenna Mounting. 
1.  Individual telecommunications antennas are allowed on existing electric distribution poles, light standards, and telecommunication towers in excess of 40 feet in height, provided that: 
a.  A joint use agreement is executed; and 
b.  The antenna is not located within the power zone of the electric distribution pole. 
2.  Antennas shall not be placed on electric transmission towers. 
3.  The total length of any antenna does not exceed 15 percent of the height of the structure. The height of a telecommunications tower is determined by the highest point of any and all components of the structure, including antennas. 
4.  Existing structures in excess of 50 feet in height may, as a matter of right, be rebuilt, if necessary, to support or contain a new antenna, provided that the new structure is the same height and substantially the same in appearance as the structure it replaces. 
5.  Building-mounted panel antennas are permitted on non-residential buildings and multifamily dwellings in all zoning districts; provided that they are mounted flush with the exterior of the building and that they do not project above the roof line, nor more than 30 inches from the surface of the building to which they are attached. The antenna's appearance shall be such that its color and texture blends with the surrounding surface of the building. 
6.  Whip antennas are permitted on non-residential buildings and multifamily dwellings in all zoning districts, provided that the total length of said whip antennas, regardless of mounting method or location, does not exceed 15 percent of the height of the building. 
7.  Only one building/roof-mounted antenna support structure, less than 100 square feet in area, is permitted per 5,000 square feet of building floor area. 
C.  Dish Antenna Mounting. 
1.  Dish antennas shall not be permitted in any front setback area or side yard setback adjacent to any roadway. 
2.  Ground-mounted dish antennas in excess of five feet in height shall be screened from roadways and adjacent property by a minimum six foot high screening fence, evergreen hedge, or masonry wall. 
3.  Dish antennas in excess of 10 feet in height or more than 10 feet in diameter are permitted, except as provided in Table 5.6-E. 
4.  Building/roof-mounted dish antennas that are one meter or less in diameter are permitted, except as provided in Table 5.6-E, and other applicable regulations of this section. 
5.  Building/roof-mounted dish antennas two meters or less in diameter are permitted on all buildings in excess of 5,000 square feet of building floor area except as provided in Table 5.6-E, and other applicable regulations of this section. 
6.  Only one building/roof-mounted dish antenna that is two meters or less in diameter, is permitted per 5,000 square feet of building floor area, except as provided in Table 5.6-E, and other applicable regulations of this section. 
7.  Building/roof-mounted dish antennas in excess of two meters in diameter may be permitted on buildings in excess of 100,000 square feet of building floor area, except as provided in Table 5.6-E, and other applicable regulations of this section. 
8.  Building/roof-mounted dish antennas in excess of one meter in diameter in residential zoning districts shall be painted to have an appearance that blends with the building on which they are located, or to be located so that they are not visible from any adjacent roadway. 
9.  Building/roof-mounted dish antennas in excess of two meters in diameter in non-residential zoning districts shall be painted or screened with enclosures so as to have an appearance that blends with the building on which they are located, or to be located so that they are not visible from any adjacent roadway.  
5.6.10 - Structural Certification. 
Prior to the installation of any building/roof-mounted telecommunications antenna, antenna array, or support structure the Building Official shall be provided with an engineer's certification that the structure will support and not be adversely affected by the proposed antenna and associated equipment.  
5.6.11 - Appeal. 
Any entity that desires to erect or use telecommunication facilities that wishes to present evidence that such entity would be limited by the current ordinances or regulations of the city dealing with zoning and land use may apply for such use under this section. The City Council shall, upon a showing that strict application of regulations would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless service, as defined by federal law, modify the subject regulations, consistent with the spirit and intent of this subchapter and section, to the extent necessary to prevent the prohibition.  
Subchapter 6 - Gas Wells  
6.1 - Integrated Provisions 
6.1.1 Sections 6.2: Gas Well Development, and 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production, relating to gas well development are intended as a set of integrated regulations. Each section may incorporate by reference other applicable provisions of this DDC that pertain to gas well development. 
6.1.2 Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production, contains definitions that apply to all provisions regulating gas well development, and identifies impact mitigation standards and other general standards that apply to gas well development. 
6.1.3 In addition to this Subchapter, Subchapter 5: Use Regulations, establishes zoning classifications for gas well development and Section 2.6.6, Gas Well Development Plat, establishes platting requirements and procedures for gas well development.  
6.2 - Gas Well Development 
 
6.2.1 - Purpose, Authority and Applicability. 
A.  Purpose. The drilling and production of gas and the development of gas well facilities within the corporate limits of the City necessitate promulgation of reasonable regulations to prevent devaluation of property; to protect watersheds; to ensure that Gas Well Drilling and Production Activities are compatible with adjacent land uses throughout the duration of such activities; and to assure that such activities conform to The Denton Plan. The regulations contained in Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; Subchapter 8: Subdivisions; and Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production, are designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and to assure that the orderly and practical development of mineral resources is compatible with the quiet enjoyment of affected surface estates. The regulations contained in Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; Subchapter 8: Subdivisions; and Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production, are designed to implement the purposes set forth in this subsection and are supported by the following findings of fact: 
1.  Gas Well Drilling and Production Activities create externalities that potentially threaten the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing or working on property in proximity to such operations. 
2.  Gas Well Drilling and Production Activities, in the absence of local regulatory controls, may emit high noise levels, produce large volumes of dust, congest local streets, present fire hazards and produce other deleterious effects, all of which fall disproportionately on adjacent land uses, and which can result individually or cumulatively in injury to persons, destabilization of property values, and inhibit the quiet peace and enjoyment of surface uses of real property in the vicinity of such operations. 
3.  The City of Denton recognizes that the United States and the State of Texas primarily regulate Gas Well Drilling and Production Activities. Moreover, with the enactment of House Bill 40 on May 18, 2015 (Texas Natural Resources Code, Section 81.0523), the State of Texas has exclusive jurisdiction over Gas Well Drilling and Production Activities. Municipalities are preempted from regulating said activities except as allowed in Section 81.0523(c), which expressly provides that a municipality has authority to regulate certain aspects of aboveground activity related to oil and gas operations. The regulations in this Subchapter are intended to regulate under such authority, in order to implement compatible local objectives that assure the health, safety and general welfare of the City's residents and businesses. 
4.  The proliferation of gas wells and Drilling and Production Sites within the City of Denton creates conflicts between such developments and other existing and future surface uses of the property. In order to assure the compatibility of residential, commercial and industrial uses with gas well development, it is necessary for the City to separate Gas Well Development from other surface uses within the City. 
B.  Authority. This Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, is adopted pursuant to authority vested under the constitution and laws of the United States, the State of Texas and the City of Denton. Each authorization identified in this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, shall be construed as an exercise of the City's zoning powers, pursuant to the Denton City Charter, TLGC Chapters 211 and 212 and the provisions of Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts of this DDC, as well as an exercise of its authority granted by Section 81.0523(c) of the Texas Natural Resources Code. 
C.  Applicability. The provisions of Section 6.2: Gas Well Development and Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production, apply only within the corporate limits of the City of Denton, except as otherwise expressly stated therein.  
6.2.2 - Required Authorization for Gas Well Development in City Limits. 
A.  Zoning District Classifications for Gas Well Development. 
1.  Gas well development is classified as an industrial land use in all zoning districts. 
2.  Gas well development is permitted as set forth in Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses of the DDC, subject to the use-specific standards in Section 5.3: Use-Specific Standards, of the DDC and the standards in Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production. Gas well development also is permitted if authorized by a Master Planned Community ("MPC") or Planned Development ("PD") District. 
3.  In order to foster compatible land use within zoning districts, Gas Well Development within the corporate limits of the City will be subject to reasonable setbacks from Protected Uses and Residential Subdivisions, which vary according to the types of uses authorized in each district. Because many gas wells are already in close proximity to existing Protected Uses or Residential Subdivisions, setbacks standards within districts will vary according to whether the proposed Gas Well Development takes place on an Existing Site or a new site. 
4.  A Drilling and Production Site Setback is the distance that the site must be separated by an Operator from an existing Protected Use or Residential Subdivision. A Reverse Setback is the distance that a Protected Use or Residential Subdivision must be separated by a surface owner from an approved Drilling and Production Site. A Minimum Setback is the minimum distance of separation between a Drilling and Production Site and a Protected Use or Residential Subdivision after a waiver or variance is granted to reduce the setback requirement. A Minimum Reverse Setback is the minimum distance a Protected Use or residential lot must be separated by a surface owner from an approved Drilling and Production Site or from a gas well within such site after administrative relief or a variance is granted to reduce the reverse setback requirement. 
B.  Setbacks by Zoning District Classification. New Gas Well Drilling and Production Sites. Setbacks from Protected Uses and Residential Subdivisions for new Drilling and Production Sites, Reverse Setbacks and Minimum Setbacks shall be as follows. In order to reduce Drilling and Production Site Setbacks, the procedures outlined in Subsection 6.2.3, General Permit Requirements for New and Existing Gas Well Sites, shall be followed. 
1.  For new Drilling and Production Sites authorized in the RR, R1, R2, R3, R4, R6, R7, MN, MD, MR, SC, HC, GO, and PF districts, except in MPC or PD Districts: 
a.  Drilling and Production Site Setbacks: 1,000 feet. 
b.  Minimum Setbacks: 500 feet. 
c.  Reverse Setbacks: 500 feet. 
d.  Minimum Reverse Setback: 250 feet. 
2.  For new Drilling and Production Sites authorized in the LI and HI zoning districts: 
a.  Drilling and Production Site Setbacks: 250 feet. 
b.  Minimum Setbacks: 250 feet. 
c.  Reverse Setbacks: 500 feet. 
d.  Minimum Reverse Setback: 250 feet. 
Where a proposed Drilling and Production Site in the LI or HI zoning district is contiguous to the boundary of a district subject to the setbacks in Subsection B(1) above, the Drilling and Production Site Setback shall be 500 feet from Protected Uses or Residential Subdivisions within the adjacent district, the Reverse Setback shall be 500 feet, and the Minimum Setback and Minimum Reverse Setback shall be 250 feet. 
3.  For new Drilling and Production Sites in PD Districts and MPC Districts, Drilling and Production Site Setbacks and Reverse Setbacks shall be as provided in the PD District or MPC District regulations or as provided in subsequent site-specific applications approved prior to August 4, 2015. The Drilling and Production Site Setbacks and Reverse Setbacks in Subsection B(1) above shall apply to any setback not specified in the MPC or PD District regulations or in subsequent site-specific applications approved prior to August 4, 2015. 
C.  Setbacks for Existing Gas Well Sites. 
1.  For Existing Drilling and Production Sites in the LI or HI zoning district: 
a.  Drilling and Production Site Setbacks: 250 feet. 
b.  Minimum Setbacks: 250 feet. 
c.  Reverse Setbacks: 500 feet. 
d.  Minimum Reverse Setback: 250 feet. 
2.  For Existing Drilling and Production Sites in all other districts, except in MPC or PD Districts: 
a.  Drilling and Production Site Setbacks: 500 feet. 
b.  Minimum Setbacks: 250 feet. 
c.  Reverse Setbacks: 500 feet. 
d.  Minimum Reverse Setback: 250 feet. 
3.  For Existing Drilling and Production Sites in MPC or PD Districts, setbacks shall be as provided in the MPC or PD District regulations, or as provided in subsequent site-specific applications approved prior to August 4, 2015. The Drilling and Production Site Setbacks and Reverse Setbacks in Subsection C(2) above shall apply to any setback not specified in the MPC or PD District regulations, or in subsequent site-specific applications approved prior to August 4, 2015. 
In order to reduce Drilling and Production Site Setbacks, the procedures outlined in Subsection 6.2.3, General Permit Requirements for New and Existing Gas Well Sites shall be followed. 
D.  Measurement of Setbacks. 
1.  A Drilling and Production Site Setback shall be measured from the actual or proposed boundaries of the Drilling and Production Site in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any structure occupied or utilized by a Protected Use or any residential lot boundary line on an approved Residential Subdivision plat when not currently occupied by a Protected Use. 
2.  The Reverse Setback shall be measured from the closest exterior point of the proposed structure to be occupied or utilized by a Protected Use or residential lot, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest boundary designated for the approved Gas Well Development Site Plan, or, if no Gas Well Development Site Plan has been approved for the site, from the closest boundary of the Existing Drilling and Production Site. For a proposed Residential Subdivision plat, the Reverse Setback shall be measured from any undeveloped residential lot boundary to the closest boundary designated for the approved Gas Well Development Site Plan, or, if no Gas Well Development Site Plan has been approved for the site, from the closest boundary of the Existing Drilling and Production Site. 
3.  For the purposes of setback measurements at public parks, measurements shall be taken from any improvement such as a building, playground equipment, pool, splash pad, regulation area of a permanent ball field or court, or pavilion. This definition does not include flatwork such as parking lots, sidewalks, or trails. 
4.  The Reverse Setback for all other proposed Habitable Structures shall be the distance prescribed by the Fire Code. No permanent Habitable Structure, however, shall be located within the boundaries of a Drilling and Production Site. 
E.  Compliance with Fire Code Setbacks. In the event of any conflict between the setback provisions established by this Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, and any setback provisions established by the Fire Code, as now adopted or hereafter amended by the City of Denton, whichever provision provides for the larger setback shall control. 
F.  Protected Use Setbacks. After the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, a property owner who constructs a Protected Use must maintain a distance of 300 feet between the closest exterior point of the proposed structure to be occupied by the Protected Use and any equipment on a Drilling and Production Site that produces or stores flammable or combustible liquid or gas, to assure efficient emergency response operations. After such date, an Operator who locates any equipment that produces or stores flammable or combustible liquid or gas on a Drilling and Production Site must maintain a distance of 300 feet between such equipment and the closest exterior point of a structure occupied by a Protected Use. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-009c, § 2(Exh. B), 11-19-19)  
6.2.3 - General Permit Requirements for New and Existing Gas Well Sites. 
A.  Permit Procedure Tracks. 
1.  Gas Well Development Site Plan Required for Authorization of Multiple Wells. 
a.  Other than for pending permit applications excepted from these regulations under Subsection 6.2.3E: Legal Non-Conformity; Exceptions, no Gas Well Permit shall be issued until a Drilling and Production Site has been established through approval of a Gas Well Development Site Plan for the well site. For an Existing Drilling and Production Site for which no Gas Well Development Site Plan has been approved, an Operator must obtain approval for a Gas Well Development Site Plan under these regulations before any additional wells may be permitted on the site, except as provided in Subsection 6.2.4A.1.b. 
b.  In order to satisfy the setback requirements of Subsection 6.2.2, Required Authorization for Gas Well Development in City Limits, an Operator must use the procedures for approval of a Gas Well Development Site Plan set forth in subsections A(2), A(3), or A(4) of this Section. 
c.  Once a Gas Well Development Site Plan has been approved, Drilling and Production Site Setback requirements will not apply to individual Gas Well Permit applications authorized by the approved Gas Well Development Site Plan. No variance or waiver from the setback for the Drilling and Production Site shall be required for subsequent wells. 
d.  A new Gas Well Permit must be obtained for each well authorized by an approved Gas Well Development Site Plan. 
e.  Once a Gas Well Development Site Plan has been approved for an Existing Drilling and Production Site shown on a gas well development plat, such plat shall have no further force and effect with respect to that Drilling and Production Site. 
2.  Procedures for Drilling and Production Sites that Meet Setback Requirements. For a New or Existing Drilling and Production Site that meets the setback requirements in Subsection 6.2.2, Required Authorization for Gas Well Development in City Limits, an Operator may apply for a Gas Well Development Site Plan pursuant to Subsection 6.2.4: Gas Well Development Site Plans. 
3.  Procedures for Drilling and Production Sites That Do Not Meet Setback Requirements. For a New or Existing Drilling and Production Site that does not meet the setback requirements in Subsection 6.2.2, Required Authorization for Gas Well Development in City Limits, the Operator may seek a waiver from 100 percent of the owners of Protected Uses and the owners of lots in Residential Subdivisions within the Drilling and Production Site Setback pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6A. In the alternative, the Operator may apply for a variance from the setback requirement from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6B. In the alternative, for qualified Drilling and Production Sites, the Operator may obtain a reduction in the site setback using incentive procedures in Subsection 6.2.6C. The Minimum Setback requirements under Subsection 6.2.2, Required Authorization for Gas Well Development in City Limits, shall apply. The notice provisions of Subsection 6.3.7B apply to proceedings under this subsection. Once a setback has been reduced through waivers or variance procedures, the Operator may apply for a Gas Well Development Site Plan pursuant to Subsection 6.2.4. 
4.  Special Procedures for Setbacks in PD and MPC Districts. 
a.  The Operator and the surface owner of land in a PD or MPC District may present a unified plan that assures the compatibility of surface development and Gas Well Development of the property, taking into consideration setbacks from Protected Uses and Residential Subdivisions, traffic circulation and access, fire safety and emergency response, noise and light mitigation and other factors necessary to achieve compatibility of land uses. The plan may establish different Drilling and Production Site and Reverse Setbacks that vary from those prescribed in Subsection 6.2.2, Required Authorization for Gas Well Development in City Limits. The plan if approved by the City Council shall be incorporated into the zoning district regulations. 
b.  Where the Drilling and Production Site and Reverse Setbacks for Existing Sites within a PD or MPC district are less than the minimums set forth in Subsection 6.2.2, Required Authorization for Gas Well Development in City Limits, no amendments to the zoning district regulations for surface development or gas well development shall be approved by the City Council unless the setbacks are conformed to the requirements of this Section or a compatibility plan is presented and approved pursuant to paragraph (4)(a) above. 
5.  Procedures for Protected Uses or Residential Lots that Do Not Meet Reverse Setback Requirements. For a new Protected Use or residential lot that does not meet the setback requirements in Subsection 6.2.2, Required Authorization for Gas Well Development in City Limits, the property owner may apply for administrative relief using the alternative design standards in Subsection 6.2.6C.2a, if applicable, or for a variance from the Reverse Setback requirement from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6B. 
B.  Sequence of Gas Well Permits. The Operator must comply with all rules and regulations of the Fire Code and all other law, rules and regulations applicable to gas well operations, including, but not limited to, the following provisions. No Drilling or Production Activities may commence within the City limits until the following authorizations have been obtained, in the following sequence: 
1.  Approval of a Gas Well Development Site Plan pursuant to Subsection 6.2.4, for new sites. Upon approval of a Gas Well Development Site Plan, the Operator may commence construction of a Drilling and Production Site. No disturbance of the land is allowed until a Gas Well Development Site Plan is obtained. 
2.  The Operator shall obtain a Gas Well Permit for each new gas well on such site pursuant to the application requirements and standards of Subsection 6.2.5. 
3.  Approval of a Temporary Above-Ground Storage Tank Permit from the Denton Fire Department. 
4.  Approval of Gas Well Operational Permit from the Denton Fire Department. 
5.  When all approvals contained in paragraphs (1) through (4) above have been obtained, applicant may commence Initial Drilling Activities. 
6.  Approval of a Flammable and Combustible Liquids Construction Permit from the Denton Fire Department. 
7.  Approval of a Flammable and Combustible Liquids Operational Permit from the Denton Fire Department. 
8.  When all approvals contained in paragraphs (1) through (7) above have been obtained, applicant may commence Completion Operations and Production Activities. 
9.  Approval of an Open Flame Operational Permit from the Denton Fire Department for flaring activities during any stage of operation. 
10.  New Drilling or Production Activities on an existing Drilling and Production Site that is subject to an approved Watershed Permit, or on sites which required a Watershed Permit under prior regulations, but for which site no Watershed Permit was issued, are subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.3.9D. 
11.  The applications for any authorization for gas well drilling and production listed in this Subsection B must be submitted and approved in the numerical order listed. No subsequent application shall be determined to be complete and hereby is deemed to be incomplete until all required prior applications have been approved, and no completeness determination shall be made until such prior applications have been approved. 
C.  Expiration of Permits, Plans. Applications for gas well drilling and production shall expire under the following circumstances: 
1.  A Specific Use Permit which was approved under prior gas well regulations expires according to its terms, or pursuant to DDC, paragraph 2.5.2C.6: Step 6: Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
2.  A Watershed Protection Permit, if applicable, expires with the expiration of a Gas Well Development Site Plan. 
3.  A Gas Well Development Site Plan for a new Drilling and Production Site expires unless a complete application for a Gas Well Permit has been filed within one year of the date of approval of the Site Plan, or no drilling and production activities have occurred on the Drilling and Production Site for a period of three years. A Gas Well Development Site Plan for an Existing Site does not expire, unless no drilling and production activities have occurred on the site for a period of two years after all wells on the site have been plugged and abandoned. 
4.  A Gas Well Permit expires if Initial Drilling Activities have not commenced within one year of the date of approval of the Gas Well Permit. 
5.  Following expiration of an approved application for gas well drilling and production, a new application must be submitted. 
D.  Requirements are in Addition to Other Permits. The authorizations required by this Subchapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any permits that may be required by any other provision of the Denton City Code, DDC or any other government agency. 
E.  Legal Non-Conformity; Exceptions. 
1.  Non-Conformities. The provisions of Section 1.5, Nonconformities, are applicable to gas well drilling and production activities, except as provided hereinafter. 
a.  For purposes of Section 1.5, Nonconformities, the drilling of a new gas well and associated Production Activities do not constitute an existing lawful use. 
b.  The amendment of Table 5.2-A: Table of Allowed Uses and use-specific standards in Section 5.3: Use-Specific Standards, to provide for gas well Drilling and Production Activities shall not render non-conforming any Workover Operations, Drilling Activities or Production Activities for an existing well conducted on an Existing Drilling and Production Site, if such activities were authorized under a gas well permit that was approved by the Gas Well Administrator pursuant to gas well regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance. 
c.  The adoption of this amendatory ordinance or the application of such regulations to an Existing Drilling and Production Site shall not render non-conforming any Workover Operations, Drilling Activities or Production Activities for an existing well on such site, if such activities were authorized under a gas well permit that was approved by the Gas Well Administrator prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance. 
2.  General Exceptions. The standards or procedures implemented by this amendatory ordinance shall not affect the processing and approval or disapproval of an application for a gas well permit that was pending for decision on the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, or any subsequent permit applications for the same gas well, or for a gas well for which a gas well permit was approved prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, except to the extent necessary to give effect to Subsection 6.2.3E. For purposes of Subsection 6.2.3E.2, an amended Gas Well Development Site Plan application is not a subsequent permit application. 
a.  Authorizations or applications excepted under Subsection 6.2.3E.2. are subject to all gas well drilling and production standards in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance. 
b.  To the extent that any exception provided under Subsection 6.2.3E.2 is dependent on an application pending on the effective date of an amendatory ordinance, such application must have been approved subsequently in order for the exception to apply. 
c.  City shall, prior to annexation, provide notice of the City's intent to annex to each Operator affected by the annexation. Every Operator of a Drilling and Production Site that has been annexed into the City shall register the Drilling and Production Site not later than three days after the effective date of the annexation by contacting the Gas Well Administrator to ensure that gas well development plats and gas well locations are on file with the City. If they are not, the Operator shall provide the City with a copy of a gas well development plat and gas well location information. 
F.  General Application Standard. In additional to any other remedies available at law or in equity, the City may initiate proceedings to revoke any site plan, permit, variance or special exception approved pursuant to this Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, upon discovery that the applicant supplied false, fraudulent or misleading information that was material to approval of the application under the standards applicable to the permit, variance or special exception. All site plan or permit applications or requests for relief to the Board of Adjustment or requests for waivers shall be verified. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0009c, § 2(Exh. B), 11-19-2019)  
6.2.4 - Gas Well Development Site Plans. 
A.  Gas Well Development Site Plan. 
1.  Applicability. 
a.  A Gas Well Development Site Plan approved under this amendatory ordinance is required to authorize multiple gas wells on a Drilling and Production Site and must be approved prior to issuance of any Gas Well Permit for any new well on the site. 
b.  Notwithstanding subsection A, new wells identified on an approved Existing Gas Well Development Site Plan may be permitted in accordance with the gas well ordinance regulations in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance. 
c.  A gas well development plat is not an Existing Gas Well Development Site Plan. 
d.  A Gas Well Development Site Plan is not required to authorize Workover Operations, Drilling Activities or Production Activities for an existing gas well for which a gas well permit was issued prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance. 
2.  Application Requirements. 
a.  A cover page that includes a vicinity map of the Drilling and Production Site; a Sheet Index that identifies the number of Exhibits with titles for each (exhibit titles shall begin with the word 'Exhibit' and include the respective letter); the Project Title; the date of preparation; the preparer, Operator, and property owner's names; space for the City project number; and a signature block for both the Gas Well Administrator and the City Secretary. 
b.  A mapping exhibit with an accurate legal description of the Drilling and Production Site that was prepared and certified by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor of the State of Texas. Provide closure sheet of bearings and distances used in legal description. The exhibit shall include exact location, dimension, and description of all existing public, proposed, or private easements, and public rights-of-way within the lease area, intersecting or contiguous with its boundary, or forming such boundary. Describe and locate all permanent survey monuments, pins, and control points and tie and reference the survey corners to the Texas State Plane Coordinate System North Central Zone 1983-1999 datum. Provide proposed pipeline route—note that a separate application may be necessary if the proposed route encroaches onto any public easement, right-of-way or land owned by the City of Denton. 
c.  The maximum size of a proposed Drilling and Production Site shall be three acres, unless the Operator can demonstrate to the City at the time of filing of a Gas Well Development Site Plan application that: (i) the surface owner(s) has agreed to a larger site via a written agreement that will be recorded by the Operator in the Denton County records, (ii) the surface owner is subject to a covenant in a written instrument, or memorandum thereof, recorded prior to August 4, 2015, that authorizes a larger site, or (iii) the Operator can demonstrate that a larger site is needed to accommodate the planned gas well operations based upon the acreage that the Operator presently has under the mineral lease; provided that no new Drilling and Production Site authorized under (i), (ii) or (iii) may exceed seven acres, unless authorized by the Board of Adjustment. For a Gas Well existing on the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, evidence that the current Drilling and Production Site is greater than the maximum size shall be sufficient proof to demonstrate that a larger site is needed to accommodate the planned gas well operations proposed by the Gas Well Development Site Plan. A gas well development plat is neither a written agreement nor a written instrument or memorandum within the meaning of this subsection. 
d.  A map showing the distance from the boundaries of the Drilling and Production Site from all Protected Uses and Residential Subdivisions. If the separation distance(s) from Protected Uses and Residential Subdivisions do not meet the setback requirements of Subsection 6.2.2, the application also must include a copy of the waivers approved pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6A, or the approval of a setback variance approved by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6B. If the Operator seeks to qualify the proposed Drilling and Production Site for an administrative waiver pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6C, the information therein required shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval. 
e.  A site plan of the Drilling and Production Site, capable of being recorded, showing clear site boundary lines and the location of all on-site improvements and equipment, including: tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators, and other appurtenances in relation to the boundaries of the site. 
f.  A legal description of the proposed Drilling and Production Site. 
g.  An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. Such exhibit must include contact information, a physical site description including: land uses; general vegetation and surface water in near proximity; topography/contour lines both pre- and post-construction; hydrologic analysis including: stormwater directional flow, outfalls, water well related structures and water sources; receiving waters; soils; project narrative with general timeline; well pad site plan including: fueling areas, waste disposal containers, hazardous materials storage, and product and condensate storage tanks, soil stabilization and erosion control measures including: list of selected stormwater measures, site map of selected stormwater measures, locations and final stabilization plans; solid waste management plan, septic/portolet location; and maintenance plan for stormwater controls including schedule and transfer of ownership provision. See Gas Well Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Guidance Document for details. 
h.  An Access and Transportation Plan identifying the points of access and routes to be followed on the road network supporting gas well development on the Drilling and Production Site over time, and the internal circulation plan for the property containing the proposed site, including provisions to protect vehicle access to Neighborhood Streets. The Plan shall contain specifications for construction of the access road(s) and on-site fire lanes that meet the standards for emergency access set forth in paragraph 6.3.2E. A map showing transportation route and road for equipment, supplies, chemicals, or waste products used or produced by the gas well operation shall be included. The map shall illustrate the length of all public roads that will be used for site ingress and egress. The water source proposed for both the drilling and fracturing stages shall be identified in the Plan, together with a designation whether the water is to be hauled or piped to the site. 
i.  A Landscape Plan. The project review planner will determine if a buffer is required based on the adjacent land use(s). If the planner determines a buffer is required, then a landscape plan must be submitted in accordance with the City of Denton's Landscape Plan Checklist. Not every Drilling and Production Site requires a landscape plan. 
j.  A Tree Inventory and Preservation and Mitigation Plan. For sites with trees, a Tree Inventory and a Preservation Plan and Mitigation Plan pursuant to DDC, Subsection 7.7.4: Tree Preservation will be submitted. 
k.  A copy of any prior approvals required, including conditions imposed, such as a specific use permit (SUP) or watershed protection permit; 
l.  A Noise Management Plan, prepared in accordance with paragraph 6.3.2F.2; and 
m.  Proof of issuance of Notice of Activities pursuant to paragraph 6.3.7A.1. 
3.  Procedures and Criteria. 
a.  Processing of Application. An application for a Gas Well Development Site Plan shall be processed in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 2.6.6: Gas Well Development Plat, and shall be decided by the Gas Well Administrator. 
b.  Criteria. The Gas Well Administrator shall approve the application if it meets the following standards: 
i.  The site meets the setback requirements of Subsection 6.2.2, a waiver has been granted or a variance from such standards has been approved by the Board of Adjustment or the Gas Well Administrator. 
ii.  The application is consistent with any applicable SUP, MPC or PD site specific authorization, or Watershed Protection Permit and any conditions incorporated therein. 
iii.  The application meets applicable requirements of Subsection 6.3.2. 
iv.  The size of the Drilling and Production Site can accommodate the number of wells proposed. 
v.  The site is adequately served by a road network, does not take access from any Neighborhood Street, and road remediation fees have been paid. 
vi.  Notice of the application has been posted pursuant to Subsection 6.3.7. 
c.  Conditions. The Gas Well Administrator may impose conditions that assure compliance with the terms of the prior approvals or standards of this Subchapter. 
4.  Effect. The approval of a Gas Well Development Site Plan authorizes the Operator to apply for a Gas Well Permit for each well authorized by the Site Plan and other permits required before commencement of Drilling Activities on the Drilling and Production Site. 
5.  Recordation. An approved Gas Well Development Site Plan must be recorded by the Operator in the Denton County Records prior to the issuance of a Gas Well Permit. 
B.  Amended Gas Well Site Plan. 
1.  If the Operator proposes to do any of the following, an Amended Gas Well Development Site Plan shall be required. The applications shall be reviewed and decided in the same manner as the original application. 
a.  Relocate the boundaries of the Drilling and Production Site. 
b.  Expand the boundaries of the Drilling and Production Site. 
c.  Change the layout of the structures or appurtenances within the boundaries of the approved Drilling and Production Site. 
d.  Change the access road(s) or the location of the access road(s). 
2.  The application shall be reviewed and decided in the same manner as the original application for the Drilling and Production Site. 
3.  The setback requirements of Subsection 6.2.2 shall apply to activities described in paragraphs 6.2.4B.1.a and 6.2.4B.1.b above. 
4.  An approved Amended Gas Well Development Site Plan shall be recorded as required by paragraph 6.2.4A.5 above. 
C.  Expiration and Extension of Gas Well Development Site Plans. 
1.  A Gas Well Development Site Plan for a new Drilling and Production Site expires unless a complete application for a Gas Well Permit has been filed within one year of the date of approval of the Site Plan, or no drilling and production activities have occurred on the Site for a period of three years. 
2.  A Gas Well Development Site Plan for an Existing Site does not expire, unless no drilling and production activities have occurred on the site for a period of two years after all wells on the site have been plugged and abandoned. 
3.  An Operator may seek a special exception from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to paragraph 6.2.6B for a one-year extension of the expiration date for a Gas Well Development Site Plan for a new Drilling and Production Site.  
6.2.5 - Gas Well Permits. 
A.  Applicability and Exceptions. 
1.  Any person, acting for himself or acting as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person, shall not engage in Initial Drilling Activities within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a Gas Well Permit. 
2.  A Gas Well Permit shall be required for each well. No Gas Well Permit shall be issued for multiple wells. 
3.  A Gas Well Permit shall not be required for exploration for gas. Exploration of gas means geologic or geophysical activities, including, but not limited to surveying and seismic exploration not involving explosive charges, related to the search for oil, gas, or other sub-surface hydrocarbons. A seismic permit is required for impact-based exploration. 
4.  A Gas Well Permit shall constitute authority for Initial Drilling Activities, Completion Operations, Production Operations, Workover Operations and Redrilling with proper notice pursuant to Subsection 6.3.7. 
5.  By acceptance of any Gas Well Permit issued pursuant to this section, the Operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this Section 6.2: Gas Well Development and Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production, of this DDC. The terms of such provisions shall be deemed to be incorporated in any Gas Well Permit issued pursuant to this section with the same force and effect as if such gas well development regulations were set forth verbatim in such Gas Well Permit. 
6.  A Gas Well Permit is not required to authorize Workover Operations, Drilling Activities or Production Activities for an existing well conducted on an Existing Site, if such activities were authorized under a gas well permit approved by the Gas Well Administrator pursuant to gas well regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance; provided that nuisance and sound mitigation requirements under paragraph 6.3.2F.1 and paragraph 6.3.2F.2 and notice requirements under Subsection 6.3.7C shall apply to such activities. An Operator is not relieved from the obligation to obtain additional Fire Code permits for such activities. 
B.  Application Requirements. Applications for Gas Well Permits shall include the following: 
1.  File marked copy of recorded Gas Well Site Development Plan; 
2.  A completed application and permit form provided by the City that is signed by the applicant; 
3.  The application fee; 
4.  Upon completion of construction of the Drilling and Production Site, a copy of the As-built Gas Well Development Site Plan; 
5.  A copy of the permit issued by the RRC and corresponding API number; 
6.  Well and Operator information; 
7.  Description of work to be performed; 
8.  Anticipated start date; 
9.  Water source to be used for Completion Operations; 
10.  Verification that notices were provided in accordance with Subsection 6.3.7B; and 
11.  Proof of insurance and security. 
C.  Procedures and Criteria. 
1.  Filing of Application. All applications for Gas Well Permits shall be filed with the Department. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant, in which case the City shall provide a written explanation of the deficiencies. The City shall retain a processing fee determined by ordinance. The City may return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the Railroad Commission regarding the identity or authority of the Operator for the gas well. 
2.  Criteria. The Gas Well Administrator shall approve the application if it meets the following standards: 
a.  The application is consistent with the approved Gas Well Development Site Plan and any conditions incorporated therein. 
b.  The application meets applicable standards of Section 6.3. 
c.  The application is in conformance with the insurance and security requirements set forth in Subsection 6.3.3 and Subsection 6.3.4. 
3.  Conditions. The Gas Well Administrator shall not approve a Gas Well Permit until after the Operator has provided: 
a.  The security and insurance required by Subsections 6.3.3 and 6.3.4; 
b.  Payment of the required Road Damage Remediation Fee that will obligate the Operator to repair damage excluding ordinary wear and tear, if any, to public streets, including but not limited to, damage to bridges caused by the Operator or by the Operator's employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or representatives in the performance of any activity authorized by or contemplated by the approved Gas Well Permit. 
4.  An Operator may obtain a conditional Gas Well Permit contingent upon the submittal of an As-Built Gas Well Development Site Plan that conforms to the approved Gas Well Development Site Plan. The Gas Well Administrator shall review the As-Built submittal within three business days. Upon the written determination of the Gas Well Administrator that the As-Built Gas Well Development Site Plan conforms to the legal description as approved in the Gas Well Development Site Plan, the Operator may commence Drilling Activities. 
5.  Contents of Permit. Each Gas Well Permit issued by the Gas Well Administrator shall: 
a.  Identify the name of each well and its Operator; 
b.  Specify the date on which the Gas Well Administrator issued each Permit; 
c.  Specify the Permit expiration date; 
d.  Specify that if drilling is commenced before the Permit expires, the Permit shall continue until the well covered by the Permit is abandoned and the site restored; 
e.  Incorporate, by reference, the insurance and security requirements set forth in Subsection 6.3.3 and Subsection 6.3.4; 
f.  Incorporate, by reference, the requirement for periodic reports set forth in Subsection 6.3.6 and for Notice of Activities set forth in Subsection 6.3.7; 
g.  Incorporate the full text of the release of liability provisions set forth in Subsection 6.3.3A; 
h.  Incorporate, by reference, the conditions of the applicable Watershed Protection Permit to which the Gas Well Permit is subject; 
i.  Incorporate, by reference, the information contained in the Permit application; 
j.  Include the statement that all Drilling and Production Activities are subject to the applicable rules and regulations of the RRC, including the applicable "Field Rules," TCEQ and United States Army Corps of Engineers; 
k.  Contain the name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the City; 
l.  Contain the name, address and phone number of the person designated to receive service of process from the City, which person shall be a resident of Texas that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail; 
m.  Incorporate the well's RRC permit number and the American Petroleum Institute (API) number; 
n.  Incorporate, by reference all other applicable provisions set forth in the DDC; 
o.  Contain a notarized statement signed by the Operator, or designee, that the information is, to the best knowledge and belief of the Operator or designee, true and correct; 
p.  Contain a statement that the Operator acknowledges and voluntarily consents to be inspected by the City to ensure compliance with this section, Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production, and applicable provisions of the DDC, and the Municipal Code of Ordinances; and 
q.  If the Drilling and Production Site has not been constructed, an As-Built Gas Well Development Site Plan must be approved prior to commencement of Drilling Activities. 
6.  Denial of Permit. 
a.  The decision of the Gas Well Administrator to deny an application for a Gas Well Permit shall be provided to the Operator in writing within 10 days after the decision, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. 
b.  If an application for a Gas Well Permit is denied by the Gas Well Administrator, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new Gas Well Permit application from being re-submitted. 
D.  Expiration of Gas Well Permit. 
1.  A Gas Well Permit is valid for a period of one year and shall automatically expire, unless Initial Drilling Activities have commenced prior to such date. 
2.  If a Gas Well Permit has been issued by the City but Initial Drilling Activities have not commenced prior to the expiration date of the Permit, the Permit shall not be extended unless a special exception has been approved by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6; however, the Operator may reapply for a new Permit, as long as the Gas Well Development Site Plan remains in effect. 
E.  Transfer of Gas Well Permit. A Gas Well Permit may be transferred by the Operator with the written consent of the City if the transfer is in writing signed by both parties, if the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of the transferred Permit, if all information previously provided to the City as part of the application for the transferred Permit is updated to reflect any changes, and if the transferee provides the insurance and security required by Subsection 6.3.3 and Subsection 6.3.4. The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be released if a copy of the written transfer is provided to the City and all other requirements provided in this subsection are satisfied. The transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the City arising out of any activities conducted prior to the transfer.  
6.2.6 - Relief Measures. 
A.  Waiver Procedures for Drilling and Production Site Setback Reductions. 
1.  Property Owner Waivers for Drilling and Production Sites. An Operator may obtain a reduction in the Drilling and Production Site Setback requirements of Subsection 6.2.2 by procuring written, notarized waivers from 100 percent of the owners of Protected Uses and the owners of lots in Residential subdivisions that are within the required setback. 
a.  Property owner waivers must be in a format approved by the City and shall include an aerial exhibit attached clearly depicting the boundaries of the proposed Drilling and Production Site where well development could occur and the closest dimension to each Protected Use and each lot in the Residential Subdivision for which the waiver is being requested. Signatures are required on both the form and exhibit. 
b.  Written notarized waivers granted by all the property owners within the prescribed setback distance from a Drilling and Production Site must be filed, at the expense of the Operator, in the Denton County records. All waivers must identify the property address, block and lot number, subdivision name and plat volume and page number. Copies of filed property owner waivers must be submitted with the filing of a complete application for a Gas Well Development Site Plan. 
c.  If the Operator fails to obtain written waivers from all property owners within the prescribed Drilling and Production Site Setback, the Operator may submit a request for a variance to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6B, or a request for an administrative variance, pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6C. 
2.  Effect of Surface Development on Drilling and Production Site Setback Waivers. After the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, when a property owner constructs a Protected Use or develops a Residential Subdivision within the Drilling and Production Site Setback for an Existing Site prescribed by Subsection 6.2.2C, such property owner shall be deemed to have granted the Operator a waiver in satisfaction of paragraph (1) requirements above for that property containing the Protected Use or constituting the Residential Subdivision. This waiver shall apply to all successor property owners. This does not relieve an Operator from obtaining waiver(s) from all other property owners located within the Drilling and Production Site Setback for the Existing Site. 
3.  The notice provisions of Subsection 6.3.7B apply to procedures under this subsection (A). 
B.  Board of Adjustment Proceedings. 
1.  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Gas Well Administrator relative to the application and interpretation of this Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, except for vested rights appeals and matters described in paragraph 6.3.8F: Permit Suspension or Revocation, furthermore, the Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances to the provisions of this Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, under the relevant criteria set forth below. The Board may also grant special exceptions extending the expiration date of a Gas Well Development Site Plan or a Gas Well Permit for a period not to exceed one year. Any Operator or surface owner who desires to appeal the decision of the Gas Well Administrator, request a variance or request a special exception may file the appeal or request to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 2.8.1: Variance of the DDC. Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal variance or special exception request. For purposes of this Section, the Gas Well Administrator has designated authority from the Director of Planning to make final orders, decisions, or determinations. 
a.  Standard of review for appeals. The members of the Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise the authority to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the approval or denial of a Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Permit. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the Gas Well Administrator's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken. 
b.  General criteria for review of variances. In deciding requests for variances, the Board of Adjustment shall consider, where applicable, the following relevant criteria: 
i.  Whether there are special circumstances existing on the property on which the application is made related to size, shape, area, topography, surrounding conditions and location that do not apply generally to other property in the vicinity; 
ii.  Whether a variance is necessary to permit the applicant the same rights in the use of his property that are presently enjoyed by other similarly situated properties, but which rights are denied to the property on which the application is made; 
iii.  Whether the granting of the variance on the specific property will adversely affect any other feature of the comprehensive master plan of the City; 
iv.  Whether the variance, if granted, will be of no material detriment to the public welfare or injury to the use, enjoyment, or value of property in the vicinity; 
v.  Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the vicinity considering the particular location and the character of the improvements located there; and 
vi.  Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the public when and if conducted in accordance with the Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Permit conditions to be imposed. 
2.  Standard of Review for Setback Variances. 
a.  In deciding requests for variances to Drilling and Production Site Setbacks, the Board of Adjustment shall consider, where applicable and in addition to the general criteria stated in paragraph (1.b) above, the following relevant criteria: 
i.  Whether there is reasonable access for City fire personnel and firefighting equipment, including the ability to safely evacuate potentially affected residents. 
ii.  The extent to which the Operator and the surface owner(s) are in agreement on a plan for development of the property, have provided for adequate access and traffic circulation, and taken measures to promote compatibility of gas well development and other surface development of the property. 
iii.  For a request by an Operator to reduce Drilling and Production Site Setbacks, whether the impact upon adjacent property and the general public from gas well development under the requested setback will be substantially increased, considering: 
a.  The reasonable use of the mineral estate by the mineral estate owner(s) to explore, develop, and produce the minerals; 
b.  The availability of alternative drilling sites; and 
c.  The number of owners of Protected Uses or lots in a Residential Subdivision who are willing to waive the Drilling and Production Site Setback as requested or in modified form. 
b.  In deciding the request for a variance to setback requirements, the Board may approve the request as granted, modify the request or deny the request. In granting a variance for reduction of a Drilling and Production Site Setback, the Board may impose such conditions as are necessary to mitigate the impacts of the reduced setbacks and to preserve the public health and safety, including but not limited to, the enhanced mitigation standards contained in Subsection 6.3.2G. 
c.  In deciding requests by a property owner or developer of a Protected Use or residential lot for a variance from Reverse Setbacks that do not meet the requirements for administrative alternative site design approval as described in Subsection 6.2.6.C, the Board of Adjustment shall consider, where applicable and in addition to, the general criteria stated in Section 6.2.6.B.1.b, the following relevant criteria: 
i.  The reasonable use of the surface of the subject property by the property owner or developer; 
ii.  The availability of alternative site designs or subdivision layouts; and 
iii.  Compatibility with any existing Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Plat. 
d.  In no event shall the Board of Adjustment reduce the Minimum Setbacks set forth in Subsection 6.2.2. 
3.  The Board of Adjustment shall determine whether to grant an extension of the expiration for a Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Permit based upon whether there are circumstances reasonably beyond the control of the Operator, including any delay on the part of the City in issuing subsequent permits, that justify an extension of the Site Plan or Permits, in order that the Operator may enjoy the same rights in the use of the property that are presently enjoyed by other similarly situated properties, but which rights are denied to the property for which the Site Plan or Permits have expired or are suspended. 
4.  Any action under this subsection B shall require a three-fourths majority vote of the entire Board of Adjustment. 
5.  Any Operator or other person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, stating that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the alleged illegality. Such petition shall be presented within 10 days after the date on which the decision of the Board of Adjustment was rendered and not thereafter, and judicial review of the petition shall be pursuant to TLGC, § 211.011, as amended. 
C.  Administrative Relief Procedures. 
1.  Drilling and Production Site Setbacks. An Operator may request administrative relief to the Drilling and Production Site Setback requirements of Subsection 6.2.2 for a New or Existing Site from the Gas Well Administrator under the following circumstances: 
a.  The Operator has at least one Existing Site on the property under mineral lease for the property or for contiguous leased property; 
b.  Such Existing Site(s) is located closer to Protected Uses or Residential Subdivisions than is the proposed Drilling and Production Site to such uses; and 
c.  The Operator agrees in a written instrument capable of recording to limit gas well development on such Existing Site(s) to existing Gas Well Drilling and Production Activities. 
For each Existing Site so restricted, the Gas Well Administrator may reduce the Drilling and Production Site Setback by an amount calculated as follows: 50 percent of the difference between the Drilling and Production Site Setback and the Minimum Setback. As a condition of granting the administrative variance, the Gas Well Administrator shall require that the Operator's written agreement be recorded in the Denton County records at the Operator's expense. 
2.  Reverse Gas Well Setbacks. The Director may grant administrative relief from the Reverse Setback requirements of Section 6.2.2 upon application of the owner of a Protected Use or residential lot where (i) the property owner has utilized all applicable options for alternative site designs and DDC flexibility provisions to maximize buildable area and (ii) fifty percent (50%) or more of the subject property is encumbered by the Reverse Gas Well Setback. 
In applying alternative site designs to a subject property under this section: 
i.  For a residential subdivision, the standards for Cluster Developments in Subsection 8.3.4 may be applied without having to meet the minimum parcel size of 5 acres as stated in 8.3.4B.2 and without requiring approval of a Planned Development (PD) in accordance with 8.3.4C.1. Plats for cluster subdivisions shall require approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the applicable procedures in Subchapter 2. 
ii.  For all other Protected Uses, the applicable maximum building height and maximum building coverage may be increased by 20%, and the minimum unit size and minimum required number of parking spaces may be reduced by 20%. 
D.  Vested Rights Appeals. Any person who claims that he has obtained a vested right pursuant to TLGC, Chapter 245, or other applicable vesting law under prior gas well development regulations from the requirements of Section 6.2: Gas Well Development and Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production, as they pertain to gas well development, may request a determination pursuant to Subsection 2.5.6: Vested Rights. For proposed gas wells to be located inside the City limits, the petitioner shall include a statement of the reasons why the regulations contained in Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, as they pertain to Gas Well Development are not exempt pursuant to TLGC section 245.004. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0009c, § 2(Exh. B), 11-19-2010)  
6.3 - Gas Well Drilling and Production 
 
6.3.1 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, certain words and terms shall be defined and interpreted as follows. Interpretations of meaning shall be made by the Director of Planning and Development based on the provisions of Subsection 2.8.6, Interpretations. Appeals of staff interpretations of this Subchapter shall be heard as a Board of Adjustment proceeding in accordance with Subsection 2.8.1: Variance. 
As-Built Gas Well Development Site Plan: A Gas Well Development Site Plan depicting the boundaries of the subject Drilling and Production Site as constructed. 
Completion Operations: The term used to describe the events and equipment necessary to bring a wellbore into production once drilling operations have been concluded, including, but not limited to, well stimulation activities, the assembly of downhole tubular, or installing equipment in the well to allow a safe and controlled flow of petroleum or hydro carbons from the well. This definition describes all events performed and equipment used for completion of a well, whether performed the first time on a well or as subsequent treatments to an existing well. 
Compressor: A device that raises the pressure of natural gas. 
Contaminant: Any substance capable of contaminating a non-related homogeneous material, fluid, gas or environment. 
Cure Period: The amount of time granted to remedy a violation of this Chapter. 
Daytime: The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. CST on any given day. 
Drilling: Term used to typically describe the means by which the earth is bored to create a pathway to formations containing hydrocarbons to allow for their production to the surface. It can employ various types of mobilized drilling equipment to create a wellbore while incorporating drilling fluids to cool the bit, to condition the hole, to remove drilled cuttings and to maintain an overbalanced pressure gradient against the formation that may contain inherently pressurized well fluids. 
Drilling Activities: Those activities commonly performed at a Drilling and Production Site necessary or incidental to getting hydrocarbons to market; including but not limited to a well redrill or any hydraulic refracturing, initial drilling and completion operations, but not including Production Activities. 
Drilling and Production Site: The area dedicated to all authorized above ground gas well drilling and production activities related to an oil and gas operation on an improved area and containing all wells, structures, dehydrators, parking areas, security cameras, lighting, tanks, tank battery (or any other tank grouping area), drilling rigs, separators, lift compressors, perimeter walls, utilities, and all other features or objects used during and after gas well drilling or production activities, as depicted on a Gas Well Development Plat or Gas Well Development Site Plan, but excluding pits, gathering and transmission lines and compressor stations. Drilling and Production Site includes the terms gas well park, gas well pad site, pad site, and drilling and production area. 
Drilling and Production Site Setback: The distance that the site must be separated by an Operator from an existing Protected Use or from a Residential Subdivision. 
Existing Drilling and Production Site or Existing Site: A Drilling and Production Site that was specifically depicted and approved on a Gas Well Development Site Plan, or a gas well development plat, prior to August 18, 2015, and on which one or more gas wells exist. Where the boundaries of such site have not been defined by metes and bounds or lot/block description on an approved gas well development plat, this term describes the improved surface area incorporating all facilities and appurtenances currently contained on the developed Drilling and Production Site. An Existing Site also includes a Drilling and Production Site designated in a MPC or PD District, and approved via a site-specific authorization, whether or not one or more wells exist on the site, provided that the site-specific authorization includes a metes and bounds description or a metes and bounds description is provided within three months of this amendatory ordinance. 
Existing Gas Well Development Site Plan: A Gas Well Development Site Plan that was approved by the City after August 4, 2010 that established setback boundaries and identified a specific number of wells to be constructed on the subject Drilling and Production Site. 
Exploration: Geologic or geophysical activities, including, but not limited to surveying and seismic exploration, related to the search for oil, gas, or other sub-surface hydrocarbons. 
Floodplain: See Subchapter 9: Definitions, for definition. 
Flood Fringe: See Subchapter 9: Definitions, for definition. 
Floodway: See Subchapter 9: Definitions, for definition. 
Flowback: The process of allowing fluids to flow from a well following a treatment, either in preparation for a subsequent phase of treatment or in preparation for cleanup and returning the well to production. The flowback period occurs as a stage within Completion Operations. 
Freshwater Well: A private water well used by a Protected Use. 
Gas: A naturally-occurring gaseous substance, including substances primarily composed of methane and other light, gaseous hydrocarbons. 
Gas Processing Plant: A facility, separate and distinct from a Drilling and Production Site, engaged in the extraction of natural gas liquids from field natural gas, or the fractionation of mixed natural gas liquids to natural gas products, or a combination of both. 
Gas Well: A hole or bore drilled to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose of producing or storing natural gas, or other liquid hydrocarbons. 
Gas Well Administrator: The administrative official designated by the City of Denton that is responsible for evaluating the impacts of exploration, development, and production of oil and/or gas wells. Responsibilities include environmentally sensitive areas review, erosion control inspection, monitoring, and evaluating compliance with federal, state, and local regulations. 
Gas Well Development: Any drilling activity or production activity performed on an approved Drilling and Production Site. 
Gas Well Development Site Plan: The initial approval authorizing wells to be drilled at one Drilling and Production Site that sets the boundaries used for setback measurements and contains all the information required by this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. 
Gas Well Drilling and Production Activities: (A/K/A drilling and production activity(ies), drilling and production.) As used in this Chapter, gas well drilling and production activities encompasses all three of the following: Initial Drilling Activities, Completion Operations and Production Activities. 
Gas Well Permit: A written license that is granted by the City of Denton pursuant to Subsection 6.2.5: Gas Well Permits. A Gas Well Permit is required for each separate well. The term "gas well permit" in lower case letters refers to a permit approved by the City of Denton under gas well regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, as the context may indicate, which authorized drilling and production activities on a gas well existing on such effective date. 
Habitable Structure: Structures suitable for human habitation or occupation for which a Certificate of Occupancy or Final Inspection Certificate is required, including but not limited to, public buildings and enclosed buildings used for commercial or industrial purposes. A habitable structure shall not include accessory buildings, barns, garages and sheds. 
Hazardous Materials Management Plan: The hazardous materials management plan and hazardous materials inventory statements required by the Fire Code. 
Hydraulic Fracturing: A well stimulant treatment that involves the process of directing pressurized fluids containing any combination of water, propellant, and any added chemicals to penetrate tight formations, such as shale or coal formations, that subsequently require high rate, extended flowback to expel fracture fluids and solids during completions. Hydraulic Fracturing occurs as a stage within Completion Operations. 
Initial Drilling Activities: The portion of the Drilling Activities that includes the means by which a portion of the earth is originally bored in order to create a pathway to formations containing hydrocarbons to allow for their production to the surface. 
Lightning Protection System: An integrated system designed to ground metal equipment on a rig, well pad or at a tank battery location for protection against electrical shock, fire or explosion due to lightning. 
Liner: In pit construction, a liner is an impervious material, either synthetic or natural, that is used to line the interior of a pit to prevent pit fluids from leaking or leaching into the environment. 
Minimum Setback: The minimum distance a Drilling and Production Site must be separated by an Operator from a Protected Use or from a Residential Subdivision after a waiver or variance is granted to reduce the setback requirement. 
New Drilling and Production Site or New Site: A proposed Drilling and Production Site that is other than an Existing Site. 
Operator: The person(s) in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping, or controlling any well or pipeline including without limitation, a unit Operator. 
Plugging and Abandonment: Includes the plugging of the well, abandoned, orphaned or otherwise, in accordance with RRC Statewide Rule 3.14 or its successor regulation and restoration of the Drilling and Production Site as required by the RRC. 
Production Activities (A/K/A Production): The phase that occurs after Exploration, Initial Drilling Activities and Completion Operations and during which time hydrocarbons are stored or drained from an underground reservoir involving operations performed on a Drilling and Production Site, excluding those operations and facilities as defined and regulated by the Pipeline Safety Act of 1994, 49 U.S.C. §§ 60101—60137. 
Protected Use: Any dwelling, church, public park, public library, hospital, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten or elementary, middle or high school, public pool, public transit center, senior center, public recreation center, hotel or motel. 
Railroad Commission (RRC): The Railroad Commission of Texas. 
Redrill: Any work to an existing well bore or an existing surface hole location after Initial Drilling Activities that requires a new permit from the Texas Railroad Commission. This definition includes, but is not limited to, drilling into a new horizon or drilling multiple directionals from the same surface hole location or using the same vertical wellbore. 
Residential Subdivision: A subdivision designated for residential use for two or more dwellings. 
Reverse Setback: The minimum distance that a Protected Use or Residential Subdivision must be separated by a surface owner from an approved Drilling and Production Site or from a gas well within such site. 
Site Access Road: The route depicted and approved on the Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Development Plat that identifies the ingress and egress point used to access the Drilling and Production Site from an existing City, County, or State maintained roadway. 
Site Preparation: To ready a Drilling and Protection Site for Initial Drilling Activities by installing erosion and sediment control practices, performing clearing and grading activities of the Drilling and Production Site or Site Access Road. 
Site-specific Authorization: The prior approval by ordinance of the City Council, of one or more specifically located and defined gas well site locations, subject to further site design, development, regulatory and permitting requirements, as set forth in this DDC or as specified within the site approval ordinance (or both), as applicable. 
Spud: The start of the well drilling process by removing rock, dirt, or other sedimentary material with the drill bit. 
Tank: Any storage vessel that contains an accumulation of crude oil, condensate, intermediate hydrocarbon liquids, or produced water; is constructed primarily of non-earthen materials (such as wood, concrete, metal, fiberglass, steel or plastic) which provide structural support; is not skid-mounted or permanently attached to something that is mobile; and is intended to be located at the Drilling and Production Site for more than 90 consecutive days. 
Well Stimulation: A treatment performed to restore or enhance the productivity of a well by opening new channels in the rock for the oil and gas to flow through; including, but not limited to fracturing, hydraulic or otherwise, injection of acid, or the use of charges to break up the rock. 
Workover Operation: Work performed on a well after its initial completion to secure production where there has been none, to restore production that has ceased, or to enhance or increase production within the zone originally completed or to repair the well. Workover operations do not include redrills or completion activities.  
6.3.2 - Standards for Gas Well Drilling and Production. 
The drilling and production of gas wells within the City limits shall be subject to the following standards: 
A.  Prohibited or Restricted Locations, Uses and Activities. 
1.  No gas well Drilling and Production Sites shall be allowed on slopes greater than 10 percent. 
2.  No Drilling and Production Site shall be located within any of the streets or alleys of the City or streets or alleys shown by the current Comprehensive Plan of the City of Denton. No street shall be blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling, or production activities unless prior consent is obtained from the City Manager, and then only temporarily. 
3.  Nothing in this Section is intended to prevent an Operator from drilling directionally to reach a target or bottom hole that is located beneath a prohibited or restricted site. Gas wells may have a target location or bottom-hole location that is under the floodway, an ESA or within 1,200 feet of the flood pool elevation of Lake Ray Roberts or Lake Lewisville when the gas well is drilled directionally from a location outside such areas. 
4.  No refining process, or any process for the extraction of products from gas, shall be carried on at a Drilling and Production Site, except that a dehydrator and separator, in accordance with federal and/or state law, may be maintained on a Drilling and Production Site for the separation of liquids from gas. Any such dehydrator or separator may serve more than one well. Gas Processing Facilities shall require a Specific Use Permit. 
5.  No person shall place, deposit, or discharge (or cause or allow to be placed, deposited, or discharged) any oil, naphtha, petroleum, diesel, gasoline, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substance, or any refuse, including wastewater or brine, from any gas operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any gas operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or sewer, any body of water, or any private property within the corporate limits of the City of Denton. 
6.  No Operator shall excavate or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water, or minerals on, under, or through the streets or alleys or other land of the City without an easement or right-of-way license from the City, at a price to be agreed upon, and then only in strict compliance with this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, with other ordinances of the City, and with the specifications established by the Engineering Department. 
7.  The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking up, or damaging of any public street or leaving upon any public street any earth or other materials is prohibited. Construction activities or deposition of any materials or objects creating an obstruction within public rights-of-way or easements are prohibited unless the Operator has first obtained written approval from the Engineering Department and, if applicable, has filed a right-of-way use agreement, and then only if in compliance with specifications established by the Department. 
B.  Site Layout, Design, and Compatibility Requirements. The following requirements apply only within City limits: 
1.  Entrance Gate. An entrance gate to the Drilling and Production Site shall be required and a sign identifying the entrance to the Drilling and Production Site or operation site shall be light reflective. 
2.  Fencing, Screening and Landscaping. 
a.  Fencing, buffering, landscaping and screening shall be required on Drilling and Production Sites. All required fencing, landscaping, buffering and screening must be installed in accordance with the approved Landscape Plan within 180 days after initial drilling of the first approved well. Landscaping and screening shall also be required for Compressors. Landscaping and screening shall comply with the same requirements for Drilling and Production Sites as set forth in this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, and in the DDC. Should the Operator decide to fence in gathering and transmission lines or compressor stations, or both, Operator shall install the fencing in accordance with Subchapter 7: Development Standards. 
i.  All Drilling and Production Sites in Residential Districts shall be screened with an opaque decorative masonry fence that shall be no less than eight feet in height. 
ii.  In lieu of this requirement, an alternative fence that is compatible with the area surrounding the Drilling and Production Site may be approved by the Director of Planning and Development. 
iii.  Required fencing must be located within 300 feet of all equipment necessitating fencing requirements under this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. 
b.  Fencing in all other districts shall be screened with a fence at least eight feet in height that is compatible with the area surrounding the Drilling and Production Site. Required fencing must be located within 300 feet of all equipment necessitating fencing requirements under this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. 
3.  Signage. 
a.  A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed on each side of the fence that surrounds the Drilling and Production Site. Such sign shall be made of durable material and shall be maintained in good condition. The sign shall have a surface area of not less than 2½ feet by 2½ feet or more than 4 by 4 feet and shall be lettered in minimum four-inch lettering and shall include the following information: 
"THIS IS A GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION SITE. THIS SITE MAY BE THE SUBJECT OF FURTHER DRILLING AND PRODUCTION AND/OR HYDRAULIC FRACTURING." 
b.  Additional signs shall be posted on each Drilling and Production Site which contain the following information: 
i.  The Well Identification Number(s), American Petroleum Institute well number(s) and any other well designation(s) required by the RRC; 
ii.  Name of Operator; 
iii.  Operator's telephone number which will be answered 24 hours a day by a live, in-person, non-automated response system so as to ensure that in cases of emergency the Operator is made immediately aware; 
iv.  Operator's business mailing address; 
v.  Address of Drilling and Production Site; 
vi.  The number for emergency services (911); 
vii.  The telephone number of the City's Gas Well Division for citizens to call with questions, concerns or complaints; 
viii.  The telephone number of the TCEQ's Regional Office where air quality complaints may be reported; and 
ix.  Any additional information required by RRC. 
c.  A permanent weatherproof sign shall be posted on each Drilling and Production Site reading "DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED," in both English and Spanish, at the entrance of each Drilling and Production Site or in any other location approved or designated by the Fire Marshal. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height and shall be red on white background or white on red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the City Fire Department and the Operator, well and lease designations required by the RRC. 
4.  Painting. All installed, mounted, and/or permanent equipment on Drilling and Production Sites shall be coated, painted, and maintained at all times, including the wellhead, gas processing units, pumping units, storage tanks, above-ground pipeline appurtenances, buildings, and structures, in accordance with applicable guidelines adopted by The Society for Protective Coatings (SSPC). In addition, the following standards are applicable: 
a.  Protective coatings and paints shall comply with any applicable State or City requirements. In absence of any such requirement, protective coatings and paints shall be of a neutral color that is compatible with the surrounding environment. 
b.  All exposed surfaces of the identified equipment must be coated and painted, and free from rust, blisters, stains, or other defects. 
5.  Electric Lines. All electric lines to permanent production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those already installed in the surrounding areas or subdivision. 
6.  Lift Compressor Location. Any lift compressor which is installed within an approved Drilling and Production Site shall be located at least 24 feet from the outer boundary of the site. 
7.  Storage Tanks and Separators. 
a.  An Operator is allowed to construct, use, and operate such storage equipment and separation equipment as shown on the approved Gas Well Development Site Plan, except that permanent storage equipment and separation equipment may not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
b.  The use of centralized tank batteries is permitted if shown and approved by the applicable Gas Well Development Site Plan. 
8.  Trash Removal. Any rubbish or debris that might constitute a fire hazard shall be promptly removed from the Drilling and Production Site. 
9.  Debris. The Drilling and Production Site and site access road shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material. 
C.  Site Development Standards. 
1.  Water Conservation Plan. In cases where the City activates its drought contingency plan, each Operator must submit to the City a water conservation plan for uses of water. The plan must provide information in response to each of the following elements: 
a.  A description of the use of the water in the production process, including how the water is diverted and transported from the source(s) of supply, how the water is utilized in the production process, and the estimated quantity of water consumed in the production process and therefore unavailable for reuse, discharge, or other means of disposal; 
b.  If long-term, five to 10 years, water storage is anticipated, quantified five-year and 10-year targets for water savings and the basis for the development of such goals; 
c.  A description of the device(s) and/or method(s) within an accuracy of plus or minus five percent to be used in order to measure and account for the amount of water diverted from the source of supply; 
d.  Leak-detection, repair, and accounting for water loss in the water distribution system; 
e.  Application of state-of-the-art equipment and/or process modifications to improve water use efficiency; and 
f.  Any other water conservation practice, method, or technique which the user shows to be appropriate for achieving the stated goal or goals of the water conservation plan. 
2.  Erosion and Sediment Controls. Erosion and sediment control practices shall be conducted for all gas wells. The Operator shall comply with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved by the City. 
3.  Site Access Restriction. Access to a Drilling and Production Site shall not be taken from Neighborhood Streets. 
D.  Operations and Equipment Standards. The following requirements apply only within City limits: 
1.  Compliance with Federal and State Laws, Rules and Regulations. The Operator shall at all times comply with the applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations, and Field Rules, including but not limited to those addressing the following subjects: 
a.  Vapor recovery equipment; 
b.  Venting and flaring; 
c.  Soil sampling; 
d.  Pit design and use; 
e.  Hydraulic fracturing; 
f.  Plugging and abandonment of gas wells; 
g.  Reclamation of Drilling and Production Sites; 
h.  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers setback requirements from water bodies; and 
i.  Surface casing procedures. 
2.  Time of Fracturing. Fracturing operations shall be scheduled to occur during daytime unless the Operator has notified the Gas Well Administrator that fracing will occur before or after daytime to meet safety requirements. 
3.  Clean-up After Completion. After the well has been completed the Operator shall clean and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations within 30 days. 
4.  Plugged and Abandoned Wells. All wells shall be plugged and abandoned in accordance with the rules of the RRC. In addition, the Operator shall: 
a.  Submit a copy of its RRC Form W-3A (Notice of Intention to Plug and Abandon) and Form W-3 (Plugging Record) to the Inspector within two business days of filing with the RRC; 
b.  Notify the Gas Well Administrator of the intention to plug and abandon a well at least 24 hours prior to commencing activities; and 
c.  Submit to the Gas Well Administrator the surface hole locations in an acceptable Geographic Information System (GIS) format to accurately map and track well locations. The GIS data may be submitted with an initial Gas Well Permit application or with the annual administrative report. Submission of GIS location data is only required once. 
E.  Fire Safety and Emergency Response Requirements. The provisions of this section shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Denton. 
1.  State, Federal, and Local Compliance. The drilling and production of gas and accessing the Drilling and Production Site shall be in compliance with all state, federal and local safety regulations. 
2.  Gathering Lines. 
a.  Each Operator shall place a pipeline marker sign at each point where a flow line or gathering line crosses a public street or road. 
b.  Each Operator shall place a warning sign for lines carrying H2S (Hydrogen Sulfide) gas as required by the Railroad Commission. 
c.  All flow lines and gathering lines within the corporate limits of the City (excluding City utility lines and franchise distribution systems) that are used to transport oil, gas, and/or water shall be limited to the maximum allowable operating pressure applicable to the pipes installed and shall be installed with at least the minimum cover or backfill specified by the American National Safety Institute Code, as amended. 
3.  Operating Pressure. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All wellheads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line. 
4.  Control Device. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank. 
5.  Storage Tanks. Each storage tank requires a permit by the Fire Department and shall meet the requirements of the Fire Code. 
6.  Outdoor Storage Areas. Outside storage areas shall be equipped with a secondary containment system designed to contain a spill from the largest individual vessel. If the area is open to rainfall, secondary containment shall be designed to include the volume of a 24-hour rainfall as determined by a 25-year storm and provisions shall be made to drain accumulations of ground water and rainfall. 
7.  Lightning System. Drilling and Production Sites shall be equipped with a lightning protection system, in accordance with the City's Fire Code and the National Fire Association's NFPA-780. In addition, tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a lightning arrestor system. 
8.  Remote Foam Line. Drilling and Production Sites shall be equipped with a remote foam line that meets the requirements of NFPA-11. 
9.  Hazardous Materials Management Plan. An Operator shall prepare and provide to the Fire Marshal a Hazardous Materials Management Plan. Any updates or changes to this plan shall be provided to the Fire Marshal within three business days of the change. All chemicals and/or hazardous materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent, contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and cleanup of any accidental spill, leak, or discharge of a hazardous material. Operator shall have all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials on-site. All applicable federal and state regulatory requirements for the proper labeling of containers shall be followed. Appropriate pollution prevention actions shall be required and include, but are not limited to, chemical and materials raised from the ground (e.g., wooden pallets), bulk storage, installation and maintenance of secondary containment systems, and protection from stormwater and weather elements. 
10.  Emergency Response Plan. An Operator shall prepare and provide to the Fire Marshal an Emergency Response Plan which includes the following information: (i) a detailed site plan showing the location of the access road, all buildings and structures, well head, tank batteries, above ground pipe and underground transmission pipe; (ii) a list of all on-site safety features, equipment and its location; (iii) the name, address and a twenty-four-hour, in-person response, phone number of the Operator to be notified in case of emergency; and (iv) the name, phone number and address of the surface property owner. The Emergency Response Plan should describe the personnel, procedures and equipment that the Operator has available for responding to any irregular release or a threatened release of materials on the site. The Emergency Response Plan may be included in the Hazardous Materials Management Plan. 
11.  Testing/Record Keeping. Operator shall perform periodic testing to verify that all equipment is operating properly. Maintenance and testing shall be under the supervision of a responsible person who shall ensure that such maintenance and testing are conducted in accordance with the manufacture's specifications. Test and inspection records must be available to the Fire Marshal or Gas Well Administrator for review upon request. 
12.  Access by Emergency Vehicles. All Drilling and Production Sites will be designed to provide road access for emergency vehicles in accordance with the provisions of the Fire Code. All access roads for fire apparatus must be unobstructed and be at least 20 feet in width, or shall have a design determined by the Fire Marshall as functionally equivalent to this standard. In addition, all access roads shall have an all-weather surface as provided for in the Fire Code. All dead ends and turning radii shall meet adopted Fire Code standards. 
13.  Pit Fencing. For safety reasons, fencing shall be installed to restrict access to a reserve pit or other type of open pit containing a synthetic liner and used in gas well drilling operation at a Drilling and Production Site within the corporate limits of the City. 
14.  Catchment Basins. Drip pans, catchment basins and other secondary containment devices or oil absorbing materials shall be placed or installed underneath all tanks, containers, pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system valves, connections, and any other areas or structures that could potentially leak, discharge, or otherwise spill hazardous or solid materials. 
15.  Clean-up Operations. After any spill, leak or discharge, the Operator shall remove or cause to be removed all contamination and associated waste materials. Clean-up operations shall begin immediately. 
16.  Immediate Notification. Upon the occurrence of a fire, blowout, release of hazardous materials, injury or other incident outside normal operating events, the Operator will immediately notify the Fire Department and a representative of the Operator will be on-site within 60 minutes to assist the City's Emergency Response Team and provide any information necessary regarding the site. The Operator shall also, at its own expense, contact and deploy any well containment specialists or other specialists necessary to contain and suppress the emergency situation. 
17.  Storage. No pit shall be used or maintained for storage of oil or oil products or oil field fluids, or for storage or disposal of oil and gas wastes. 
F.  Nuisance Prevention and Impact Mitigation Standards. 
1.  Nuisances. Adequate nuisance prevention measures shall be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust and vibration. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of gas and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effects are minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto to avoid injury to or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity. The site or structures shall not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor. 
2.  Sound Mitigation. 
a.  A noise management plan, prepared by a professional qualified in the area of noise mitigation, and approved by the Gas Well Administrator, detailing how the equipment used in the drilling, completion, transportation or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible noise levels of this section will be submitted with the Gas Well Site Plan Application. The noise management plan must: 
i.  Identify operation noise impacts; 
ii.  Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior to construction of any wellhead, compressor or compression facility; and 
iii.  Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall be considered, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location and type; 
b.  Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions; 
c.  Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; and 
d.  Topography. 
iv.  The Operator shall be responsible for verifying compliance with this section and the noise management plan after the installation of the noise mitigation equipment. 
b.  No well shall be drilled, re-drilled or any equipment operated at any location within the City in such a manner so as to create any noise, including low-frequency outdoor noise levels, which causes the exterior noise level when measured at the Protected Use receiver's/receptor's property line or from the closest exterior point of the Protected Use structure or inside the Protected Use structure if access to the property is granted by the receiver/receptor, that: 
i.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than five decibels during daytime hours and more than three decibels during nighttime hours; 
ii.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than 10 decibels over the daytime average ambient noise level during fracturing operations during daytime hours; 
iii.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three decibels during flowback operations during nighttime hours; 
iv.  Creates pure tones where one-third octave band sound-pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure levels of two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hertz and above, and by eight dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hertz, and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hertz. 
c.  The Operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to the City a continuous 72-hour pre-drilling ambient noise level prior to the issuance of a Gas Well Permit. The 72-hour time span shall include at least one 24-hour reading during either a Saturday or Sunday. The Operator shall use the prior established ambient noise level for the installation of any new noise generation equipment unless the Operator can demonstrate that the increase in the ambient noise level is not associated with drilling and production activities located either on or off-site. 
d.  Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in subsections b(i), b(ii) and b(iii) of this section may be permitted intermittently in accordance with the following: 
Table 6.3-A: Adjustments to Noise Standards 
Permitted Increase (dBa) 	Duration of Increase (minutes) [1] 
10 	5 
15 	5 
20 	Less than one 
Notes: 
[1] Cumulative minutes during any one hour. 
 
e.  All workover operations shall be restricted to daytime hours. 
f.  The exterior noise level generated by the drilling, redrilling or other operations of all gas wells located within the applicable Drilling and Production Site Setback as set forth in Subsection 6.2.2 shall be continuously monitored, to ensure compliance. The cost of such monitoring shall be borne by the Operator. If a complaint is received by either the Operator or the gas inspector from any Protected Use the Operator shall, within 24 hours of notice of the complaint, continuously monitor for a 72-hour period the exterior noise level generated by the drilling, redrilling or other operations to ensure compliance. At the request of the Gas Well Administrator, the Operator shall monitor the exterior noise level at the source of the complaint. 
g.  Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative methods as approved by the Gas Well Administrator may be used to ensure compliance. All soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards. 
h.  The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National Standard Institute's Standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
i.  A citation may be immediately issued for failure to comply with the provisions of this section. However, if the Operator is in compliance with the approved noise management plan, and a violation still occurs, the Operator will be given 24 hours from notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the 24-hour period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the Operator. 
3.  Lighting. No Operator shall permit any lights located on any site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within 300 feet. 
G.  Enhanced Nuisance Mitigation Standards. 
1.  Enhanced Standards for Operators. When an Operator, either by waiver procedure or variance, receives a reduction to the set-back requirements of Subsection 6.2.2 for a Drilling and Production Site, the Operator shall comply with the following Enhanced Nuisance Mitigation Standards for that site: 
a.  Sound Mitigation. The Drilling and Production Site shall be surrounded on all four sides with sound wall noise barriers that comply with accepted industry standards and are at least 30 feet in height during all Drilling Activities and Completion Operations and shall be removed by the Operator no later than 60 days after concluding the respective activity. In the alternative, if the Operator's noise management plan provides equally effective sound mitigation to the Protected Uses within 1,000 feet of the Drilling and Production Site boundary, then the Operator may follow the recommendations set forth in the noise management plan. If the Operator chooses the alternative, the Operator shall provide notice of its intent together with its Notice of Activities as required by Subsection 6.3.7C.1. 
b.  Production Monitoring. Periodic evaluations will be conducted by the City for the Drilling and Production Site during production to determine if equipment is functioning as designed or may be producing fugitive emissions. 
i.  A third party contractor may be retained by the City to perform such inspections, and cost of services and charges assessed by the third party contractor shall be borne by the Operator. Any third party contractor shall act at the City's direction and report directly to the City, and shall have the same authority as the Gas Well Administrator for purposes of inspections under this Section. 
ii.  The City shall notify the Operator in writing, as well as to the state and federal regulatory agencies having jurisdictional authority, of any malfunctioning equipment producing fugitive emissions. 
iii.  Quarterly reporting of the monitoring results to the City's Gas Well Administrator is required with all laboratory data sheets, field logs, data summaries, and actions taken in the previous quarter. 
iv.  Upon showing documented compliance for a period of 12 months, the Operator shall thereafter employ best management practices to eliminate any emissions in violation of state and federal regulations. 
c.  An Operator is exempt from the inspection requirements included in Subsection b. above, and any associated fees, on any well site equipped with an equivalent automated system that meets the following requirements and is approved by the Inspector. 
i.  Any such alternative must include a screening for the presence of leaks, releases, or emissions, and other conditions that could identify potential malfunctions in the efficient operation of on-site equipment, such as the monitoring of line pressures and storage tank levels. 
ii.  The automated system alternative shall include: 
a.  A 24-hour remote alert system designed to notify appropriate personnel of excess storage tank levels or abnormal changes in line pressure; and 
b.  An emergency automated shutdown of the well(s) when monitoring indicates irregular storage tank levels and functioning of valves. All emergency situations shall be immediately reported to the City via 911. 
iii.  If malfunctions are identified, the point of concern shall be noted and a repair confirmation provided to the Gas Well Administrator. The repair confirmation shall include a statement indicating that the component is working within manufacturer and regulatory requirements. 
iv.  Data shall be compiled over the life of the well(s) and available to the Gas Well Administrator for review. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0009c, § 2(Exh. B), 11-19-2010)  
6.3.3 - Indemnification and Insurance. 
A.  Indemnification and Express Negligence Provisions. Each Gas Well Permit issued by the City shall include the following language: 
OPERATOR DOES HEREBY EXPRESSLY RELEASE AND DISCHARGE ALL CLAIMS, DEMANDS, ACTIONS, JUDGMENTS, AND EXECUTIONS WHICH IT EVER HAD, OR NOW HAS OR MAY HAVE, OR ASSIGNS MAY HAVE, OR CLAIM TO HAVE, AGAINST THE CITY OF DENTON, AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, SUCCESSORS, ASSIGNS, SPONSORS, VOLUNTEERS, OR EMPLOYEES (COLLECTIVELY REFERRED TO AS THE "INDEMNIFIED PARTIES"), RELATING TO OR ARISING OUT OF BODILY INJURY, KNOWN OR UNKNOWN, AND INJURY TO PROPERTY, REAL OR PERSONAL, OR IN ANY WAY INCIDENTAL TO OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE PERFORMANCE OF THE WORK PERFORMED BY THE OPERATOR UNDER A GAS WELL PERMIT. TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, OPERATOR SHALL DEFEND, PROTECT, INDEMNIFY, AND HOLD HARMLESS THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM AND AGAINST EACH AND EVERY CLAIM, DEMAND, OR CAUSE OF ACTION AND ANY AND ALL LIABILITY, DAMAGES, OBLIGATIONS, JUDGMENTS, LOSSES, FINES, PENALTIES, COSTS, FEES, AND EXPENSES INCURRED IN DEFENSE OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, BODILY INJURY AND DEATH IN CONNECTION THEREWITH WHICH MAY BE MADE OR ASSERTED BY OPERATOR, ITS AGENTS, ASSIGNS, OR ANY THIRD PARTIES ON ACCOUNT OF, ARISING OUT OF, OR IN ANY WAY INCIDENTAL TO OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE PERFORMANCE OF THE WORK PERFORMED BY THE OPERATOR UNDER A GAS WELL PERMIT. THE OPERATOR AGREES TO INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM ANY LIABILITIES OR DAMAGES SUFFERED AS A RESULT OF CLAIMS, DEMANDS, COSTS, OR JUDGMENTS AGAINST THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES RELATING TO OR ARISING OUT OF THE ACTS OR OMISSIONS OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES OCCURRING ON THE DRILLING AND PRODUCTION SITE OR OPERATION SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE GAS WELLS INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS AND DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE SOLE NEGLIGENCE OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES OCCURRING ON THE DRILLING AND PRODUCTION SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE GAS WELLS. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH, AND/OR DAMAGE. LIABILITY FOR THE SOLE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF ITS DUTY TO INSPECT AND PERMIT THE GAS WELL IS LIMITED TO THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF RECOVERY UNDER THE TORT CLAIMS ACT. 
B.  Insurance. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  The Operator shall provide or cause to be provided the insurance described below for each well for which a Gas Well Permit is issued, and shall maintain such insurance until the well is abandoned and the site restored, except as otherwise required in this Section. The Operator may provide the required coverage for multiple wells on a "blanket basis." Such coverage shall be approved by the Risk Manager for the City of Denton. 
b.  Prior to issuance of the Gas Well Permit, the Operator shall furnish the City with a certificate(s) of insurance, executed by a duly authorized representative of each insurer, showing compliance with the insurance requirements set forth in this Section. A copy of the endorsements or other policy provisions adding the City as an additional insured to the insurance policies, endorsements providing the City 30 days' written notice of cancellation or material change in coverage, and all waivers of subrogation shall be attached to the certificate(s) of insurance. Upon request, certified copies of the insurance policies shall be furnished to the City. The City's acceptance of documents that do not reflect the required insurance, or the City's failure to request the required insurance documents, shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirements set forth in this Section. 
c.  In the event any insurance required by this Section is cancelled, the Gas Well Permit shall be suspended on the date of cancellation and the Operator's right to operate under the Gas Well Permit shall immediately cease until the Operator obtains the required insurance. 
d.  The Operator shall provide the City 30 days' written notice of any cancellation, non-renewal, or material change in policy terms or coverage, and the policies shall be endorsed to provide the City such notice. 
e.  All insurance policies shall be written by an insurer authorized to do business in Texas and with companies with a: VIII or better rating in accordance with the current Best's Key Rating Guide, or with such other financially sound insurance carriers approved by the City. 
f.  All insurance policies, with the exception of the workers compensation policy, shall be endorsed to name the City, its officials, employees, agents and volunteers as additional insureds on the policies. The additional insured coverage shall apply as primary insurance with respect to any other insurance or self-insurance programs maintained by the City, its officials, employees, agents and volunteers. A copy of each endorsement shall be provided to the City as evidence of coverage. 
g.  All insurance policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation in favor of the City, its officials, employees, agents and volunteers. A copy of each endorsement shall be provided to the City. 
h.  All insurance policies shall be written on an occurrence basis where commercially available. 
i.  During the term of the Gas Well Permit, the Operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the Gas Well Division any known loss or occurrence which has caused, or may in the future cause, bodily injury or property damage. 
2.  Required Insurance Coverages. 
a.  Commercial General Liability Insurance. Operator shall maintain commercial general liability (CGL) insurance with a limit of not less than $1,000,000 each occurrence with a $2,000,000 aggregate. This insurance shall cover liability including, but not limited to, liability arising from premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products-completed operations, contractual liability, underground property damage, broad form property damage, and independent contractors. This insurance shall also include coverage for underground resources and equipment hazard damage. In addition to the additional insured requirements set forth above, the additional insured coverage provided to the City, its officials, employees, agents and volunteers shall include coverage for products-completed operations. 
b.  Environmental Impairment (or Pollution Liability) Insurance. Operator shall maintain environmental impairment or pollution liability insurance with a limit of not less than $5,000,000. Such coverage shall not exclude damage to the lease site. If coverage is written on a claims-made basis, the Operator shall maintain continuous coverage or purchase tail coverage for four years following the expiration or suspension of the Gas Well Permit, and the retroactive date(s) applicable to such coverage shall precede the date of issuance of the Gas Well Permit. Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. Where commercially available, Operator shall also maintain such coverage for gradual pollution incidents. 
c.  Automobile Liability Insurance. Operator shall maintain automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less than $1,000,000 each accident. Such insurance shall cover liability arising out of any auto (including owned, non-owned, and hired autos). 
d.  Worker's Compensation Insurance. Operator shall maintain workers compensation and employers liability insurance. The workers compensation limits shall be as required by statute and employers liability limits shall not be less than $1,000,000 each accident for bodily injury by accident and $1,000,000 each employee for bodily injury by disease. 
e.  Excess (or Umbrella) Liability Insurance. Operator shall maintain excess (or umbrella) liability insurance with a limit of not less than $24,000,000 per occurrence with a $24,000,000 aggregate. Such insurance shall be excess of the commercial general liability insurance, automobile liability insurance and employers liability insurance as specified above. 
f.  Control of Well Insurance. Operator shall maintain control of well insurance with a limit of not less than $5,000,000 per occurrence. The policy shall provide coverage for the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage. A $500,000 sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the Operator has care, custody, and control.  
6.3.4 - Security. 
A.  Generally. Prior to the issuance of a Gas Well Permit the Operator shall provide the Gas Well Administrator with a security instrument in the form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in accordance with Subsection 6.3.4B below. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the Gas Well Administrator by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking institution, with a copy of the same provided to the City Secretary. 
1.  During Initial Drilling Activities. An Operator drilling between one and five wells in the City at any time shall provide a blanket bond or letter of credit that meets the requirements with Subsection 6.3.4B below in the principal minimum amount of $150,000. Such blanket bond or letter of credit shall be increased by $50,000 for the sixth and each additional well being drilled in the City. 
2.  During Completion and Production Activities. An Operator with wells that are producing and for which all drilling operations have ceased shall provide a blanket bond or letter of credit that meets the requirements with Subsection 6.3.4B below in the principal minimum amounts as follows: 
a.  Up to 75 wells: $100,000; 
b.  Between 76 and 150 wells: $150,000; and 
c.  More than 150 wells: $250,000. 
B.  Drawing of a Bond or Letter of Credit. 
1.  The City shall be authorized to draw upon such bond or letter of credit to: 
a.  Recover any fines or penalties assessed under this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; or 
b.  To pay the City for the cost of doing any work required to remedy any default by the Operator under any provision of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. 
2.  If the City determines that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, a written notice shall be given to the Operator. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the Operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the City 125 percent of the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the Cure Period be less than 10 days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the Operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. 
3.  The City shall be authorized to draw against the bond or letter of credit provided hereunder to recover such amount due from the Operator. Upon receipt of such moneys, the City shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient and necessary to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, such additional money may be demanded from the Operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. In the event the Operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over to the City the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the City against the applicable irrevocable letter of credit or bond the City may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the Operator, or by criminal action against the Operator, or by both such methods. 
C.  Requirements for Bonds. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to the City. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the Gas Well Permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration of the Gas Well Permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs first. The Operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the City, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the Operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, and the City. The original bond shall be submitted to the Gas Well Administrator with a copy of the same provided to the City Secretary. 
D.  Requirements for Letters of Credit. A letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in Texas and shall become effective on or before the date the Gas Well Permit is issued. The letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration of the Gas Well Permit term. If the letter of credit is for a time period less than the life of the well as required by this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, the Operator must agree to either renew the letter of credit or replace the letter of credit with a bond in the amount required by this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, on or before 60 days prior to the expiration date of the letter of credit. If the Operator fails to deliver to the City either the renewal letter of credit or replacement bond in the appropriate amount on or before 60 days prior to the expiration date of the letter of credit, the City may draw the entire face amount of the attached letter of credit to be held by the City of Denton as security for Operator's performance of its obligations under this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. 
E.  Abandoned Wells. When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice to that effect has been received by the City, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled.  
6.3.5 - Inspection. 
A.  In accordance with federal and state law, the Gas Well Administrator and Fire Marshal shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production; and Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, and Gas Well Permit, to determine compliance with its provisions, and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or directives of any local, state or federal authority. 
B.  Pursuant to inspection authority granted by this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, the Fire Code, the Texas Clean Air Act, and the Texas Water Code, the Gas Well Administrator and the Fire Marshal shall conduct periodic inspections of all Drilling and Production Sites, Gas Wells and well-related equipment permitted under this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production and Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. 
C.  Inspections will also include an evaluation of the Operator's conformance with their Hazardous Materials Management Plan and other applicable requirements to their site. Any deviations from, or violations of, the Hazardous Materials Management Plan shall be referred to the Fire Marshal for further inspection and enforcement in accordance with the Fire Code. 
D.  Inspection fees will be assessed for all inspections in an amount set by separate ordinance. Failure to timely remit payment for inspection fees is a violation of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production and Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; however, nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the City's remedies in equity or law in the collection of any past due fees.  
6.3.6 - Periodic Reports. 
A.  The Operator shall notify the Gas Well Administrator and the Fire Marshal of any changes to the following information within one business day after the change occurs: 
1.  The name, address, and phone number of the Operator; 
2.  The name, address, and twenty-four-hour, in-person response, phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority on behalf of the Operator over the Drilling and Production Site; 
3.  The name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the City, which person shall be a resident of Texas that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail; and 
4.  The Operator's Emergency Action Plan if required to file one pursuant to federal or state law. 
B.  The Operator shall, upon request of the Gas Well Administrator, promptly make available a copy of any "incident reports" or written complaints submitted to the RRC or any other state or federal agency. 
C.  Beginning a year after a well is spud, and thereafter until the Operator notifies the Gas Well Administrator that the well has been plugged and abandoned and the Drilling and Production Site restored, the Operator shall prepare a written report to the Gas Well Administrator identifying any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable Gas Well Permit that have not been previously reported to the City provided that changes have been made. 
D.  The Operator must provide a copy to the Gas Well Administrator of all reports otherwise filed with the TCEQ in connection with an installed vapor recovery unit as described in this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. The Operator shall also provide the City with copies of any responses provided by TCEQ. Such reports and responses shall be kept on the Drilling and Production Site and shall be available for inspection when requested by the Gas Well Administrator. 
E.  The Operator shall provide the City with copies filed with the RRC of the respective reports for setting surface casing, blowout preventer (BOP) pressure testing, bridge plug testing, pressure relief valve testing, and level control testing. The Operator shall also provide the City with copies of any responses provided by the RRC. Copies of such reports and responses shall be kept on the Drilling and Production Site and shall be available for inspection when requested by the Gas Well Administrator. 
F.  In addition to the records listed in this chapter, the Operator shall provide the City with a copy of all records filed with the RRC and TCEQ by the Operator or by third parties. Copies of such records shall be kept on the Drilling and Production Site and shall be available for inspection when requested by the Gas Well Administrator.  
6.3.7 - Notice of Activities. 
A.  Notice Applicable to Setback Waivers and Variances. 
1.  An Operator who seeks to reduce Drilling and Production Site Setbacks for a proposed Drilling and Production Site below those prescribed in Subsection 6.2.2, pursuant to the procedures in Subsection 6.2.6, shall give the notice prescribed by this subsection to each owner of surface property within the Drilling and Production Site Setback and to all registered neighborhood associations within one-half mile of the proposed Drilling and Production site at least 20 days prior to filing an application for approval of a Gas Well Development Site Plan for the proposed Drilling and Production Site. The notice shall describe which procedure(s) under Subsection 6.2.6 will be utilized by the Operator to obtain a reduction in the setback and the date of any hearing scheduled before the Board of Adjustment on a variance request. Such notice shall be in addition to any notices required for Board of Adjustment proceedings. 
2.  The notice shall identify the Operator and give the address and phone number of the Operator's representative, an internet link for information on the proposed request for reduction of setbacks, and contact telephone numbers for the City staff. The notice shall be accompanied by an aerial photograph containing the information in paragraph 6.2.6A.1.a. 
3.  Notices required by this subsection shall be by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. 
B.  Notice Applicable to Applications for Gas Well Development Site Plans. 
1.  At least 20 days prior to the date of filing of an application for approval of an original or amended Gas Well Development Site Plan with the Gas Well Administrator, the Operator shall notify, at the expense of the Operator, each surface owner of property within 1,000 feet of the proposed Drilling and Production Site. Such notice, as outlined below, shall be by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. 
2.  The notice shall expressly state whether waivers or variances from the Drilling and Production Site Setback have been granted pursuant to Subsection 6.2.6. The notice shall identify the Operator and give the address and phone number of the Operator's representative, an internet link for information on the proposed request for reduction of setbacks, and contact telephone numbers for the City staff. The notice shall be accompanied by an aerial photograph containing the information in paragraph 6.2.6A.1.a. 
3.  At least 20 days prior to the date of filing of an application for an original or amended Gas Well Development Site Plan with the Gas Well Administrator, the Operator shall publish a notice containing the information in paragraph (B)(2) above, at the expense of the Operator, in one issue of the local section of a newspaper of general circulation in the City for 10 consecutive days. An affidavit by the printer or publisher of the newspaper indicating publication of the notice shall be filed with the application and will be prima facie evidence of such publication. All notices shall follow a format required by the City. 
4.  No later than five days after filing of an application for an original or amended Gas Well Development Site Plan with the Gas Well Administrator, the Operator, at Operator's expense, shall erect at least one sign, as approved by the Gas Well Administrator, no less than three feet by three feet, upon the premises upon which a Gas Well Development Site Plan has been proposed. The sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points nearest right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property. The Gas Well Administrator may require additional signage if the premises fronts on more than one right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare. The sign(s) shall state that a Gas Well Development Site Plan has been requested, which if approved, would authorize the drilling of multiple gas wells for the site. The sign shall further set forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the Operator at the number indicated on the sign. The sign shall remain posted at the Drilling and Production Site for the duration of the Gas Well Development Site Plan. 
C.  Notice Applicable to Activities. 
1.  Any Operator who intends to perform the following activities: (1) Drilling Activities; (2) Workover Operations; (3) perform Completion or Re-Completion Operations; (4) plug and abandon a well; (5) perform any other maintenance activities that involve removal of the well head at a Drilling and Production Site; or (6) conduct seismic exploration not involving explosive charges; shall give written notice to the City no sooner than 30 days and no later than 10 days before the activities begin, except in instances where immediate Operator response is necessary, provided that the Operator has first obtained all necessary authorizations required by this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, and the Fire Code. Road Damage Remediation Fees shall be paid to the City and submitted with the Notice of Activities. 
2.  Except in instances where immediate Operator response is necessary, all dwellings within 1,000 feet from the boundary of a Drilling and Production Site shall be notified no sooner than 30 days and no later than 10 days prior to the activities listed in Subsection C(1) above, excluding Workover Operations. Such notice shall be by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. 
a.  The notice shall identify where the activities will be conducted and shall describe the activities in reasonable detail, including but not limited to the duration of the activities and the time of day they will be conducted. 
b.  The notice shall also provide the address and the 24 hour, in-person response, phone number of the Operator responsible for the well concerning the activities. 
3.  The Operator responsible for the activities shall post a sign at the entrance of the Drilling and Production Site giving the public notice of the activities, including the date and time the activities will begin, and the name, address, and 24-hour, in-person response, phone number of the Operator conducting the activities. 
4.  If upon receipt of the notice the City determines that an inspection by the Gas Well Administrator is necessary, the Operator will pay the City's fee for the inspection as set forth in amount as established by separate ordinance. 
5.  The Operator shall notify the Gas Well Administrator within 24 hours of setting surface casing.  
6.3.8 - Remedies, Enforcements and Right of Entry. 
A.  The Fire Marshal and the Gas Well Administrator are authorized and directed to enforce this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production; Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; and the provisions of any Gas Well Permit. Whenever necessary to enforce any provision of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production; Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; or a Gas Well Permit, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there has been a violation of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production; Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; or a Gas Well Permit, the Fire Marshal or Gas Well Administrator, may, consistent with federal and state law, enter upon any property covered by this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production; Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; or a Gas Well Permit at any reasonable time to inspect or perform any duty imposed by this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. If entry is refused, the City shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law and equity to gain entry. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following: 
1.  Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a Gas Well Permit issued under this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; 
2.  Fail to comply with any conditions set forth in a Gas Well Permit issued under this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; or 
3.  Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. 
C.  The enforcement and penalty provision under Section 1.6, Enforcement, shall apply to a violation of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. 
D.  The Gas Well Administrator is authorized to issue citations into municipal court for violations of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production; Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; or Gas Well Permit. 
E.  The City may also notify the EPA, TCEQ, RRC or other applicable federal or state agency in connection with violations of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. 
F.  Permit Suspension or Revocation. 
1.  If an Operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of any Gas Well Permit issued by the City in connection with any Gas Well Drilling and Production activity, the Fire Marshal or Gas Well Administrator may give written notice to the Operator specifying the nature of the alleged failure and giving the Operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the alleged failure, the extent of the efforts required to remedy the failure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. The Operator shall notify the Gas Well Administrator within 48 hours indicating how the violation(s) shall be remedied. Unless otherwise provided by this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production or Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, in no event, however, shall the Cure Period be less than 10 days unless the alleged failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to person. The Fire Marshal may issue a Stop Work Order under the Fire Code. 
2.  If the Operator does not cure the alleged failure within the time specified by the Fire Marshal and/or Gas Well Administrator, the Fire Marshal and/or Gas Well Administrator may notify the appropriate state or federal agency with jurisdiction over the alleged violation and request that the state or federal agency take appropriate action (with a copy of such notice provided to the Operator), and the City may pursue any other remedy available. 
3.  If the Operator does not cure the alleged failure within the time specified by the Fire Marshal and/or Gas Well Administrator, the Gas Well Administrator may recommend to the Board of Adjustment: 
a.  That the Gas Well Permit at issue shall be suspended until the alleged failure is cured; or, 
b.  If the Gas Well Permit at issue was under suspension at any time during the prior two-year period, that the Permit at issue shall be revoked. 
4.  The decision of the Fire Marshal and/or Gas Well Administrator to recommend suspension or revocation of a Gas Well Permit shall be provided to the Operator in writing at least 10 days before the hearing to be held by the Board of Adjustment. 
5.  If a Gas Well Permit is revoked, the Operator may submit information to the Gas Well Administrator evidencing that the alleged failure resulting in the revocation of the Gas Well Permit has been corrected, and an application for a new Gas Well Permit may be submitted for the same well.  
6.3.9 - Watershed Permits for Gas Well Developments. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  A Watershed Protection Permit shall be approved prior to approval of any Gas Well Development Site Plan, Gas Well Development Plat, or Gas Well Permit that includes land in any flood fringe area or ESA within the corporate limits or ETJ of the City, and for any proposed site that is within 1,200 feet of the flood pool elevation of Lake Ray Roberts or Lake Lewisville. Approval of a Watershed Protection Permit authorizes the processing of a complete application for a Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Development Plat, as the case may be, that includes land in a flood fringe area or ESA, or for a site that is within 1,200 feet of the flood pool elevation of Lake Ray Roberts or Lake Lewisville. No gas well development is allowed in the floodway, including the area of an ESA located in a floodway. 
2.  Inside the City limits, a Watershed Protection Permit for gas well development can be approved only if the City Council authorizes a Specific Use Permit. In making a recommendation for the SUP, the Director shall apply those standards set forth in Subsection 6.3.9D below. In the City's ETJ, a Watershed Protection Permit may be approved by the Director of Environmental Services, or designee pursuant to the procedures in Subsection 6.3.9C below. 
3.  A Watershed Protection Permit application may be submitted simultaneously with an application for a Specific Use Permit. 
B.  Application Requirements and Processing. A Watershed Protection Permit shall be processed in accordance with the following: 
1.  An application for a Watershed Protection Permit shall contain the following information and such information as may be required by the Development Review Committee and the Environmental Services Department, which is reasonably necessary to review and determine whether the proposed development and required facilities meet the requirements of this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production; Section 6.2: Gas Well Development; and as required by the Application Criteria Manual. In addition the information shall include the following: 
a.  A Tree Inventory Plan shall show the location of ESAs on any proposed Drilling and Production Site. 
b.  Show location of ESAs on proposed Drilling and Production Sites. 
2.  All applications for Watershed Protection Permits shall be filed with the Development Services Department, who shall immediately forward all applications to the DRC for review. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant, in which case the City shall provide a written explanation of the deficiencies. The City shall retain a processing fee determined by the City Council. The City may return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the Railroad Commission regarding the determination of the Operator. No application shall be deemed accepted for filing until the application is complete. 
C.  Procedures. 
1.  Each application for a Watershed Protection Permit for gas well development in the ETJ shall be approved or denied by the Director of Environmental Services or designee following DRC review. 
2.  Criteria for Approval for Watershed Protection Permit for Gas Well Development in the City limits. In reviewing the application for a Watershed Protection Permit, the Director shall apply those standards set forth in Subsection 6.3.9D below. The Director may attach such conditions to approval of a Watershed Protection Permit as are necessary to assure that the requirements of Subsection 6.3.9D below and any other applicable requirements contained in this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production and Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, are met. 
3.  Criteria for Approval for Watershed Protection Permits for gas well developments within the ETJ. In deciding the application for a Watershed Protection Permit, the Director shall apply those standards set forth in paragraph 6.3.9D.1; paragraph 6.3.9D.2 for riparian buffers within floodplains; and paragraph 6.3.9D.5. The Director may attach such conditions to approval of a Watershed Protection Permit as are necessary to assure that the requirements of these components of Subsection 6.3.9D below and any other applicable requirements in this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production and Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, are met. 
4.  Each Watershed Protection Permit shall: 
a.  Identify each well subject to the Permit; 
b.  Specify the date on which the Permit was issued; 
c.  Incorporate by reference all applicable standards of approval; and 
d.  Incorporate by reference all applicable conditions of approval. 
5.  The applicant may appeal the Director's denial or conditional approval of a Watershed Protection Permit in the ETJ on grounds pertaining to the standards in Subsection 6.3.9C.3 below to the City Council within 10 calendar days of the decision by the Director. The Council shall decide the petition based upon the criteria in Subsection 6.3.9C.3 below and any other applicable requirements contained in this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production and Section 6.2: Gas Well Development. 
D.  Watershed Protection Permit Standards. The standards in this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, are adopted pursuant to the authority granted by TLGC, Section 551.002 and Chapter 211 and are intended to minimize adverse impacts on areas within the Flood Fringe or ESA, reduce flood damage, and lessen the potential for contaminating surface water or any water supply. 
1.  Location of Sites. Drilling and Production Sites shall be located outside floodplains and other ESAs whenever practicable to minimize adverse impacts on these areas, reduce flood damage, and lessen the potential for contaminating surface water or any water supply. 
2.  Riparian Buffers. For all ESAs constituting or containing riparian buffers prior to the approval of a Gas Well Development Site Plan: 
a.  If a riparian buffer is designated as "fair" to "excellent" ESA, the designated protective stream buffer width as specified in Section 7.4, Environmentally Sensitive Areas of this DDC shall apply, and no encroachments shall be allowed. 
b.  Within all areas except unstudied floodplains, if the stream is designated as a "poor" ESA, the designated width of the protective stream buffer shall be decreased by either 50 percent or to the limits of the floodway whichever is greater, but in no instance shall the protective stream buffer width be decreased below 25 feet measured each direction from the centerline of the existing channel. 
3.  Tree Mitigation. In the event of a conflict between this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, and 7.7.4, Tree Preservation, this Subchapter 6: Gas Wells, shall control. Tree mitigation for gas wells located in an ESA shall be required and shall be calculated on a one to one replacement value for 100 percent of the diameter breast height ("dbh") of trees removed from the Drilling and Production Site. Tree mitigation shall be accomplished by planting replacement trees, within a floodplain, on-site or off-site with similar tree species or by payment into a Tree Mitigation Fund. Tree Mitigation Funds that are specific to ESAs will be kept separate from other Tree Mitigation Funds and will only be used to either acquire wooded floodplain or riparian property that remains in a naturalistic state in perpetuity, or to purchase conservation easements within riparian or floodplain areas. Funds may be used to purchase, plant, and maintain trees on public property, as long as the public property is within a riparian area or floodplain. 
4.  Tree Removal. Any request to remove tree(s) shall be accompanied by a letter from a certified geologist or engineer that indicates why the well site cannot be located to avoid the trees. If Operator has chosen to pay into the Tree Mitigation Fund, such funds shall be paid prior to approval of a Final Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Development Plat for the ESA. 
5.  Limitation on Well Heads. Only one well head may be placed in the Flood Fringe or other ESA under the following conditions: 
a.  Storage tanks or separation facilities shall be constructed at least 18 inches above the established Base Flood elevation plus the surcharge depth for encroachment to the limits of the floodway having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. 
b.  A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study shall be performed by a Registered Professional Engineer. The study shall be submitted to the Engineering Department in a technical report for review by the City Engineer or his designated representative. The report shall demonstrate that the proposed facilities will have no adverse impacts on the carrying capacity of the adjacent waterway nor cause any increases to the elevations established for the floodplain. When the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) on the subject site is designated as "Zone A" on the FIRM Panel, or the SFHA is not identified on the FIRM Panel, the following approximate method may be used to evaluate the impacts from gas well development. A flow rate shall be calculated using procedures set forth in the City of Denton Drainage Criteria Manual. Using Manning's Equation with an estimate of the average slope of the stream, measurements of a single irregular cross-section geometry at the well site, and the one hundred-year discharge rate, the average velocity and normal depth may be calculated. Calculations shall be provided for the unaltered existing channel cross-section and for the proposed modified channel cross-section and submitted to the City for review and approval prior to construction within these areas. 
c.  No more than 10 percent of the flood fringe, within the limits of the Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Development Plat, may be filled. 
6.  Additional Standards inside City Limits. For land inside the City limits, all conditions imposed by any applicable SUP, MPC District or a PD District for the land subject to the Watershed Protection Permit, as well as the standards in Subsection 6.3.9D and any other applicable requirements contained in this Section 6.3: Gas Well Drilling and Production and Section 6.2: Gas Well Development, shall apply. 
E.  Post-Approval Procedures. 
1.  If evidence from water quality monitoring efforts indicates that contamination is occurring from gas wells, the Operator shall remove, cause to be removed, or otherwise remediate contamination, as required by the Gas Well Administrator including but not limited to Waste Minimization Practices established by the RRC. Cleanup operations shall begin immediately. A re-inspection fee shall be charged as established by the City Council and published in the Application Criteria Manual. 
2.  An associated Watershed Protection Permit shall expire with the expiration of the Gas Well Development Site Plan or Gas Well Development Plat and may not be extended prior to expiration.  
Subchapter 7 - Development Standards  
7.1 - Purpose 
This subchapter includes standards that regulate the physical layout and design of development within Denton to ensure the protection of the health, welfare, safety, and quality of life. These standards address the physical relationship between development and adjacent properties, public streets, neighborhoods, and the natural environment, in order to implement the Comprehensive Plan vision for a visually cohesive, efficient, and livable community.  
7.2 - Applicability 
 
7.2.1 - Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter 7: Development Standards, the standards of this subchapter and any applicable Criteria Manuals shall apply to all development located within the city, pursuant to the TLGC and Subsection 8.2.1: Regulatory Jurisdiction.  
7.2.2 - Development Activities. 
The following development activities shall trigger compliance with the standards in this subchapter as provided in Table 7.2-A: Development Standards Applicability Table. 
A.  Minor: Tier 1. 
1.  Expansions, alterations, or modifications that increase the gross floor area of an existing structure by the greater of 1,000 square feet or between 10 and 50 percent; 
2.  Expansions, alterations, or modifications that increase the total number of existing dwelling units on a lot by the lesser of 10 dwelling units or between 10 and 25 percent; 
3.  The alteration or expansion of any vehicular parking area by the greater of six spaces or 50 percent, excluding re-striping; or 
4.  Any change in use that involves or requires improvements that meet the thresholds established in paragraphs (1) through (3) above. 
B.  Major: Tier 2. 
1.  Expansions, alterations, or modifications that increase the gross floor area of an existing structure by more than 50 percent; 
2.  Expansions, alterations, or modifications that increase the total number of existing dwelling units on a lot by more than 25 percent; 
3.  An existing principal structure is relocated on the lot; or 
4.  Any change in use that involves or requires improvements that meet the thresholds established in paragraphs (1) through (3) above. 
C.  Development Standards Applicability Table. 
1.  Table 7.2-A identifies activities that trigger compliance with specific development standards contained in Subchapter 7: Development Standards. These standards shall not exempt development activity that falls below the thresholds identified in Subsection 7.2.2A or 7.2.2B from complying with applicable standards of this DDC or any applicable federal, state, or local regulations. 
2.  For purposes of this section, "entire site" shall mean the total area of the lot on which development is occurring. "Development impact area" shall mean those areas of the lot or those portions of the structure that are included in the project area or that are affected by the proposed development activity, as defined in Section 9.2: Definitions. 
3.  Specific applicability thresholds and applicable exemptions are provided in Sections 7.2 through 7.13. 
Table 7.2-A: Development Standards Applicability Table 
? = Entire Site ? = Development Impact Area Only
*Please see Sections 7.2 through 7.13 for specific applicability thresholds and exemptions.* 
DDC Standard 	DDC Reference 	New
Construction	Minor: Tier 1 	Major: Tier 2 
Dimensional Standards 	Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts 	? 	? 	? 
Land-Disturbing Activities 	7.2 	All development, see Section 7.2 
Environmentally Sensitive Areas 	7.4 	All development, see Section 7.4 
Drainage 	7.4 	All development, see Section 7.4 
Water and Wastewater 	7.6 	All development, see Section 7.6 
Landscaping, Screening, Buffering, and Fences 	7.7 	? 	? 	? 
Access and Circulation 	7.8 	All development, see Section 7.8 
Parking and Loading 	7.9 	? 	? 	?[1] 
Site and Building Design 	7.10 	? 	? 	? 
Exterior Lighting 	7.11 	? 	? 	? 
Solid Waste and Recycling 	7.12 	? 	? 	? 
Electric Standards 	7.13 	All development, see Section 7.13 
Notes: 
[1] Also applies when the addition or expansion of one or more structures or uses requires specific use permit approval. 
 
D.  Planned Development (PD). 
1.  Development within any new planned development (PD) established after the effective date of this DDC shall be subject to this Subchapter 7: Development Standards, unless alternative standards are adopted as part of the PD approval that, in the determination of the Director, are at least equal to the standards set forth in this subchapter. 
2.  Development of a residential structure within an existing PD established prior to the effective date of this DDC is exempt from this Subchapter 7: Development Standards.  
7.3 - Land-Disturbing Activities 
 
7.3.1 - Purpose. 
The section establishes standards that regulate earthwork construction (including clearing, grading, grubbing, stockpiling, excavation, demolitions, and embankments) on property located within the city, in order to: 
A.  Preserve and enhance the City of Denton's natural character by preventing untimely and indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees, understory, and ground cover; 
B.  Protect and preserve the ecological functions of environmentally sensitive areas (ESAs) by regulating land disturbances and removal of vegetation within the ESAs; 
C.  Protect the city from sediment entering streets, storm sewers, ditches and streams, which may result in additional taxes for city maintenance costs, increased flooding, impaired water quality, and damage to property; 
D.  Promote soil conservation by minimizing land disturbances, thereby reducing sedimentation, air, and surface water pollution; and 
E.  Comply with state and federal stormwater regulations.  
7.3.2 - Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.3: Land-Disturbing Activities, the standards of this section shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability, with the following modifications: 
A.  Generally. 
1.  No person shall engage in any clearing, grading, grubbing, stockpiling, excavating, cutting, or other site earthwork without first obtaining the proper permit and/or authorization pursuant to Subchapter 2: Administration and Procedures, and any other applicable criteria manuals, ordinances, plans, policies, and city standards. 
2.  Activities shall be limited to the area and scope identified on the plans submitted with the development permit, and shall comply with all state and federal stormwater regulations. 
B.  Exemptions. Unless otherwise provided in this DDC, the following shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section 7.3: Land-Disturbing Activities: 
1.  Grading and clearing in emergency situations involving immediate danger to life and property or substantial fire hazards; 
2.  Any activity where the total volume of material disturbed, stored, disposed of or used as fill does not exceed 25 cubic yards and the area disturbed does not exceed 2,000 square feet, provided it does not obstruct a watercourse and is not located in a floodplain or other environmentally sensitive area; 
3.  Soil-disturbing activities, excluding tree removal, that are associated with normal agricultural crop operations; or 
4.  Stockpiling and handling of earth material associated with commercial quarry and landfill operations licensed under the state.  
7.3.3 - Legal Responsibility for Land Disturbance. 
The exemptions provided in Subsection 7.3.2B do not preclude any person from liability if that person's actions increase flood hazards to any other person or property. Neither the issuance of a building permit nor compliance with the provisions of this Section 7.2, or with any conditions imposed in the building permit, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the city for damage to other persons or property.  
7.3.4 - Applications. 
Permit applications and requirements, processing of applications, and conditions of issuance are as follows: 
A.  An application along with the required fee shall be submitted in accordance with Subchapter 2: Administration and Procedures, and the Administrative Criteria Manual. 
B.  Any permit granted under this section shall expire one year from the date of issuance. Upon a showing of ongoing construction activity, the permit may be extended by the Building Official for one six month period and for an additional fee in accordance with the city's adopted fee schedule. 
C.  Reviewed plans shall not be amended without authorization of the Building Official based on a determination that the modified plan meets all city requirements. The Building Official may stop work or revoke a permit because of incorrect information supplied, or for any violation of the provisions of this subchapter.  
7.3.5 - General Standards. 
Land-disturbing activities shall comply with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) regulations found in TXR150000 and this section. The design criteria for erosion and sediment control shall comply with the design standards contained in the Site Design Criteria Manual. Permittees shall also comply with the following general regulations and standards: 
A.  General Regulations. 
1.  The activity will not create or contribute to landslides, accelerated soil creep, and settlement. 
2.  The activity will not create or contribute to flooding, erosion, or increased turbidity, siltation, or other forms of pollution in a watercourse. 
3.  Operations shall be consistent with anticipated build-out schedule and shall be conducted so as to expose the smallest practical area of soil to erosion for the least possible time. 
B.  Construction Stormwater Notice of Intent (NOI) Required. The site operator or owner shall provide a copy of the signed Notice of Intent (NOI) from the TCEQ for all sites that are larger than five acres or are less than five acres and part of a larger common plan of development that is larger than five acres. A copy of Notice of Termination (NOT) shall be provided to the city after final stabilization is completed and temporary erosion and sediment controls are removed. 
C.  Construction Site Notice (CSN) Required. 
1.  A small construction site operator or owner shall provide a copy of the Small CSN Construction Site Notice for all sites larger than one acre and less five acres, or part of a common plan of development greater than one acre and less than five acres. 
2.  Secondary operators of large construction sites shall provide a copy of the signed Secondary Operator CSN for all sites larger than five acres or part of a larger common plan of development greater than five acres. 
3.  The CSN notice shall be posted at the construction site in a location where it is safely and readily available for viewing by the general public and city staff. The CSN must be posted at least two days prior to commencing construction activity and maintained in that location until completion of the construction activity. 
D.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Required. 
1.  The site owner or operator is responsible for routinely inspecting erosion and sediment controls at the site as specified in the SWPPP. The city shall also inspect erosion and sediment controls located at a site for compliance. If a responsible party fails to implement, inspect, and maintain controls as specified in the site's approved SWPPP, the city shall provide such party with written notice of non-compliance. The responsible party shall have no less than 48 hours to correct the violation, which may be extended for inclement weather or other factors outside of the control of the responsible party at the discretion of the City Inspector. 
2.  When construction or land-disturbing activities are conducted as a part of a nonresidential or multifamily construction project, temporary erosion and sediment controls shall be installed prior to land-disturbing activities as specified in the approved SWPPP. Permanent erosion and sediment controls that are specified in the SWPPP shall be installed and maintained prior to the occupancy of any nonresidential or multifamily structure. Phased occupancy will only be allowed when there are no outstanding erosion or sediment control violations for the project for which the request is made. 
3.  When construction or land-disturbing activities are conducted as part of a residential subdivision project, temporary erosion and sediment controls shall be installed prior to land-disturbing activities as specified in the approved SWPPP. Permanent erosion and sediment controls that are specified in the SWPPP shall be installed and maintained prior to final acceptance of a subdivision. 
a.  The permittee for such subdivision shall continue to maintain all temporary erosion and sediment control devices until permanent erosion and sediment control has been established on all lots within the subdivision for which the permittee retains day-to-day operational control and a Notice of Termination (NOT) is issued; 
b.  If a permittee sells one or more lots in a subdivision to a purchaser, the permittee may extend permit coverage to the purchaser under the developer's NOI. If this occurs, the permittee remains the responsible party for the entire subdivision including the purchased lot(s) and remains liable for violation of this section. A copy of the developer's NOI and a letter from the developer stating that coverage under the NOI has been extended to the purchaser shall be provided to the city as a condition of building permit issuance for the lot(s); 
c.  If a permittee sells one or more lots in a subdivision to a purchaser, the permittee may choose to not extend permit coverage to the purchaser under the permittee's NOI. If this occurs, the permittee remains the responsible party for only those lots for which the permittee retains day-to-day operational control. The purchaser then becomes the responsible party for the lot(s) and is liable for violation of this section; 
d.  If a purchaser sells one or more lots prior to final occupancy, the current owner of the lot(s) becomes the responsible party. A copy of owner's NOI and SWPPP shall be provided to the city as a condition of building permit issuance for the lot(s). 
E.  Establishing Ground Cover. Stabilization of disturbed areas, excluding areas within an approved landscape plan must, at a minimum, be initiated immediately whenever any clearing, grading, excavating, or other earth disturbing activities have permanently ceased on any portion of the site, or temporarily ceased on any portion of the site and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. In the context of this requirement, "immediately" means as soon as practicable, but no later than the end of the next work day, following the day when the earth-disturbing activities have temporarily or permanently ceased. 
1.  Temporary Stabilization. 
a.  Temporary stabilization measures shall be established in all areas of the site where soil disturbances have occurred and where construction activities have temporarily ceased for more than 14 calendar days. 
b.  Temporary stabilization shall be completed no more than 14 calendar days after initiation of soil stabilization measures. 
c.  Temporary stabilization may include seeding, geotextiles, mulches, and similar measures that are designed to reduce or eliminate erosion until permanent stabilization can be achieved or until further construction activity takes place and are approved as part of the permit. 
2.  Permanent Stabilization. 
a.  Final stabilization measures shall be initiated within 48 hours of construction activities being completed on a portion of the site. 
b.  Final stabilization measures shall be a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 70 percent of the native background vegetative cover for all unpaved areas not covered by structures. 
c.  Final stabilization shall be completed prior to termination of permit coverage. 
F.  Cleanup Operations. 
1.  The property owner shall be responsible for all cleanup operations incidental to the disturbance of the surface of the property within six months of the operation completion date, including removal of temporary erosion and sediment controls if final stabilization has been obtained, and removal of all trash or other materials not suitable for fill; 
2.  No soil, rock, mud, and/or other construction debris shall be allowed to be deposited on or in the streets, alleys, utility facilities, rights-of-way, easements, or drainage facilities owned or required by the City of Denton. 
3.  Upon establishing permanent ground cover or other approved permanent erosion and sediment control, all temporary erosion and sediment control devices shall be removed by the responsible party, as identified on the SWPPP. Failure to comply with this provision is considered a violation of this section.  
7.3.6 - Compliance Required. 
A.  The city may deny the approval of any clearing and grading permit, building permit, site development plan, and any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that site erosion or sediment controls are determined not to reduce the discharge or sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other materials associated with land disturbances to the maximum extent practicable. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this DDC punishable in accordance with Section 1.6, Enforcement, and the following standards: 
1.  The cure period will be established by the Director, and will generally not be less than 24 hours unless the alleged failure represents a risk of destruction of property or injury to persons. 
2.  The cure period may be extended for inclement weather or other factors at the discretion of the Director. 
3.  If the permittee does not cure the alleged failure within the time frame specified by the Director, the city may: 
a.  Notify the TCEQ and request that the TCEQ take appropriate action; and 
b.  Issue a Stop Work Order and may enforce the penalty provision of Section 1.6: Enforcement, against the permittee or site operator, or both. 
4.  Should the permittee fail in any respect to fulfill the requirements of this section, the city may go onto the property in question and perform such work as may be necessary to fulfill such requirements, including, but not limited to, leveling grounds, establishing temporary stabilization, constructing erosion controls, and removing all soil, rock, debris, and other materials not suitable for fill at the permittee's expense. The city shall bill the permittee for the expenses incurred. If the permittee fails to pay the city for such expenses within 30 days of being billed for same, the city shall have the right to place a lien on the property for all amounts expended by the city, plus interest at the current lawful rate. 
C.  The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies described in this DDC. Exercise of any remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against the violator, including civil enforcement remedies.  
7.4 - Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs) 
 
7.4.1 - Purpose. 
This Section 7.4 is intended to achieve the following goals: 
A.  Manage and protect environmentally sensitive areas within the city; 
B.  Protect the natural and ecological resources that are essential elements of the city's health and community character and which provide irreplaceable plant and wildlife habitat; 
C.  Establish a development framework for the city that respects private property rights, while encouraging them to be used responsibly for the benefit of the entire community; 
D.  Preserve and enhance the city's distinctive community character and quality of life by ensuring that its natural and built environments are consistent with the community vision and values embodied in the Comprehensive Plan; and 
E.  Establish regulations that conform to the requirements of the state and federal government regarding air quality, water quality, and environmental protection.  
7.4.2 - Applicability. 
A.  General Applicability. 
1.  The standards of this Section 7.4: Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs), shall apply to all land and all development within the corporate limits of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this section. 
2.  The floodplain standards of this section shall apply to all land and all development within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city. 
3.  The type of regulation applicable to the land depends upon the specific ESA classification determined for the property in question on the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Map. If other regulations in this DDC conflict with the specific ESA regulations of this section, the more stringent of the two regulations shall apply. 
B.  Exemptions. 
1.  Property that does not contain any ESAs as depicted on the City's Environmentally Sensitive Areas Map (ESA Map). 
2.  Grading, filling, cutting, or other earth-moving activity on any lot involving less than 25 cubic yards for residential projects, or 50 cubic yards for nonresidential projects. 
3.  Lots platted for single-family or duplex dwelling uses prior to February 20, 2002. 
4.  The applicant can demonstrate through an ESA field assessment application that the subject property contains no ESAs, or their location is not as depicted on the ESA Map.  
7.4.3 - Environmentally Sensitive Areas Criteria Manual. 
In addition to meeting the requirements expressly established in this section, all ESAs shall comply with the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Criteria Manual.  
7.4.4 - ESAs Procedures. 
A.  ESAs Compliance Review. 
1.  Applicability. ESA compliance review for residential and nonresidential development shall be performed as part of a final plat application pursuant to Subsection 2.6.4: Final Plat, a site plan application pursuant to Subsection 2.5.1: Site Plan Review, a clearing and grading permit, or any other applicable permission to commence land-clearing activity. 
2.  Information Required. Information as required on the applicable checklists shall be provided. Additional information deemed appropriate and necessary to process the application may also be required. 
3.  Criteria for Approval. The requirements of an ESAs review shall be deemed met either upon approval of an alternate ESA plan or when the applicant demonstrates the following: 
a.  The land-disturbing activity complies with the requirements of this DDC for floodplains, riparian buffers, water related habitat, and upland habitat, as well as all other federal, state, or local laws applicable to the application type; 
b.  The land-disturbing activity will not cause damage to ESAs adjacent to the areas to be disturbed; 
c.  The land-disturbing activity complies with the requirements of Section 7.3: Land-Disturbing Activities; 
d.  Protective fencing as specified in the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Criteria Manual has been established at the perimeter of the ESA. Protective fencing shall clearly mark and delineate all ESAs to be protected and preserved for the duration of the land-disturbing activities on the property; and 
e.  A wetland delineation by a trained scientist has been performed if encroachments into U.S. Army Corp of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands are proposed, and a Section 404 Nationwide Permit or a Letter of Permission from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has been obtained. 
4.  Expiration. The ESA review shall expire when the final plat for residential development approval expires, or when the site plan approval for a nonresidential development expires. 
5.  Credit. Any ESA that is preserved may be used towards meeting: 
a.  Parkland dedication in accordance with Subpart A, Chapter 22, Article III of the Denton Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Drainage standards in accordance with Section 7.5: Drainage. 
B.  ESAs Field Assessments. ESA field assessments provide a mechanism for the city to confirm the presence of ESAs and shall be conducted pursuant to Subsection 2.5.5: Environmental Sensitive Areas (ESAs) Field Assessments. 
C.  Alternative ESA Plans. The Alternative ESA Plan provides the option to address the regulations through a flexible discretionary process using the procedure established in Subsection 2.8.4: Alternative Environmentally Sensitive Area (ESA) Plan.  
7.4.5 - Official Map. 
A.  Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESA) Map. The ESAs Map is the official map that identifies areas designated as ESAs. 
B.  ESAs Map Amendments. 
1.  The ESAs Map may be updated administratively when an ESA field assessment is conducted for a property and approved by the Director, pursuant to Section 2.5.5: Environmental Sensitive Areas (ESAs) Field Assessments. 
2.  The ESAs map may be updated administratively when the FEMA 1% Annual Chance Flood Zones are revised or amended. 
3.  Substantial amendments of the ESAs Map shall follow the procedure in Section 2.7.2: Zoning Map Amendment. "Substantial amendment" is defined as a change impacting the whole city, excepting changes caused by the publication of new flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) by FEMA. 
C.  Text Applicability. The text of this section describes and regulates the protected ESAs shown on the City's ESAs Map. In the case of any discrepancy, the text of this section shall control.  
7.4.6 - Floodplain Development ESAs. 
Upon field verification, areas designated as FEMA 1% Annual Chance Floodplain would be classified according to the existing conditions as developed or undeveloped floodplains. 
A.  Developed Floodplain. 
1.  Development within the developed floodplains shall comply with Section 7.5: Drainage. 
2.  Section 7.4.7: Riparian Buffer and Water-Related Habitat , applies when riparian buffers and water-related habitats are nested, partially or wholly, inside developed floodplain ESAs. 
3.  Gas well drilling and production within developed floodplains shall comply with Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. 
B.  Undeveloped Floodplain. 
1.  Permitted Uses and Activities. The following permitted uses and activities are allowed, when in compliance with Section 7.5: Drainage; and Subpart B, Chapter 30, of the Municipal Code of Ordinances: 
a.  The planting of any new trees or vegetation. 
b.  Restoration or enhancement of floodplains, riparian buffers, water related habitats, upland habitats, wetlands and streams as required by federal and state standards. 
c.  The placement of public or private utility facilities, such as sewer, storm water, water, electricity, gas, or other utilities, as long as the disturbed area is restored to minimized erosion and promote the recovery of the ESAs, and when adequately flood-proofed. 
d.  Measures to remove or abate nuisances, the removal of invasive plant species, or any other violation of federal, state, or local law, with the approval of the Department of Environmental Services. 
e.  Parking lots, subject to the limitations on fill as specified in paragraph 7.4.6B.3, and constructed of pervious materials as provided in the Transportation Criteria Manual. 
f.  Parks, open space, recreational uses, trails, walkways and bike paths. 
g.  Storm water quality controls. 
h.  Construction of roadways identified on the Mobility Plan, as long as the disturbed areas are restored to minimize erosion and promote the recovery of the ESA subject to the Director of Environmental Services approval. 
i.  Routine repair and maintenance of existing structures, roadways, driveways, utilities, and accessory uses. 
j.  Agricultural activity permitted through Nationwide Permit 40 (NWP 40); Agricultural Activities pursuant Section 404 of the Clean Water Act; or any other federal permits. 
k.  Any action taken by federal, state, or local officials in an emergency to mitigate an existing or potential hazard. 
l.  The construction of a private driveway, as long as the disturbed areas are restored to minimize erosion and to promote the recovery of the ESA, subject to the Director of Environmental Services approval. 
m.  Gas well drilling and production that complies with Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. 
n.  Fill activities subject to the limitations of paragraph 7.4.6B.3. 
o.  Culverts and bridges, as long as the disturbed areas are restored to minimize erosion and to promote the recovery of the ESA, subject to the Director of Environmental Services approval. Culverts and bridges are exempt from the limitations of paragraph 7.4.6B.3. 
2.  Prohibited Uses and Activities. 
a.  Placement, handling, processing, or storage of hazardous waste. 
b.  Hazardous waste and solid waste landfills. 
c.  Land-disturbing activity not authorized by a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission. 
d.  Any new structures or additions, including garages and carports, and storage sheds located within the area mapped as undeveloped floodplain. 
e.  Tree and understory vegetation removal, except as allowed by Subsection 7.5.3J: Floodways and Improvements. 
f.  Septic tanks, septic tank drain fields, and other forms of on-site wastewater treatment. 
3.  Standards for Fill in Undeveloped Floodplains. 
a.  Filling of any floodplain of a stream that drains more than one square mile is prohibited unless the fill on any lot is less than 50 cubic yards or 300 cubic feet per acre, whichever is greater. 
b.  Up to 15 percent of the floodplain valley storage may be filled if the stream drains less than one square mile. 
c.  In addition to meeting the requirement for fill set above, all fill activities in the undeveloped floodplain shall comply with the Environmental Sensitive Area Criteria Manual; Section 7.5: Drainage; and federal law.  
7.4.7 - Riparian Buffer and Water-Related Habitat ESAs. 
The following subsection defines permitted and prohibited uses and activities within riparian buffers and water-related habitats. In areas where multiple types of ESAs overlap, the standards, permissions, and prohibitions specified for those other types of ESAs, as outlined in this subsection, shall also apply. 
A.  Permitted Uses and Activities. 
1.  Placement of private residential yard amenities, including but not limited to: gardens; yards; trails; and clearings; that would result in disturbing up to 10 percent of the area, but in no instance shall the protective buffer width be decreased below 25 feet, measured each direction from the centerline of the existing channel or the outer edge of surface water bodies. No disturbance is permitted in delineated wetlands. 
2.  Riparian buffers nested, partially or wholly, inside developed floodplains may be disturbed up to 10 percent of the riparian buffer area, but in no instance shall the protective buffer width be decreased below 25 feet, measured each direction from the centerline of the existing channel, or from the outer edge of surface water bodies. No disturbance is permitted in delineated wetlands. 
3.  Repair, replacement, or improvement of public utility facilities where the disturbed portion of the ESA is restored, and vegetation listed as invasive is removed and replaced with vegetation from the City Native Plant List in the Site Design Criteria Manual. 
4.  Additions, alterations, rehabilitation, or replacement of existing structures that do not increase the existing structural footprint in the riparian buffer or water related habitat. Any disturbed areas must be restored using native vegetative cover. 
5.  Stream, wetland, riparian, and upland enhancement or restoration projects. 
6.  Agricultural activity, including buildings and structures, permitted through Nationwide Permit 40 (NWP 40), Agricultural Activities pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, or any other federal permits. 
7.  Routine repair and maintenance of existing structures, roadways, driveways, utility facilities, accessory uses, and other development. 
8.  Construction of roadways identified on the City Mobility Plan, as long as the disturbed areas are restored to minimize erosion and promote the recovery of the ESA, and subject to the Department of Environmental Services approval. 
9.  Measures to remove or abate nuisances, or any other violation of state statute, administrative rule, or the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
10.  Any action taken by the city in an emergency to mitigate an existing or potential hazard. 
11.  Gas well drilling and production within riparian buffers and water-related habitats shall comply with Subchapter 6: Gas Wells. 
B.  Prohibited Uses and Activities. The following uses and activities are not allowed in riparian buffers and water related habitats: 
1.  Land-disturbing activity not authorized by a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Section 404 Permit Letter of Permission; 
2.  Tree and understory vegetation removal, except as allowed by Subsection 7.5.3J: Floodways and Improvements; 
3.  Placement, handling, processing, or storage of hazardous waste; 
4.  Any structures, including storage sheds, garages, and carports; and 
5.  Septic tanks, septic tank drain fields, and other forms of on-site wastewater treatment.  
7.4.8 - Cross Timbers Upland Habitat ESAs. 
The following subsection defines permitted and prohibited uses and activities within upland habitat areas. In areas where multiple types of ESAs overlap, the standards, permissions, and prohibitions specified for those other types of ESAs, as outlined in this subsection, shall also apply. 
A.  Permitted Uses and Activities. 
1.  Residential development shall be designed to retain a contiguous 50 percent of the area defined as upland habitat, that shall remain predominantly in its natural state. Preservation of upland habitat contiguous to forested areas on adjacent properties or parcels is strongly encouraged. Trees removed shall be considered part of the development impact area of a site and will be subject to tree preservation and landscape requirements. 
2.  Non-residential development shall be designed to retain 30 percent of the area defined as upland habitat, which shall remain predominantly in its natural state. Preservation of upland habitat contiguous to forested areas on adjacent properties or parcels is strongly encouraged. Trees removed shall be considered part of the development impact area of a site and will be subject to tree preservation and landscape requirements. 
3.  Selective pruning conducted by or under the supervision of an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist is allowed to remove up to one-quarter of the preserved canopy area for the purposes of tree health, subject to the approval of the Environmental Services Department. 
4.  Enhancement or restoration projects, as approved by the Department of Environmental Services. Trees planted as part of an approved enhancement or restoration project may be credited against required replacement in Section 7.7: Landscaping, Screening, Buffering, and Fences. 
B.  Prohibited Uses and Activities. Septic tanks, septic tank drain fields, and other forms of on-site wastewater treatment are prohibited in areas set aside for required preservation.  
7.4.9 - Development Clustering. 
Development clustering is encouraged to minimize impact to the natural environment. Clustering shall be designed to maintain a contiguous forested area and shall comply with Section 8.3.4, Cluster Subdivisions.  
7.4.10 - Development Impact Area. 
A.  If an Alternative ESA Plan is approved, any areas of the ESA in which encroachment is permitted are considered part of the development impact area of a site and are subject to tree preservation and landscape requirements. 
B.  Areas of ESA that are to be left undisturbed will be excluded from the development impact area. Additionally, areas restored or provided as mitigation as part of an approved Alternative ESA Plan will be excluded from the development impact area.  
7.5 - Drainage 
 
7.5.1 - Purpose. 
This section establishes standards that regulate drainage on property located within the city, in order to: 
A.  Protect human life, health, and property; 
B.  Minimize the expenditure of public monies for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the public; 
D.  Retain natural floodplains in a condition that minimizes interference with floodwater conveyance, storage, aquatic, and terrestrial ecosystems as well as groundwater and surface water supplies; 
E.  Minimize erosion and sedimentation problems and enhance water quality; and 
F.  Minimize future operational and maintenance expenses.  
7.5.2 - Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.5: Drainage, the standards of this section and the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability.  
7.5.3 - General Drainage Requirements. 
A.  Stormwater Design Criteria Manual Adopted. In addition to meeting the requirements expressly set out in this DDC, all drainage systems shall comply with the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual. 
B.  Drainage Computation Data. 
1.  Design standards for drainage facilities and improvements shall be based on hydraulic and hydrologic computation data submitted and approved by the City Engineer, or designee, prior to submission of the final plat. 
2.  The City Engineer, or designee, may specify the form and manner in which the necessary data is to be submitted. 
C.  Separation of Stormwater and Sanitary Sewerage Systems. 
1.  Stormwater and sanitary sewerage systems are to be used and maintained as separate systems. 
2.  Drainage facilities shall be designed so they do not connect, direct, or allow stormwater into the sanitary sewerage system. 
D.  Drainage Improvements Required. 
1.  All developments shall provide for new drainage facilities, improvements to existing drainage facilities, channel improvements, grading, driveway adjustments, culvert improvements, or any other improvement, drainage facility, or work that is necessary to provide for the stormwater drainage needs of a development, including but not limited to work that is necessary to: 
a.  Provide for the conveyance of all stormwater from the development when fully developed to an adequate discharge point; 
b.  Fulfill any purpose for which the requirements of this section are imposed; 
c.  Adequately protect the development from flooding, including the effects of the 100-year flood; 
d.  Properly control any increase in the upstream or downstream stage, concentration, or water surface elevation caused by the development; or 
e.  Provide for the conveyance of off-site storm drainage based on ultimate developed watershed conditions through the development. 
2.  Such improvements shall be in accordance with the requirements and design standards of this section. 
E.  Off-Site Drainage. 
1.  Off-site drainage facilities and improvements shall be provided by the permittee whenever additional stormwater runoff from the development would adversely affect any off-site property or overload an existing drainage facility, whether natural or manmade. 
2.  Where stormwater runoff from three or more acres has been collected or concentrated to one point, it shall not be discharged onto adjacent properties, except into existing streams, channels, or storm drains, unless drainage or flowage easements are obtained from those properties. 
3.  If the permittee cannot obtain the necessary easements to make required off-site drainage improvements, upon the request of the permittee after compliance with the provisions of this DDC, the city may, but shall not be required to, initiate eminent domain proceedings to obtain the off-site drainage easements. 
F.  Detention Facilities. All detention facilities, whether maintained by the city, private property owner, home owners association, or private entity, shall comply with any applicable design requirements of the city and any state or federal laws or regulations, as amended, including the regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) or its successor agency. The following standards shall apply to all detention facilities, to the extent they do not conflict with any applicable federal or state laws or regulations, as amended: 
1.  The 100-year flood shall be used to determine the volume of detention storage required. Water quality volume shall be designed per the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual. 
2.  Detention facilities shall be designed so that any additional runoff generated by the proposed development will not increase the amount of original discharge for storm frequencies from the 1-year, 25-year, and 100-year flood; 
3.  Publicly dedicated or privately maintained detention facilities may be used to reduce peak discharges where conditions prevent conveying stormwater to an adequate discharge point or studies show that off-site structural facilities will not mitigate hydraulic effects more efficiently; 
4.  All detention facilities shall comply with the standards of this section and the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual, as amended; 
5.  A development may provide for drainage by participating in the design and construction of a regional detention facility. Detailed engineering studies of the entire basin shall be required to ensure that the timing of peak flows has not been altered to create higher peak flows elsewhere in the basin; and 
6.  Detention facilities may be constructed in phases, if phased to provide for the timely needs of the development. 
G.  Flood Damage Prevention. All developments regulated by this DDC shall be subject to and comply with any applicable provision of FEMA Flood Damage and Prevention Regulations and the Municipal Code of Ordinances, Subpart B, Chapter 30: Flood Prevention and Protection Ordinance. 
H.  Floodplain Reclamation-Engineering Criteria. 
1.  Water Surface Elevation. 
a.  Alterations of the floodplain shall not result in an increase in the 100-year fully developed watershed water surface elevation on other properties under separate ownership. 
b.  Alteration of the floodplain that could result in any degree of increased flooding to other properties, adjacent, upstream, or downstream is prohibited. 
2.  Stream Velocity. 
a.  Alterations of the floodplain shall not create an erosive water velocity on- or off-site. The mean velocity of stream flow at the site, after fill, shall be no greater than the mean velocity of the stream flow under existing conditions. 
b.  Alteration to the flood plain that would increase velocities of flood waters to the extent that the significant erosion of flood plain soils will occur either on the subject property or on other properties up or downstream is prohibited. 
c.  City staff shall determine what constitutes an "erosive" velocity based on analysis of the surface material and permissible velocities for specific cross-sections affected by the proposed alteration, using criteria established in the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual. 
3.  Valley Storage. 
a.  Encroachments and/or channelization is strongly discouraged along Pecan, Cooper, Hickory Creek, Milam, and Clear Creeks to prevent the reduction of storage capacity of streams and drainage ways and to prevent increasing discharges downstream. 
b.  The city restricts the valley storage loss to zero percent reduction for all streams serving with a drainage basin of one square mile or greater in the city. For minor tributaries (drainage basins with less than one square mile), a 15 percent maximum reduction in valley storage shall be allowed. 
4.  Conveyance. Alterations of the flood plain shall be permitted only to the extent permitted by equal conveyance on both sides of the natural channel. Staff's calculation of the impact of the proposed alteration shall be based on the "equal conveyance" principle in order to insure equitable treatment for all property owners. Under equal conveyance, if the city allows a change in the flood carrying capacity (capacity to carry a particular volume of water per unit of time) on one side of the stream due to a proposed alteration of the flood plain, it shall also allow an equal change to the owner on the other side. The combined change in flood carrying capacity, due to the proposed alteration, plus corresponding alteration to the other side of the stream, shall not cause either an increase in flood elevation or an erosive velocity, or violate the other criteria. 
I.  Floodplains. Where regulations within this section require a development to make any drainage improvements in or adjacent to a floodplain to provide for the ultimate base flood, the permittee may, in lieu of making the required improvements, restrict development in the area subject to flooding because of the failure to provide for the drainage improvements. In such cases, the area to be left undeveloped shall be dedicated to the public as a floodplain and drainage easement on the final plat. 
1.  Floodplain Restrictions. 
a.  Development is prohibited within the floodplain of any stream or water course with a contributing drainage area of one square mile or more. These floodplain areas shall be preserved from all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste or material, or stumps. Modifications of this requirement shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator. 
b.  The purpose of a floodplain easement is to preserve open space in an area subject to riverine flooding. Construction of new buildings within floodplain easements is prohibited. Filling, grading, or other activities that obstruct flood flows or remove flood storage are prohibited in floodplain easements. Floodplain easement regulations listed in this section also apply to drainage easements dedicated for the purpose of preserving floodplain areas as open space. 
c.  New fences shall not be permitted within the floodplain, regardless of whether or not there is a drainage easement. The Floodplain Administrator may approve exceptions to this prohibition for specific sites where adequate mitigation measures are provided, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator, such as provision of a breakaway area. 
2.  Stream Restrictions. Major streams (those with a contributing drainage area of one square mile or more) shall remain in open natural condition; smaller streams or drainage ways (contributing drainage area less than one square mile) may be channelized if allowed by Section 7.4: Environmentally Sensitive Areas, and provided they meet the criteria of the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual. When a stream or excavated channel is to remain open, or in its natural condition, it shall meet one of the following requirements: 
a.  Dedication, Ownership, and Maintenance Requirements. 
i.  For single-family residential subdivisions where more than 50 percent of the lots are less than one-half acre in size, dedication of the stream or drainage way shall be made to the city or to an approved homeowner association (HOA). 
ii.  A drainage or floodplain easement shall be dedicated as a single lot to the city, a homeowners association, or other legal entity as allowed by this subsection. 
iii.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may waive this dedication requirement for the following reasons: 
a.  Replats which were originally platted prior to the dedication requirement. 
b.  Subdivisions of five lots or less. 
iv.  Streams and drainage ways may be retained as a part of a nonresidential lot, and it shall be the property owner's responsibility to maintain this area as set forth by easement, except as otherwise provided. 
v.  A maintenance easement shall be granted to the city and shall grant the right but not the obligation to maintain and construct drainage facilities if the stream or drainage way is not being properly maintained. 
vi.  The maintenance entity's by-laws and covenants filed of record shall provide for ongoing maintenance. The easement shall authorize a lien against individual abutting lots in favor of the city to secure the payment to the city for any expenses incurred by the city in the event of default or to secure payment for any expenses incurred if the maintenance entity is not properly maintaining the stream or drainage way. 
vii.  Adequate floodplain and drainage easements shall be required that give the city the right but not the obligation to maintain and construct drainage facilities if, in the city's sole opinion, the maintenance entity is not properly maintaining the stream or drainage way. 
viii.  Where the city has designated a floodway or floodplain as part of the city park system, the permittee shall provide access by one of the following methods. In all cases, the city shall approve the proposed street alignment fronting on city parks as required for this purpose: 
a.  Parallel streets fronting along the park; or 
b.  Courtyard or cul-de-sac streets that provide public access fronting on the park; or 
c.  Loop streets that provide public access fronting on the park. 
3.  Minimum Finished Floor Elevations. 
a.  Minimum finished floor elevations, the datum used, and the source of the elevation information shall be labeled on the final plat where required. Vertical datum used for minimum finished floor elevations shall be the same as the datum used to establish 100-year base flood elevations. 
b.  The city reserves the right to specify a new or revised minimum finished floor elevation at the time of issuance of a building permit if new or more accurate information, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator, warrants the change. This minimum finish floor elevation shall apply to the building foundation, including basements, and electrical and mechanical equipment. 
c.  Minimum lot and habitable space for lots within the 100-year base flood, abutting the 100-year base flood, or within 200 feet of the 100-year base flood shall be established as follows: 
i.  For lots adjacent to a stream without Base Flood Elevations (BFE's) identified on the official FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps, any habitable structure shall have a finished floor elevation at least 18 inches above the 100-year base flood elevation based on fully developed conditions. This shall apply to all rivers or streams regardless of whether the 100-year floodplain is shown on the FEMA map. 
ii.  For lots adjacent to a stream with Base Flood Elevations (BFE's) identified on the official FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps, any habitable structure shall have a finished floor elevation at least 18 inches above the 100-year base flood elevation based on fully developed conditions, or at least 30 inches above the FEMA Base Flood Elevation. 
J.  Floodways and Improvements. 
1.  Generally, floodways serving drainage areas larger than one square mile in area and that are still functioning primarily in a natural and adequate state shall not be altered or improved to provide for the drainage needs of a development, unless there is no other reasonable means or method to provide for such drainage. 
2.  As part of required improvements, debris, small brush, vines and other obstructions may be cleared from that portion of any channel located within or on the perimeter of the development, as directed by the Director of Utilities, prior to the connection of any utilities for any building within a development. 
3.  A development may also be required to provide clearing of off-site floodways to the extent necessary to adequately receive or convey stormwater runoff from the development, based on the roughness coefficient approved during the development review process. 
4.  Developments discharging stormwater runoff into a floodway shall provide grass or similar vegetation as approved by the city, on-site and off-site areas in public easements, when necessary to preserve or restore any disruption to the natural state. Refer to the North Central Texas Council of Governments Integrated Stormwater Management (ISWM) technical manual on landscape for additional suggestions. 
5.  The vegetation requirement shall apply to any portion of any floodway, on-site or off-site, that would be affected by runoff from the development. 
K.  Channel Requirements. Required channel improvements shall be based on the amount and concentration of the stormwater runoff from the development. All developments shall provide for the permanent improvement and modification of existing drainage system channels or dedication of floodplain areas based on flood conditions as necessary to serve the development, subject to and in accordance with the following: 
1.  Channels that serve as floodways having a drainage basin one square mile or larger shall be maintained in a natural state, as provided for in this section. 
2.  Channels serving a development shall contain the 100-year base flood with at least one foot of freeboard. 
3.  Excavated channels shall have a concrete pilot channel, if deemed necessary by the Drainage Department, for access or erosion control as outlined in the specifications of the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual. Locations where earth channel improvements are required to carry a flood discharge through an undeveloped area of the off-site property channel grade may be "daylighted" and no freeboard required until the area is developed. 
4.  The design for all open channels shall be based on geotechnical investigations, unless determined to be unnecessary by the City Engineer, or designee. 
5.  No development shall be designed to access a public street across a channel without providing adequate clearance for the channel under design storm conditions as required by the Stormwater Criteria Manual. No public access to a public street by means of a low water crossing will be permitted. 
6.  Bridges crossing channels serving drainage areas greater than one square mile in area shall have one foot of freeboard between the 100-year base flood elevation and the lowest beam of the bridge. 
7.  Bridges crossing channels serving drainage areas less than one square mile in area shall have one foot of freeboard between the design water surface and the lowest top of road elevation of the bridge. 
8.  All culvert crossings shall have two feet of freeboard between the 100-year base flood elevation and top-of-curb elevation. 
L.  Lot Drainage. 
1.  Generally, each lot shall be designed or graded to direct stormwater into an abutting street, alley, channel, or inlet. If drainage is provided in the rear of any lot by a surface or underground storm drainage system, the surface or underground drainage system shall be designed to convey runoff from the 100-year storm event. 
2.  Where it is not practical to provide abutting drainage facilities for each lot, drainage facilities such as a closed pipe system or drainage ditch, shall generally be required whenever the cumulative stormwater runoff from more than two lots is directed across a third lot or when the facilities are necessary to avoid an adverse effect on any other lot. 
3.  It shall be unlawful for any person to fill, modify or otherwise obstruct any public drainage easement designed or used as an overflow channel or structure. 
M.  Site Erosion Control. 
1.  To minimize erosion resulting from the removal of vegetation and to reduce the introduction of erosion materials into the storm drainage systems, all developments and any person undertaking any development activity shall make use of erosion and sediment control devices in accordance with the requirements of the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual and the iSWM Water Quality Technical Manual. 
2.  The erosion and sediment control devices shall be installed and thereafter maintained until sufficient vegetation cover has been provided or been replaced to control erosion and sediment. 
N.  Easements. In addition to any other provisions of this DDC relating to easements for public improvements, the following requirements for public drainage improvements, channels, and facilities required for any development shall apply: 
1.  All public drainage systems and facilities, that are not to be included within an existing or proposed public street right-of-way, shall be located within easements to be dedicated to the city and shall have adequate access to a public street. 
2.  Prior to acceptance of any public drainage facilities, all easements within which the facilities are located shall be cleared of all buildings, structures, fences or other obstacles that would interfere with access to the easements. 
3.  Restrictions of easements shall be described on the final plat and approved by the city. 
4.  Drainage easements through residential lots shall be placed entirely on one lot. Split lot easements shall not be allowed. 
5.  Structures, eaves and overhangs, fences, storage sheds, decks, pools, landscaping or other aboveground man-made improvements shall not be permitted in drainage easements or floodplains, except as specifically allowed in the Stormwater Design Criteria Manual. This provision includes, but is not limited to areas encompassing floodplain, channels, flumes, natural streams or swales, or any other system used to convey storm water through surface flow, regardless of whether or not there is an easement. 
O.  Payment in Lieu of Improvements. Any development required to provide drainage facilities or improvements in accordance with this section may elect to pay the city the total construction cost of the required facilities or improvements, excluding engineering and design cost, when: 
1.  The city's approved Capital Improvement Plan proposes to provide, within two years of the date the required improvements are to be undertaken, for the same or similar drainage improvements that would make the drainage improvements required by the development unnecessary; 
2.  Failure to provide the drainage improvements at the time of development would not adversely affect the development or any off-site properties, as determined by the City Engineer, or designee; and 
3.  The payment allowed in this subsection shall be made prior to beginning any construction of the development. If the money paid to the city is not used for the required improvements within five years of payment; the funds shall be returned to the person making the payment.  
7.6 - Water and Wastewater 
 
7.6.1 - Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.6: Water and Wastewater, the standards of this section and the Water and Wastewater Criteria Manual shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability.  
7.6.2 - Basic Policy. 
It is the responsibility of the design engineer to ensure the final design of water or sewer system improvements is in conformance with the following: 
A.  Current standards prescribed by all state and federal laws; 
B.  Texas Administrative Code (TAC) Title 30, Part 1, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) - Rules, Ch. 290: Public Drinking Water; and Ch. 217: Design Criteria for Domestic Wastewater Systems; 
C.  This DDC; 
D.  The Water and Wastewater Criteria Manual and the City's Standard Details; 
E.  North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction ("COG Specs"), as amended by the City of Denton; 
F.  City of Denton Water and Wastewater Master Plans; 
G.  In accordance with adopted Fire Code; 
H.  American Water Works Association (AWWA) Standards; and 
I.  All applicable local ordinances.  
7.6.3 - Extensions of Water and Sewer Mains. 
A.  Extensions for New Subdivisions and Other Developments. Extensions required to serve new subdivisions and other developments shall be as follows: 
1.  Required Extensions. 
a.  All developments shall be required to extend across the full width of the development lot (defined by plat or lot of record) in such an alignment that it can be extended to the next property in accordance with the master sewer and water plans for the city or provide continuity of service to the adjoining lot. 
b.  Properties having frontages along multiple streets shall extend accordingly along each street frontage. 
c.  Gravity wastewater mains shall generally be installed at maximum depth and minimum slope, to facilitate future service to upstream properties. The Water and Wastewater Director may modify this requirement on a case-by-case basis. 
d.  Properties already served by water and sewer shall not be required to install additional facilities unless: 
i.  The current lines are not of adequate capacity to serve the proposed development, in which case the permittee will be required to install adequate facilities; 
ii.  The current lines are not of adequate capacity to serve the zoning of a property that has been rezoned to a more intense use since the time of the original utility installation; and 
iii.  The lot is located on a corner lot and/or fronting a state or federal highway right-of-way. 
2.  Extensions to Existing Dwellings. The Water and Wastewater Director may approve an extension of water and sewer mains to an existing dwelling, provided funds are available and as allocated in the Capital Improvement Plan. 
B.  Cost Policies for New Developments. 
1.  Development Mains and Facilities. Developers, including individuals, subdividers, and owners of single or multifamily dwellings, shall pay the actual cost of all water and sewer main extensions, lift stations, or other necessary facilities required to serve their development, in accordance with the City's Criteria Manuals and the provisions of this DDC. A developer may appeal a determination of the required facilities to the Public Utilities Board, which shall provide a recommendation, and City Council, which shall make a final decision on the appeal, pursuant to the procedures established in Subsection 2.8.3: Appeal of Administrative Decision, and in accordance with TLGC, § 212.904. 
2.  Oversized Participation by the City. See Subsection 7.6.14: Oversize Participation by the City. 
3.  Pro Rata Agreements. See Subsection 7.6.15: Pro-Rata Agreements. 
C.  Number of Water Service Taps. 
1.  Developments exceeding the following thresholds shall be required to be served by at least two different connections to mains to facilitate domestic and fire service redundancy: 
a.  Multifamily Residential: 200 units. 
b.  Single Family Residential: 30 units. 
c.  Commercial/Industrial: 124,000 square feet. 
2.  The Water and Wastewater Director, at their discretion, may adjust this requirement if there are extenuating circumstances involved. 
3.  The connections shall be spaced as far apart as reasonably feasible, and preferably be tapped off of different mains. 
4.  Sufficient valving shall be provided to facilitate isolating each service connection with minimal service disruption to other customers; if such valving does not exist, the developer shall be required to install it, at their cost. 
D.  Minimization of Public Main Extensions into Private Property. 
1.  Public water or sewer mains serving only one lot (for both the proposed and anticipated future conditions) shall not be extended into that lot. 
2.  Water or sewer mains within lots shall be privately owned and maintained, and be designed per the requirements of the Building Code, as adopted by the City of Denton.  
7.6.4 - Fire Hydrants. 
These are general standards to be used for platting purposes. For known end uses at the time of platting, Appendix C of the International Fire Code, as amended, shall be used. Fire hydrant spacing requirements for all building permits issued on any platted lot shall comply with the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of Denton.  
7.6.5 - Booster Pump Stations and Pressure Regulating Valves. 
A.  Occasionally, the proper design of the water distribution system may require the installation of booster pump stations and/or pressure regulating valves to insure proper water system pressures are provided to the development. The city reserves the right to require the developer to design and install these appurtenances as essential components of the water system necessary to serve the development. Any cost sharing for these improvements by the city will be handled by separate contract with the developer on a case-by-case basis and be in accordance with the provisions contained in Subsection 7.6.14: Oversize Participation by the City, and will factor in the following: 
1.  The location of the proposed development in relationship to the existing water distribution system; 
2.  The size of the development and the economic hardship that would be imposed upon the development by applying this requirement; 
3.  Compliance with the City's Water Distribution System Master Plan; 
4.  The relative benefits to the development compared to the benefits to the existing or future utility customers; 
5.  Availability of funding within the Water Department's Capital Improvement Program; and 
6.  The identification of capital improvement projects within the Water Utility Department's adopted five year Capital Improvements Program that would be designed to address this system wide need. 
B.  All contracts between the city and the developer for city cost participation for these improvements must be approved by the City Council after recommendation from the Public Utilities Board.  
7.6.6 - Lift Stations. 
A.  On occasion, the location of the property, the topography of the surrounding area and the location and elevation of the nearest sanitary sewer main requires the installation of a lift station and force main to provide wastewater service for a proposed development. The city reserves the right to require the developer to design and install these facilities as essential components of the wastewater collection system necessary to serve the development. Any cost sharing for oversizing these facilities by the city will be handled by separate contract with the developer on a case-by-case basis and be in accordance with the provisions contained within Subsection 7.6.14: Oversize Participation by the City. 
B.  All contracts between the city and the developer for city cost participation for these improvements must be approved by the City Council after recommendation from the Public Utilities Board. 
C.  The Wastewater Utility Department reserves the right to require the developer to locate any proposed lift station in a manner that would facilitate the operation, maintenance and ultimate abandonment of the facility in the future by gravity extension of sanitary sewer mains on a watershed basin basis in accordance with the City's Wastewater Collection System Master Plan. The Wastewater Utility Department also reserves the right to require the developer to install an alternative gravity sanitary sewer line extension to minimize the number of additional lift stations that must be operated and maintained by the city as a result of the development. The developer has the right of appeal to this requirement. The City Council shall consider this appeal after receiving a recommendation from the Public Utilities Board.  
7.6.7 - Easement Requirements. 
All utilities in a development shall be provided in street rights-of-way except for special circumstances approved by the City Engineer, in consultation with the Directors of Water and Waste Water Utilities. In such cases, the following standards shall prevail: 
A.  All utility easements shall be a minimum of 16 feet, unless special circumstances warrant additional or reduced easements which can be approved by the City Engineer, in consultation with the Directors of Water and Waste Water Utilities. The general criteria to define minimum easement widths are listed in Table 7.B: Minimum Easement Widths: 
Table 7.B: Minimum Easement Widths 
Type of Development 	Easement Size 
Individual water or sewer lines up to 12 inches in diameter 	16 ft. 
Individual water or sewer lines greater than 12 inches up to 20 inches 	20 ft. 
Individual water or sewer lines greater than 20 inches 	25 ft. 
Water and sewer lines up to 12 inches in the same easement 	25 ft. 
Water and sewer lines greater than 12 inches up to 20 inches in the same easement 	30 ft. 
Easements along TxDOT rights-of-way 	20 ft. 
 
B.  Lot lines shall not split easements. 
C.  Side yard easements shall not be allowed. Proposed public water or sewer mains intended to be aligned alongside yards shall be contained with dedicated open space lots, with overlapping public utility easements, and there shall be a note on the plat stating that these lots shall be owned and maintained by the property owners association. 
D.  Dead-end easements are not acceptable unless approved for special circumstances by the City Engineer, in consultation with the Directors of Water and Waste Water Utilities. 
E.  Fences within utility easements are prohibited, except as provided below: 
1.  Fences shall not be built within or across dedicated utility, water, or sewer easements. The City Engineer, in consultation with the Directors of Water and Waste Water Utilities, at their discretion, may allow fences to be built across an easement if gates at least 12 feet wide are built. 
2.  Any existing fence that crosses dedicated utility, water, or sewer easements that conflict with the purpose and intent of the easement may be removed by the city at any time. 
3.  The city is under no obligation to repair or replace any fence that is damaged or removed that encroaches within a dedicated easement for the purposes of operating, maintaining, replacing or installing water or sewer facilities within the dedicated easement. 
F.  Employees of the city shall have the authority to enter premises at any reasonable time in the regular line of duty for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, or constructing any water or sewer line or any water or electric meters, etc. The landowner and occupant are responsible for any construction activities occurring over or within any on-site utility in a utility easement. 
G.  If utility inspection or repair or reconstruction is necessary, any pavement, structure, or improvement damaged within a dedicated utility, water, or sewer easement, shall not be the responsibility of the city for any repairs, but shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. 
H.  The landowner assumes responsibility for any and all improvements placed within a utility, water, or sewer easement at their own risk. Additionally, the provisions of this section do not permit or supersede the limits and restrictions prescribed by the conditions of any existing utility easement for allowing improvements to be placed within utility easements. 
I.  The following shall not be installed or planted within a utility, water, or sewer easement: 
1.  Trees; and 
2.  Any structures, including retaining walls and signs. No part of a structure, including its underground foundation, shall encroach into an easement. 
J.  The following items are typically allowed to be installed within utility, water, or sewer easements: 
1.  Drive approaches and parking lots (alignment within drive aisles is preferred); 
2.  Sidewalks; and 
3.  Grass and small shrubbery.  
7.6.8 - Sewer Capacity Requirements. 
The city reserves the right to prohibit any connection to the city sewer system when it is determined that a line or the system is overloaded or that the line or system has inadequate excess system capacity to serve the sewer demand of the proposed development.  
7.6.9 - Impact Fees. 
All connections to the city's water distribution and wastewater collection systems will require the payment of impact fees in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Code of Ordinances, Chapter 26: Utilities.  
7.6.10 - Tapping Fees. 
A.  The Water and Wastewater Utility Department personnel shall make all connections to the existing water and sewer system. The fees charged to perform this work shall be paid for by the entity requesting this work. 
B.  The Water and Wastewater Department shall have discretion as to who shall make connections to the existing wastewater system. If the Water and Wastewater Department decides to make these connections themselves, then the fees charged to perform this work shall be paid for by the entity requesting this work.  
7.6.11 - Basic Policy. 
Any water and sewer service connections that serve lots that connect to new water and sewer mains extended to serve a proposed development shall be designed and installed by the developer prior to acceptance of these lines by the city.  
7.6.12 - Fee Schedule. 
A.  The fee schedule for all taps and meter loops shall be established annually by ordinance adopted by the City Council, after recommendation by the Public Utilities Board. 
B.  The fees shall be based upon the actual cost to install a given sized tap in a paved or unpaved area. These costs shall only reflect the average annual cost to perform the work, including equipment, materials, and labor. 
C.  For all taps or other utility work performed by the Water and Wastewater Utility Department personnel that do not have established fee schedules adopted by ordinance, the fee will be based upon the Department's estimated cost of equipment, materials, labor, plus administrative costs.  
7.6.13 - Administrative Procedure. 
A.  All tap fees shall be paid for prior to the work being performed by the city. 
B.  The Directors of Water and Wastewater Utilities will be responsible for the development of administrative procedures to insure the collection of tapping fees in accordance with the provisions of this DDC.  
7.6.14 - Oversize Participation by the City. 
A.  Generally. The city reserves the right to require developers to install water mains, sewer lines, booster pump stations, and/or pressure regulating valves, and wastewater lift stations that have excess capacity to serve adjacent properties and to comply with the adopted comprehensive master plans for these utility systems. The city may elect to participate in the oversizing, subject to fund availability, approval by the City Council, and the requirements of this subsection. 
B.  Basic Policy. If city participation in oversizing is approved, the amount would be in the cost of: 
1.  Water line size above the greater of: 
a.  Eight-inch; or 
b.  The size water line that is necessary to serve the development. 
2.  Sewer line size above the greater of: 
a.  10-inch; or 
b.  The size sewer line that is necessary to serve the development. 
C.  Administrative Procedure. 
1.  Prior to the beginning of construction of any facility for which the city is to participate in the cost thereof, the developer and city shall enter into a written participation agreement. The city shall approve all oversized utility contracts for such construction of utilities prior to their execution by the developer. 
2.  The agreement shall be in a form approved by the city. In addition to such other terms as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section, the agreement shall provide that if construction of the facility does not commence within one year of the date of the agreement, it shall terminate, unless a written extension thereof is approved by both parties. 
3.  The Director of Utilities or his/her designee, in consultation with the Directors of Water and Waste Water Utilities, shall determine the appropriate level of cost participation by the city based upon the incremental cost between the developer required facilities and the city's requested oversized facilities. This cost determination shall be based upon recent bids for similar facilities and/or cost estimates prepared by the city's engineering staff. If the city cannot justify the costs involved in any such contract where city funds or pro rata repayment is involved, the city shall have the option and right to submit the project for sealed bids, and the developer shall pay his proportionate share of the acceptable low bid. 
4.  Final approval of all oversize participation agreements between the city and the developer shall come from the City Council after recommendation from the Public Utilities Board unless the participation amount is less than the expenditure level authorized by the City Manager. Final payment to the developer for oversize participation by the city shall occur within 60 days of final acceptance of the installed facilities.  
7.6.15 - Pro-Rata Agreements. 
Any developer who bears the cost of off-site water or sanitary sewer main extensions to a development or installs a lift station with excess capacity to serve adjacent property without city oversize participation shall be entitled to reimbursement of the pro rata cost paid to the city, as provided below, for each user who extends a service line from the main or connects to the lift station within 20 years from the date the facility is finally inspected and accepted by the city. In no case, however, shall a developer receive reimbursement in excess of the cost of the facility. 
A.  Basic Policy. The pro rata charges for tapping mains extended by the developer shall be as follows: 
1.  Every person or developer applying for a tap of any water or sanitary sewer main which has been constructed under the terms of the developer extension requirements of this section or the city extension requirements of this section shall pay for the requested taps at the following rates: 
a.  Where a water or sewer main is located on a city street or county road and abuts and is accessible to separate platted tracts, the pro rata charge shall be 60 percent of the average current per-foot cost of such main. 
b.  Where a water or sewer main is located on a state or federal highway and abuts and is accessible to separate platted tracts, the pro rata charge shall be 100 percent of the average current per-foot cost of such main. 
c.  Where a water or sewer main is located in a proper easement across an owner's property and where such easement does not abut a street or is not in any other way directly accessible to any separately owned tract, the pro rata charge shall be 100 percent of the average current per-foot cost of such main. 
d.  The pro rata charge shall be based on the average current cost of similar projects with pipe of the same size up to eight-inch inside diameter water pipe and 10-inch diameter sewer pipe. 
e.  All pro rata charges shall be charged on a per-front-foot basis. 
2.  The pro rata charge provided by this subsection shall be in addition to the usual tapping fee and to any other charges required by the city. 
3.  The intent and purpose of this subsection is to provide an equitable charge for water and sanitary sewer connections as a proportionate distribution of the cost of water and sanitary sewer main extensions to serve property within the jurisdiction of the city. 
4.  In cases where a property or a tract of land is so situated or shaped that the above front-foot charge creates an inequitable basis compared to other tracts of land of similar overall size, the Public Utilities Board shall determine the proper charge in accord with the intent and purpose of this subsection, and such determined charge may be lesser or greater than that by the front-foot basis. If more lots are to be served by the main than abut or contain it, then the charge shall be greater, as determined by the Public Utilities Board. 
5.  No person shall acquire any vested right under the terms and provisions of this subsection, nor shall the city incur or assume any liability or obligation to expend or encumber tax or utility funds. No utility funds shall be spent or encumbered unless funds are available for such purpose, as determined by the Public Utilities Board. 
B.  Reimbursement for Lift Stations or Force Mains. Reimbursement to developers for the cost of lift stations or force mains shall be as follows: 
1.  Any developer who bears the cost of lift stations or force mains to serve a development shall be entitled to reimbursement for such costs from pro rata connection or use charges paid to the city, in accordance with this section, by any person who makes use of such lift stations or force mains within 20 years of the date such facilities are accepted by the city. 
2.  The maximum reimbursable cost paid to a developer by the city from pro rata charges collected from persons connecting to the facilities constructed by a developer shall be based upon the cost of providing capacity for the facilities in excess of the capacity required or reserved by the developer to meet the requirements of the developer's property for which the facilities were installed, determined as follows: 
 
1 Total cost of facility. 
2 Total capacity, in gallons per minute (gpm) of the facility. 
3 Capacity, in gallons per minute (gpm), in excess of capacity reserved or required by developer's property. 
3.  Reimbursement costs shall be payable to the developer within 30 days of receipt of pro rata charges collected by the city. 
C.  Pro Rata Charges for Use of Sanitary Sewer Lift Stations or Force Mains Installed by Developers. Persons connecting to or using sanitary sewer lift stations or force mains installed by a developer shall pay pro rata costs as follows: 
1.  Every person who connects to or makes use of a sanitary sewer lift station or force main, the cost of which was incurred by a developer and for which a pro rata reimbursement agreement has been entered into between the city and such developer, shall, as a condition to such connection or use or continued use, pay to the city a pro rata cost charge based upon the use of the excess capacity of the facility, determined as follows: 
 
1 Average daily flow—The projected average daily sewage flow from each building, structure or particular land use. For single-family residential buildings the projected average daily sewage flow of 312.5 gallons per day (gpd) shall be used (based upon two and one-half persons per building times 125 gpd). For other land uses, the projected average daily sewage flows shall be based upon the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's or its successor agency's most recent listing of average sewerage flows for various land uses or facilities or any other national or state listing of such sewage flows recognized in the utility industry, as determined appropriate by the Directors of Water and Wastewater Utilities. 
2 1.5—Ratio of peak flow to average daily flow. 
3 N—Number of buildings, structures, units or particular land uses on which the projected average daily sewage flows are based. 
4 Rate—The gallon per minute (gpm) cost of providing the sewage capacity used, determined as follows: 
 
5 1440—The minutes in a 24 hour day. 
2.  The intent of this subsection is to provide for an equitable pro rata charge to persons making use of lift stations or force mains constructed under the provisions of this section based upon the average daily projected sewage flows and peak sewage flows of particular buildings, structures and land uses. 
3.  In cases where the pro rata charge calculated in accordance with this subsection would not be equitable because the actual average daily sewage flow or peak flow from a particular building, structure or land use is much greater or smaller than the normal projected average daily flow or peak flow on which such pro rata charge is based, the Directors of Water and Wastewater Utilities may, based upon evidence of such greater or smaller actual daily sewage flow or peak flow, require a payment of a greater or smaller pro rata charge as a condition to the connection to, use of or continued use of a lift station or force main which is subject to a pro rata reimbursement agreement. In such cases, the Assistant City Manager of Utilities shall give written notice to such person required to make such pro rata payment of the basis for the actual pro rata charge, and such person may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal such determination to the Public Utilities Board. The Board shall, within a reasonable time thereafter, make a determination of the actual pro rata charge to be assessed and paid. 
D.  Administrative Procedure. 
1.  Prior to beginning of construction of any facility for which pro rata reimbursement is provided for herein, the developer shall enter into a pro rata reimbursement agreement with the city. The agreement shall be in a form adopted by the city. In addition to such other terms as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section, the agreement shall provide that if construction of the facility does not commence within one year of the date of the agreement, it shall terminate, unless a written extension thereof is approved by both parties. 
2.  Pro rata reimbursement payments shall be made by the city to the person or entity who paid the cost of the main or his assignee, and no other person shall be entitled to payment under the terms of this subsection. 
3.  Pro rata reimbursement payments shall be made pursuant to the terms of the final approved pro rata agreement. 
4.  The reimbursement shall be payable within 30 days of its receipt by the city. 
5.  All pro rata agreements shall be reviewed and approved by the Directors of Water or Wastewater Utilities. Final approval of pro rata agreements will be by the City Council after recommendation by the Public Utilities Board or by the City Manager if this authority is delegated to him/her by the City Council.  
7.6.16 - Alternative Water and Sewer Facilities. 
All developments within the jurisdiction of the city shall be required to have approved water supply and sanitary sewerage facilities and shall be required to connect to the city facilities unless alternative arrangements have been approved by the city according to the following standards and procedures: 
A.  Basic Policy. 
1.  Alternative water and sewer systems will be considered for developments that are located in areas that are impractical or economically infeasible to connect to the city's centralized water distribution and/or wastewater collection system. 
2.  The key factors that will be evaluated to determine the city's acceptance of these alternative water and sewer systems are: 
a.  General compliance with the city's land use element of the Comprehensive Plan and Water Distribution and/or Wastewater Collection System Master Plans. 
b.  The severity of the economic difference between the collective costs of the alternative water and/or sewage disposal systems necessary to serve the entire development and the costs to extend water and/or wastewater lines to the development. 
c.  The suitability of the soil conditions, topography and other environmental factors effecting the development for the installation of the individual on-site sewage disposal systems. 
d.  The total number of lots, size of lots and overall density of the development. 
e.  The impact on surrounding properties and environmentally sensitive areas adjacent to the development and the availability of buffer areas. 
f.  The impact on surrounding properties ability to develop with suitable access to water and/or sanitary sewer facilities. 
B.  Approval Process. 
1.  All alternative water and sewer systems shall be approved by the Directors of Water or Wastewater Utilities based on the approval criteria established above and below. 
2.  All alternative systems shall be designed and operated in strict compliance with all applicable permits, ordinances, regulatory guidance and regulations including the EPA, TCEQ, Texas Department of State Health Services, and the city. 
C.  Approval Criteria. Alternative water and sewer systems will be considered for developments pursuant to Chapter 26: Utilities, in the Municipal Code of Ordinances; the Water and Wastewater Criteria Manual; and the following: 
1.  Individual Water Wells. Developments may be approved with individual water well facilities according to the following criteria: 
a.  Water well operation and quality meet the minimum requirements of the TCEQ; North Texas Groundwater Conservation District; the provisions of the Municipal Code of Ordinances; and Title 16, Texas Administrative Code, Part 4, Chapter 76; or other administrative rules promulgated by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation; 
b.  Water wells are not used in any commercial sale of the water; 
c.  Cost to tie onto the city water system, less impact fees, exceeds the certified initial capital cost of a well; 
d.  Satisfying health and safety requirements, including fire standards; and 
e.  An applicant for approval of an individual water well shall submit the following evidence to the Director of Water Utilities: 
i.  Water Well application; 
ii.  Water quality tests; 
iii.  Affidavits stating that no more than three families will use the well and/or the well water will not be used in any commercial sales; 
iv.  Certified cost estimate of well installation; and 
v.  Upon review of this evidence, the Director of Water Utilities may issue a Water Well Permit. 
2.  Private Water Systems. In areas where development requires water services for more than a single facility and the cost of extending and tying onto the city system is prohibitive, privately owned water facilities may be considered and approved by the city according to the following general criteria: 
a.  The cost to tie onto the city system would be significantly greater than the proposed alternative. 
b.  The applicant of the proposed alternative system provides certified evidence from a registered professional engineer that the system will meet all city, state, and federal health and water quality standards. 
c.  The sizing and material quality of all facilities will meet the city standards. Provisions shall be made to design the water system to provide adequate fire protection for the development in accordance with the design criteria established by the city. 
d.  Perpetual private maintenance is guaranteed by such means as a homeowner's association, bonds, or other means approved by the City Attorney. 
e.  Operators of the system will be certified by the TCEQ. 
f.  The city shall have the right to inspect the system periodically to determine if such system is being operated and maintained according to industry standards. 
g.  The review and approval procedures for such private water system shall proceed concurrently with the normal platting and engineering plan approval process as outlined in this article, except for applications under these alternative water facilities proposals, which shall first require review and recommendation from the Public Utilities Board and final concurrence from the City Council. 
h.  The city may accept existing or annexed private water systems for operation and maintenance when the city's water lines are connected to such system, provided the system has been designed, constructed and operated in accordance with accepted industry and city standards. Such private system shall be dedicated to the city at no cost. 
i.  Prior to such acceptance by the city, such water lines and facilities shall be inspected and evaluated as to standards, adequacy, condition, etc. If water lines and facilities are not according to city standards, a per-lineal-foot pro rata charge shall be assessed to the users of such system for installation of these new facilities or will be on a per-lineal-foot, actual-cost basis for upgrading or repairing the existing facilities to meet city standards. 
3.  Land Use Requirements for Water Wells and On-Site Sewage Systems. 
a.  Utilizing Private Water Well. Lots or tracts of land platted or created after the effective date of this DDC shall have a minimum area of two acres when a private water well is located on the legal tract and a single-family dwelling, commercial, or institutional building utilizes an on-site sewage facility. Environmental protection must be demonstrated on the on-site sewage facility plan when the land tract is in a flood plain or floodway. 
b.  Utilizing Public Water System. Lots or tracts of land platted or created after the effective date of this DDC shall have a minimum area of one acre when a single-family dwelling, commercial, or institutional building uses an on-site sewage facility. Environmental protection must be demonstrated on the on-site sewage facility plan when the land tract is in a flood plain or floodway. 
4.  Individual On-Site Sewage Disposal System. Individual on-site sewage disposal systems will be considered for developments that are located in areas that are impractical or economically infeasible to connect to the city's centralized wastewater collection system. 
a.  Approval Criteria. The key factors that will be evaluated to determine the city's acceptance of these alternative individual on-site sewage disposal systems are: 
i.  General compliance with the city's land use element of the Comprehensive Plan and Wastewater Collection System Master Plans. 
ii.  The severity of the economic difference between the collective costs of all of the individual on-site sewage disposal systems necessary to serve the entire development and the costs to extend wastewater lines to the development. In addition, the feasibility of low pressure sewer system shall be evaluated to serve the dwelling unit or the development. 
iii.  The suitability of the soil conditions, topography, and other environmental factors effecting the development for the installation of the individual on-site sewage disposal systems. 
iv.  The total number of lots, size of lots, and overall density of the development. 
v.  The impact on surrounding properties and environmentally sensitive areas adjacent to the development and the availability of buffer areas. 
vi.  The impact on surrounding properties ability to develop with suitable access to sanitary sewer facilities. 
b.  Review of Subdivision or Development Plans. 
i.  Prior to final plat approval and before the on-site sewage facility permit process for an individual on-site sewage facility can begin, persons proposing residential subdivisions, manufactured housing communities, multi-unit residential developments, business parks, or other similar uses and using on-site sewage facilities for sewage disposal shall submit planning materials for these developments to the City of Denton. 
ii.  The planning materials shall be prepared by a professional engineer or professional sanitarian and shall include: 
a.  An overall site plan; 
b.  Topographic map; 
c.  100-year floodplain map; 
d.  Soil survey; 
e.  Location of water wells; 
f.  Locations of easements as identified in Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 285; 
g.  A complete report detailing the types of on-site sewage facilities to be considered and their compatibility with area wide drainage and groundwater; and 
h.  A comprehensive drainage plan. 
5.  On-Site Sewage Facilities. 
a.  An on-site sewage facility may be installed to serve an individual residence, commercial, or industrial facility if: 
i.  The lot upon which such structure is located is more than 600 feet from any city sanitary main. The distance shall be measured as the straight-line horizontal distance between the end of the existing city sanitary sewer main to the nearest property boundary of the lot to be served; 
ii.  The Director of Wastewater Utilities, or designee, certifies in writing that the topography of such premises makes normal connection with such existing sanitary main impractical or impossible, and a low pressure sewer system is not feasible; 
iii.  The operation of an on-site sewage facility is feasible on the premises and will meet the standards and requirements of this section; and 
iv.  All other installations of on-site sewage facility shall be unlawful within the wastewater service area as certified by TCEQ. 
b.  On-site sewage facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards established by the Texas Department of State Health Services, TCEQ, and the design criteria adopted by the city. 
c.  An applicant for approval of an individual on-site sewage facility shall submit the following evidence to the Director of Water or Wastewater Utilities: 
i.  Map and statement of justification; 
ii.  Affidavits that the on-site sewage facility will serve residents, commercial, or industrial facilities confined to a single lot and not to exceed 5,000 gallons per day in capacity; 
iii.  A site evaluation and construction plan of the on-site sewage facility system prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered professional sanitarian; 
iv.  Affidavit of the results of the soil analysis and site evaluation in accordance with Title 30, TAC, Chapter 285; and 
v.  Upon review of this evidence, the Director of Water or Wastewater Utilities may issue an on-site sewage facility permit. 
6.  Wastewater Treatment Systems. In areas where development requires wastewater services for more than a single facility and the cost of extending and tying onto the city system is prohibitive, wastewater treatment system may be considered and approved by the city according to the following general criteria: 
a.  The cost to tie onto the city system, less impact fees, would be significantly greater than the proposed alternative; 
b.  The applicant of the proposed alternative system provides certified evidence from a registered professional engineer that the system will meet all city, state, and federal health and water quality standards; 
c.  The sizing and material quality of all facilities will meet the city standards, and federal, and state regulatory requirements; 
d.  The review and approval procedures for such wastewater treatment system shall proceed concurrently with the normal platting and engineering plan approval process as outlined in this article, except for applications under these alternative sewer facilities proposals that shall first require review and recommendation from the Public Utilities Board and final concurrence from the City Council. In addition, TPDES permit shall be secured for operation of the wastewater treatment facility; and 
e.  The city will assist in obtaining the TCEQ TPDES permit for the wastewater treatment facility. Once the construction of the facility is complete and the city issues the acceptance letter, the ownership of the wastewater treatment facility will revert to the city. The city will thereafter own and operate the facility. 
7.  Existing Privately Owned Water and Wastewater Systems. 
a.  The city may accept existing or annexed private wastewater treatment system for operation and maintenance when the city's sewer lines are connected to such system, provided the system has been designed, constructed and operated in accordance with accepted industry and city standards and proper maintenance bonds are provided. Such private system shall be dedicated to the city at no cost. 
b.  Prior to such acceptance by the city, such water and sewer lines and facilities shall be inspected and evaluated as to standards, adequacy, condition, etc. If sewer lines and facilities are not according to city standards, a per-lineal-foot pro rata charge shall be assessed to the users of such system for installation of these new facilities or will be on a per-lineal-foot, actual-cost basis for upgrading or repairing the existing facilities to meet city standards. 
c.  Connections to sanitary sewer extensions required upon notice. Whenever the city sanitary sewer system is extended to within 200 feet of any lot or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city where an on-site sewage facility exists, the owner or occupant of each premises shall abate such on-site sewage facility, dry closet or privy and shall construct a suitable water closet upon such premises and connect the water closet with the city sanitary sewer main within 45 days after written notice to do so from the Director of Water and Wastewater Utilities, unless he/she can show by county health certificate that his current system is functioning in a sound and safe manner. He/she shall further be required to have these facilities re-certified every two years.  
7.6.17 - Plans and Specifications. 
The developer shall provide the city with all plans and specifications for all water and wastewater facilities necessary to service the proposed development. 
A.  Basic Requirements. 
1.  All water and wastewater facilities necessary to support a proposed development shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas. 
2.  Plans and specifications shall be prepared and submitted for review and approval prior to final acceptance and approval of the final plat. 
3.  Plans and specifications shall conform to the criteria contained in the Water and Wastewater Design Criteria Manual. 
B.  Construction Plans. 
1.  The developer's engineer shall prepare construction plans for all water and wastewater facilities required to serve the development. 
2.  The construction plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas and shall be signed and sealed in accordance with the criteria outlined by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers prior to submittal to the city for review, approval or construction purposes. 
3.  The construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the standards outlined in the Water and Wastewater Design Criteria Manual and shall be available on electronic media unless otherwise approved by the Water and Wastewater Utility Department. 
C.  As Built Drawings. After the construction has been completed and prior to acceptance of the facilities by the city, the construction plans shall be modified to reflect as-built conditions and be submitted to the city.  
7.7 - Landscaping, Screening, Buffering, and Fences 
 
7.7.1 - Purpose. 
The city recognizes landscaping, tree preservation, buffering, and screening as important features and activities to: 
A.  Blend the built and natural environment and preserve the natural landscape; 
B.  Mitigate or minimize potential nuisances such as noise, light, glare, dirt, litter, signs, parking, or storage areas and to provide a transition between uses; 
C.  Conserve water resources by using sustainable design and maintenance techniques and low-water plant species; 
D.  Promote environmental benefits such as improved stormwater retention, water quality, and air quality, soil moisture, groundwater, and erosion prevention; 
E.  Improve the appearance of development and establish an attractive streetscape; and 
F.  Increase the urban tree canopy.  
7.7.2 - Intent. 
A.  The intent of these regulations is to achieve and maintain an average minimum of 30 percent tree canopy coverage citywide from preserved trees and newly planted trees, and to promote a multi-aged urban forest. Specifically, to achieve the city's goal of a city-wide average tree canopy cover of at least 30 percent, the following goals are established for specific areas of the city based upon the unique ecoregions present in different areas of the city: 
1.  For areas east of the Interstate 35/Interstate 35-W corridor, where the Cross Timbers ecoregions is more prevalent, the minimum canopy goal shall be 40 percent coverage. 
2.  For areas west of the Interstate 35/Interstate 35-W corridor, where the Grand Prairie ecoregion is more prevalent, the minimum canopy goal shall be 20 percent coverage. 
B.  These regulations are intended to promote the functional distribution of that canopy throughout various land uses as development occurs through a combination of planting and retention goals and requirements for tree canopy cover.  
7.7.3 - Applicability. 
A.  General Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.7: Landscaping, Screening, Buffering, and Fences, the standards in this section, and the Criteria Manual shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability, with the following modifications: 
1.  New Development. 
a.  A new principal structure is constructed; or 
b.  An existing principal structure is relocated on the lot. 
2.  Expansions and Enlargements. All expansions or enlargements shall be considered together with any other expansions or enlargements during the previous two year period. 
a.  The entire site shall comply with this Section 7.7 when: 
i.  The number of multifamily dwelling units on a property is increased by more than 25 percent; or 
ii.  Ten or more additional multifamily dwelling units are created within the MD zoning district; or 
iii.  The square footage of a nonresidential building is expanded or enlarged by more than 50 percent; or 
iv.  The addition or expansion of one or more structures or uses that requires specific use permit approval. 
b.  The portion of the site being expanded and/or improved shall comply with this Section 7.7 when: 
i.  Except for within the MD zoning district, the number of dwelling units on a property is increased by between 10 and 25 percent or 10 dwelling units, whichever is less; or 
ii.  The square footage of a nonresidential building is expanded or enlarged by between 10 and 50 percent; or 
iii.  Parking area improvements or expansions including reconfiguring, reconstructing, or other similar projects, but not including resurfacing or restriping. 
3.  Electric Substations and Switch Stations. Landscaping, screening, buffering, and tree standards for electric substations and switch stations shall be pursuant to Subsection 7.13.7: Electric Substation, Interchange, and Switch Station Design. 
B.  Exemptions. 
1.  Expansion of a single-family detached dwelling, duplex, or townhome within the permitted building coverage. 
2.  Cumulative expansions and enlargements of a multifamily development or nonresidential use less than 1,000 square feet. 
3.  Conversion of a residential structure to a nonresidential use where no site improvements are required. 
C.  Alternative Landscaping. 
1.  Alternatives Authorized. A reduction in the count, configuration, or location of required landscaping materials may be allowed when alternatives are justified by site or development conditions. Conditions justifying approval of an alternative landscape plan include: 
a.  Natural conditions, such as watercourses, natural rock formations, or topography; 
b.  The likelihood that required landscaping material at maturity would not achieve the intent of this DDC due to topography, placement, or other existing site conditions; 
c.  Unique lot size or configuration; 
d.  Challenges associated with infill development or redevelopment on small lots; 
e.  The presence of existing utility or other easements; 
f.  The potential for interference with public safety; 
g.  Preservation of natural vegetation; or 
h.  Other situations where strict adherence to the buffer or landscaping standards in this DDC are determined impractical by the Director. 
2.  Alternative Landscape Plan Approval Criteria. The Director may approve alternative landscape plans that do not meet the specific requirements stated in this Section 7.7, when the Director determines that the alternatives meet the following criteria: 
a.  Are consistent with the purposes of this Section 7.7; 
b.  Do not include invasive vegetation included in an adopted city, county, or state list of prohibited or invasive species; 
c.  Provide equal or superior buffering of adjacent properties from anticipated impacts of the proposed development; and 
d.  Provide equal or superior visual appearance of the property when viewed from a public right-of-way.  
7.7.4 - Tree Preservation. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The Comprehensive Plan identifies the importance of environmental management, while allowing reasonable and responsible development of land within the city. Towards this end, the purpose of these regulations is to promote the preservation and expansion of tree canopy, facilitate site design and construction that contributes to the long term viability of existing trees, and to establish a process to manage the removal of tree canopy. Further, this section is intended to accomplish the following public purposes: 
1.  Protect trees and promote the ecological, environmental, and aesthetic values of the city; 
2.  Maintain and enhance a positive image of the city through the preservation, mitigation, and planting of trees; 
3.  Prevent the untimely and indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and clear-cutting of land; 
4.  Provide for a permitting and enforcement procedure; 
5.  Preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare of citizens; 
6.  Encourage the protection of healthy trees and provide for the replacement and/or replanting of trees that are necessarily removed during construction, development, or redevelopment; 
7.  Provide for the preservation and protection of larger native and/or established trees, which provide a valuable amenity to the urban environment and which, once destroyed, can only be replaced after generations, if at all; 
8.  Enhance and preserve established tree stands adjacent to Environmentally Sensitive Areas in order to further protect wildlife habitats and reduce impacts from new developments; 
9.  Provide for shade, windbreaks, and the cooling of air; thereby, reducing the requirements for air conditioning and heating and the utilization of nonrenewable energy sources; and 
10.  Provide for open space and more efficient drainage of land; thereby, reducing the effects of soil erosion and the need for additional drainage facilities. 
B.  Applicability and Exemptions. 
1.  Unless exempted in paragraph 2. below, the requirements of this subsection shall apply to: 
a.  Undeveloped land; 
b.  All nonresidential and multifamily property to be redevelopment including additions or alterations, but not including interior alterations or exterior alterations that do not change the footprint of the building, and that do not require the removal of trees; and 
c.  Existing single-family and duplex dwelling properties applying for a demolition permit for the principal structure, provided that the minimum dbh for protected trees shall be 10 inches or greater. 
2.  The following activities shall be exempt from this subsection: 
a.  Agricultural operations under Tex. Agric. Code Sec. 251.002(1); 
b.  Property on which a single-family or duplex dwelling unit(s) exists, provided that trees designated for preservation on an approved Tree Survey or Preservation Plan and/or an associated Plat shall be preserved unless otherwise exempt under TLGC 212.905 or its successor; 
c.  Any tree determined to be diseased beyond recovery, dying, dead, creating a public nuisance or damaging a foundation by a qualified professional; 
d.  Any tree determined to be causing a danger, or to constitute a hazardous condition, as a result of a natural event such as tornado, storm, flood or other act of God, that endangers the public health, welfare or safety and requires immediate removal; 
e.  Any tree listed on the Texas Department of Agriculture Noxious and Invasive Plant List; 
f.  Clearing of understory necessary to perform soil borings, boundary surveying of real property, to conduct tree surveys or inventories, or to install tree protection fencing, provided that clearing for surveying shall not exceed a width of four feet for general survey (e.g., of easement boundary) and eight feet for survey of property boundary lines, and provided that any protected tree having a dbh of 10 inches dbh or greater may not be removed under this exemption. For the installation of tree protection fencing the clearing shall not exceed a width of four feet, measured radially from the trunk, and must not encroach into the dripline or critical root zone of any tree to be protected; or 
g.  Site plan, preliminary, or final plat applications, or a building permit application deemed complete as of the effective date of this subchapter. 
C.  Tree Removal Permit. 
1.  New Development/Construction. 
a.  In the event it becomes necessary to remove a tree for development or construction, a tree removal permit is required. No protected tree may be removed for development or construction until the final plat has been approved and the Building Official has properly issued a tree removal permit for that purpose. In instances where a final plat is not required, proposed removal of protected trees shall be reviewed with any required site plan for development. 
b.  All areas within the public rights-of-way, utility easements or drainage easements, as shown on an approved plat, and areas designated as cut/fill on the related drainage plan approved by the City Engineer, shall be subject to the requirements of this section. 
2.  Municipal/Public Property. Property owned by the City of Denton, State of Texas, a political subdivision of the State of Texas, or any public school, pubic school district, or nonprofit charter school shall be subject to requirements of Subsection 7.4.3. 
3.  Tree Removal Permit Required. 
a.  No protected trees may be removed or transported until authorized by a tree removal permit. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution that permitting is exempted by Subsection 7.7.4B. 
4.  Tree Removal Permit Review and Approval Process. 
a.  Applicant submits a complete application, along with the applicable fees. 
b.  A tree survey and tree preservation plan is required for all new development, in accordance with Subsection 7.7.4D. 
c.  A tree removal permit is valid for 180 days, or for the duration of a building permit, clearing and grading permit, or clearing and grubbing permit issued in conjunction with the tree removal permit, whichever is longer. 
d.  Protected trees shall not be removed until: 
i.  Proper mitigation or replacement requirements have been determined and approved for the lot or site on an approved tree survey and preservation plan; and 
ii.  A preconstruction meeting has been held with proper city staff authorizing grading and construction activities to begin on the lot or site; and/or 
iii.  A tree removal permit has been issued for the lot or site. 
5.  Standards for Relocating Heritage and Quality Trees. All permitted tree relocations shall be in accordance with the applicable American National Standards for Tree Care Operations ANSI A300. 
6.  Permits Issued for Public Need, Danger, or Calamity. The Director or designee may issue a permit for the removal of a protected tree provided that it: 
a.  Is determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare, or safety; 
b.  Hinders or obstructs the construction, maintenance, repair, or replacement of city streets, water and sewer lines, and drainage and storm sewer; 
c.  Is located in any right-of-way required under the mobility/thoroughfare plan to be dedicated to, and accepted by the city. This does not include trees being removed for proposed driveways, right and left turn lanes, or median openings required or warranted by a development. Trees removed in these instances shall be replaced per paragraph 7.7.7F.5; 
d.  Hinders or obstructs the construction, repair, maintenance, or replacement of public improvement projects including, but not limited to, major collection lines for sanitary sewer, distribution lines for water, collection and management of storm water runoff, and thoroughfares designated for construction in the City's Capital Improvement Project Plan, Water and Sanitary Distribution Line Maps, or Mobility/Thoroughfare Plan; 
e.  Is damaged or killed by a tornado, ice or wind storms, flooding, or other acts of nature; or 
f.  Is otherwise required by statute. 
D.  Tree Protection Requirements During Construction. Property owners shall adhere to the following tree protection measures on all construction sites, consistent with Figure 7.7-1: Tree Protection and Root Pruning Details. 
1.  Prior to grading, brush removal, or construction, the developer shall clearly tag or mark all trees to be preserved. 
2.  The developer shall erect an orange plastic mesh fence, or other approved fencing material, a minimum of four feet in height around each tree or group of trees to prevent the placement of debris, equipment, or fill within the dripline or critical root zone. The fence shall be installed prior to the release of any permit. If the protection fence is found removed, damaged, or altered at any time during construction prior to final inspection or landscape installation, a stop work order may be issued by the Building Official. 
3.  During the construction phase of development, the developer shall prohibit cleaning, parking, or storage of equipment or materials under the canopy of any tree or group of trees required to be preserved. The developer shall not allow the disposal of any waste material harmful to tree growth and health, such as, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, or mortar in the dripline area. 
Figure 7.7-1: Tree Protection and Root Pruning Details
 
4.  No attachments or wires of any kind, other than those intended to identify or protect a protected tree, shall be attached to any tree. 
5.  No fill or excavation may occur within the dripline of a tree to be preserved unless there is a specific approved plan for use of tree wells or retaining walls. Any plan proposing the use of tree wells or retaining walls within the dripline of a tree to be preserved shall be designed by a licensed landscape architect. Major changes of grade (four inches or greater) will require additional measures to maintain proper oxygen and water exchange with the roots. In addition, the developer should adhere to the following guidelines to protect the trees to be preserved: 
a.  With grade changes, a reinforced retaining wall or tree well of a design approved by the city should be constructed around the tree no closer than half the distance between the trunk and the drip line. The retaining wall should be constructed so as to maintain the existing grades around a tree or group of trees. 
b.  At no time should a wall, pavement, or porous pavement be placed closer than five feet or one foot for every two inches in caliper, whichever is greater, to the trunk of the tree. 
c.  In instances where tree wells or retaining walls are approved, root pruning may be necessary when the critical root zone is to be disturbed. See Figure 7.7-1. 
d.  If a patio, sidewalk, drive, parking lot, or other paved surface must be placed within the drip line of an existing tree, material such as a porous pavement or other approved construction methods that will allow the passage of water and oxygen may be required. 
E.  Tree Survey and Preservation/Replacement Plan. 
1.  A tree survey and preservation/replacement plan is required for the development impact areas and shall accompany the initial application for a site plan, preliminary plat, replat, gas well site plan, or a clear and grade permit, regardless of the number of trees present on a property. 
2.  A tree survey and preservation/replacement plan may be required to accompany a zoning application, specific use permit, or a planned development amendment where tree and landscaping requirements are relevant to the requested zoning or development amendment, as determined by the Director. 
3.  Each tree survey and preservation/replacement plan shall contain, but not be limited to, the following required elements: 
a.  The locations of all trees to be preserved and removed on the subject site. 
b.  A table containing the following information for all trees: 
i.  Tree number; 
ii.  Common name of each tree; 
iii.  Circumference of each landmark tree; 
iv.  Diameter (dbh) of each tree; 
v.  General health and condition of each tree; 
vi.  Average canopy spread; 
vii.  Classification (quality, heritage, landmark, secondary, or non-protected) and status (preserve or remove) for each tree; and 
viii.  Mitigation worksheet as shown in Table 7.C. 
4.  The tree survey and preservation/replacement plan shall be prepared by or under the supervision of an ISA certified or ASCA registered arborist, a SAF certified forester, botanist, professional land surveyor that has documented completion of at least eight hours of training in Texas tree identification, or a registered landscape architect. 
5.  Residential subdivisions that are to be developed in phases must provide a plan that complies with the preservation requirements at full build-out as approved on the preliminary plat or general development plan. 
6.  Any subsequent redevelopment of property shall preserve the minimum percentage dbh inches as indicated by the initial tree survey and preservation/replacement plan. 
7.  A notation must be placed on the preliminary plat, final plat, site plan, and building permit identifying the dbh of trees to be preserved and the location of the lots that contain preserved trees. The notation shall limit any future unauthorized land disturbing activity or construction that would impact and/or damage the tree(s) preserved. 
8.  A tree survey and preservation/replacement plan shall be approved if the minimum preservation and replacement requirements are met. 
9.  If there are no protected trees on a property, then a signed and notarized letter indicating such shall be prepared by or under the supervision of an ISA certified or ASCA registered arborist, a SAF certified forester, botanist, professional land surveyor that has documented completion of at least eight hours of training in Texas tree identification, or a registered landscape architect and submitted with the initial development application. 
F.  Alternative Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan. 
1.  Description and Intent. The alternative tree preservation/replacement plan provides the option to further the purpose and intent of these regulations through a flexible process reviewed and approved by the Director for one of the following purposes: 
a.  To allow trees measuring below the minimum dbh to be counted for Protected Trees when: 
i.  The allowance would result in the preservation of a greater number of post oak trees, regardless of dbh; or 
ii.  The preservation of protected tree(s) would cause a substantial burden, but smaller dbh non-secondary trees are located in such a way that the trees can be incorporated into the site design such as the parking lot, buffer, or front yard landscaping. 
b.  To allow secondary trees to count towards the minimum required preservation instead of quality trees. 
2.  Criteria for Approval. 
a.  The proposed alternative tree preservation/replacement plan adequately achieves, or is an improvement on, the intent of the requirements of this subsection; and 
b.  The proposed site design has minimized the loss of protected trees to the greatest extent possible or has maintained existing tree stands. 
3.  Replacement Trees. Required replacement and mitigation contained in paragraphs 7.7.4H and 7.7.4I shall be required for those alternatives in paragraph 7.7.4F.1 above. 
G.  Minimum Preservation Requirements. 
1.  Tree Types and Required Preservation. 
a.  Landmark Trees. One hundred percent of all Landmark trees shall be preserved. 
b.  Heritage and Quality Trees. A minimum of 30 percent of the total dbh shall be preserved within the development impact area. Removal of trees shall be replaced in accordance with Subsection 7.7.4H or 7.7.4I. 
i.  The 30 percent minimum preservation requirement may be reduced to 20 percent provided: 
a.  The 20 percent preserved dbh is in either a dedicated conservation easement or in a preserved habitat. All protected and non-protected trees, unless dead or diseased, that are greater than six inches dbh may be counted toward meeting the 20 percent requirement. 
b.  Preserved habitats may be dedicated as a conservation easement, and if not dedicated as a conservation easement must otherwise be restricted on a plat. Preserved habitat shall contain the prescribed minimum preservation amount, contain a stand of trees and understory, and shall be the greater of 10 percent of the property or 5,000 square feet. 
c.  All other trees remaining in the development impact area but removed shall be replaced in accordance with subsection 7.7.4H or 7.7.4I., if applicable. 
ii.  Properties without a preserved habitat or conservation easement may reduce the 30 percent minimum to 20 percent provided: 
a.  The 10 percent reduction is mitigated at the following rates: heritage trees at two and three-quarters inches for every inch removed; and quality trees at two and one-quarter inches for every inch removed. 
b.  All other trees remaining in the development impact area but removed shall be replaced in accordance with Subsection 7.7.4H or 7.7.4I., if applicable. 
c.  Secondary Trees. There is no minimum preservation of secondary trees required when there are quality and heritage trees located on a property. In instances where there are no quality or heritage trees located on a property, then a minimum of 20 percent of the total dbh for secondary trees on the property must be preserved within the development impact area. 
d.  Preservation Relief. City Council may approve relief of the Preservation Requirements in accordance with Tree Preservation Relief Provisions in Subsection 7.7.4J, and where required by State law. 
H.  Tree Replacement. 
1.  In the event that it is necessary to remove a protected tree(s) as allowed in this section, the applicant shall be required to replace the tree(s) being removed with healthy trees or pay a mitigation fee as explained hereafter. 
a.  If it is determined that tree replacement is required, the tree preservation/replacement plan must be approved prior to approval of a final plat or replat and a note shall be placed on that plat referencing the approved tree replacement plan. 
b.  If platting is not required, the tree replacement plan shall be included as part of a site plan approval or tree removal permit. 
2.  In accordance with TLGC, § 212.905, as amended, replacement trees must: 
a.  Be planted on property in which they were removed; or 
b.  Be planted at a location mutually agreed upon by the city and the property owner; and 
c.  Measure at least two inches dbh when planted. 
3.  In order to ensure biodiversity and protect against tree diseases, if 20 or more replacement trees are planted, no one species of tree may exceed 30 percent of the total new trees on the site. 
4.  To determine the replacement inches required by this section, the applicant shall inventory and combine the total inches of dbh of all protected trees that are to be removed and that are located within the development impact area. 
5.  This inventory shall be separated into inches of dbh removed per protected tree classification as calculated using the following replacement rates: 
a.  Heritage Tree - Two and one-half inches for every inch removed; 
b.  Quality Tree - Two inches for every inch removed; and 
c.  Secondary Tree - Four inches for every tree removed. 
6.  The total of the required inventories represents the replacement inches that shall be replaced through new tree plantings or preservation of existing trees. New trees required to satisfy the landscaping provisions of this section shall be counted towards satisfying this requirement. 
7.  Once each tree on the site is inventoried, tree mitigation shall be calculated as follows and as shown in Table 7.C: Sample Tree Mitigation Worksheet. The calculated dbh of each tree shall be the dbh of the tree multiplied by the appropriate classification ratio as described in paragraph 4 above. The total calculated dbh shall be the sum of all these trees. 
8.  In accordance with TLGC, § 212.905, as amended, a credit of 50 percent shall automatically be given to the total calculated dbh for all residential development, and 40 percent for nonresidential development. The preliminary mitigation dbh is 50 percent of the total calculated dbh for all residential, or 40 percent for nonresidential. Mixed-use developments shall be credited at the residential rate of 50 percent. 
9.  After calculating the preliminary mitigation dbh and subtracting the preserved credits, any remaining dbh is defined as the mitigation dbh. The mitigation dbh is required to be satisfied either by the planting of new trees on-site with an equivalent total dbh or by using one of the alternative methods described in Subsection 7.7.4J. 
10.  If any preserved and/or replacement tree(s) dies within three years of initial planting or issuance of certificate of occupancy, the current property owner shall be subject to the same replacement requirements per these requirements, unless otherwise exempt or deemed a non-protected tree. 
I.  Tree Preservation Credit. Additional credit shall be given for all protected trees that are preserved. Preserved credits shall be the sum of: 
1.  A four-inch credit against mitigation for each one-inch of preliminary mitigation dbh shall be applied to the preservation of any landmark tree, or any trees preserved within a conservation easement or preserved habitat; 
2.  A three-inch credit against mitigation for each one-inch preliminary mitigation dbh shall be applied to the preservation of any other heritage tree; and 
3.  A two-inch credit against mitigation for each one-inch of Preliminary Mitigation dbh shall be applied to the preservation of any other quality tree. 
4.  An additional preserved credit may be credited against preliminary mitigation dbh for preserved secondary trees, provided: 
a.  The minimum preservation of 30 percent is achieved for heritage and quality trees; 
b.  A one-half inch credit against mitigation for each one-inch preliminary mitigation dbh shall be applied to the preservation of secondary trees; and 
c.  Credit for preserved secondary trees may not exceed 50 percent of the preserved dbh of quality trees. 
Table 7.C: Sample Tree Mitigation Worksheet 
dbh (Diameter at Breast Height) 
	Diameter at Breast Height (inches) 
Total dbh 	120 
Non-protected dbh 	20 
Total Protected dbh 	100 
Required Preservation (30 percent) 	30 
Dead Tree dbh 	0 
Protected Trees Removed 
TYPE 	dbh Removed (inches) 	Replacement Ratio 	Calculated dbh (inches) 
Heritage 	40 	2.5:1 	100 
Quality 	30 	2:1 	60 
Subtotal 	70 		160 
	Trees Removed 	Replacement Ratio 	Calculated dbh 
Secondary 	4 	4": 1 tree 	16 
TOTAL 			176 
Preliminary Mitigation dbh 		50 percent reduction 	88 
Trees Preserved 
TYPE 	dbh Preserved (inches) 	Credit Ratio 	Preserved Credit (inches) 
Heritage 	20 	3:1 	60 
Quality 	10 	2:1 	20 
Secondary 	5 	0.5:1 	2.5 
TOTAL 	30 		82.5 
MITIGATION dbh 			5.5 
 
J.  Tree Preservation Relief Provisions. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this provision allows a determination of whether the application of this DDC, as applied to a tree removal application and related development applications, would if not modified or other relief granted, may unreasonably burden the development of the property. 
2.  Review Procedure. 
a.  A property owner or his authorized agent may file an application for relief under this subsection following a final decision to deny or conditionally grant an application for a tree removal permit. 
b.  The Director has the authority to establish requirements for applications for tree preservation relief in the Application Criteria Manual. No application shall be accepted for filing until it is complete and the fee established by the City Council has been paid. 
c.  Upon approval of an application for relief in whole or in part by the City Council, the Director shall process the tree removal permit and related development applications pursuant to the relief granted on the application for relief approved by the City Council. 
d.  A denial of an application for relief by the City Council is a final determination. 
3.  Criteria for Approval. In deciding whether to grant relief to the applicant, the City Council shall consider whether there is any evidence from which it can reasonably conclude that the application of all or a part of the provisions of this DDC that apply to tree preservation may deprive the applicant of all economically viable use of the property, based on the following factors: 
a.  Whether there is a unique physical circumstance on the property. 
b.  Whether the proposed design has minimized the loss of trees to the extent possible. 
c.  Whether preservation and/or mitigation unduly burdens the development of the property. 
K.  Alternatives to Tree Replacement Requirements. In order to satisfy the mitigation dbh, the property owner may use any combination of alternative methods of compliance listed below. These alternative methods may also be used in combination with or in lieu of tree replacement, so long as the total replacement dbh is satisfied by one or all methods. 
1.  Payment in Lieu of Replacement. 
a.  Payment in lieu may be made in the amount prescribed separately and periodically by ordinance, and, if made, such a payment shall be deposited into the tree fund for the purposes described in this subsection. This amount is calculated by the average cost incurred by the city for the purchase, planting, and irrigation of a two-inch tree for three years. 
b.  The applicant must pay the fees contributed to the tree fund prior to the issuance of a gas well site plan, or the filing of a final plat in the Denton County Clerk's Office. If platting is not required, payment shall be prior to issuance of a tree removal permit. 
c.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this subsection, no tree mitigation fee may be collected or enforced in contravention of state law. 
2.  Tree Donation. The developer may donate the replacement tree(s) to the City's Parks Department for planting within the city, with the approval of the Parks Director. 
3.  Conservation Easement. The property owner may request to grant a conservation easement by plat to the city that includes protected trees and non-protected trees beyond the minimum preservation amount, and with a combined dbh equal to or exceeding the dbh for which mitigation is being requested. 
a.  In addition to the tree survey and preservation/replacement plan, a detailed baseline document describing the property's physical and biological condition, the general age of any tree stands, locations of easements and construction, and the conservation values protected by the easement, shall be required. 
b.  The city may decline the request for a conservation easement for any reason; however a request so declined will not satisfy the mitigation requirement and mitigation must be achieved in a different manner as described above. 
L.  Tree Fund. 
1.  The city shall administer and use the tree fund to: 
a.  Purchase, plant, and maintain trees; 
b.  Conduct maintenance on conservation easements dedicated in accordance with this subsection; 
c.  Preserve wooded property remaining in a naturalistic state in perpetuity; 
d.  Perform and maintain a city-wide tree inventory; 
e.  Educate citizens and developers on the preservation, care, maintenance, benefits and value of trees within the City of Denton; and 
f.  Support programs for the public purpose of increasing the tree canopy within the City of Denton as approved by City Council. 
2.  Proceeds from the tree fund shall not be used to meet any requirements for preservation, mitigation, landscaping, buffering, streetscaping, or similar requirements in this DDC or the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
3.  Voluntary contributions for tree planting shall be placed in the tree fund. 
M.  Incentives. 
1.  Energy Conservation Credit. Mitigated or preserved large canopy shade trees located on the western or southern exposures of a habitable building may receive additional tree replacement credit. The trees must be located a minimum of 10 feet but a maximum of 30 feet in distance from the building. Required tree replacement may be credited at 1.5 times the existing or newly planted trees; 
2.  Heritage Tree Credit. A replacement credit of 4.0 times the dbh of a heritage tree preserved beyond the minimum preservation requirements may be counted toward meeting the required replacement; 
3.  Conservation Easement Credit. Required replacement trees may be credited 2.0 times if planted within the dedicated Conservation Easement; 
4.  Tree Cluster(s). In order to emphasize the importance of preserving trees in a cluster during development, additional mitigation credit will be given for a cluster(s) of three or more trees whose bases are located less than 10 feet apart and whose drip lines overlap. Credit shall be calculated at 1.15 times the dbh of each tree within the cluster; and 
5.  Parking Space Reduction. Upon application and verification by the Director, an individual shall be entitled to a reduction in the minimum parking to help meet the minimum tree preservation requirements. For the purpose of providing an incentive, the minimum parking requirements in Subsection 7.9.4, may be reduced by one parking space for every 12 inches dbh of trees that have been protected or mitigated on a site. Up to 15 percent of the required spaces may be reduced; or 
6.  Certification in Lieu of Mitigation. The Director shall assist those who wish to have a site certified under the Denton Wildscape Program in lieu of meeting replacement requirements as long as 20 percent of existing trees on-site are preserved. 
7.  The enforcement and penalty provisions of Section 1.6 shall apply to this subsection.  
7.7.5 - Landscape and Tree Canopy Requirements. 
A.  Applicability to the Development Impact Area. 
1.  Single-family, Duplex, and Townhome Dwellings: 
a.  Existing single-family, duplex, townhome, triplex, and fourplex lots that are currently developed are exempt from the minimum requirements contained in subsection B. 
b.  New detached single-family, duplex, townhome, triplex, and fourplex subdivisions are required to provide landscaping as specified in subsection E. 
2.  Multifamily and nonresidential developments are required to comply with all landscaping and tree canopy requirements in this section. 
3.  All replacement trees included as part of the approved tree preservation/replacement plan shall be credited against the trees planted, as required by this section. 
B.  Minimum Landscape Area and Tree Canopy Requirements. Landscape area is the portion of a development impact area which is comprised of trees, shrubs, and pervious groundcovers. The percentage of landscape area required shall be based on the property's zoning designation, as indicated in Table 7.D below. 
Table 7.D: Minimum Landscaped Area and Tree Canopy Cover by Zoning District 
Zoning District 	Minimum Landscaped Area (percentage lot area) 	Minimum Tree Canopy Cover (percentage lot area) 
	Residential 
RR 	65 	25 
R1 	70 	50 
R2 	50 	50 
R3 	50 	50 
R4 	50 	50 
R6 	25 	40 
R7 	20 	40 
	Mixed-Use 
MN 	20 	40 
MD 	15 	20 
MR 	25 	30 
	Corridor 
SC 	20 	30 
HC 	30 	30 
	Other Nonresidential 
GO 	20 	30 
LI 	15 	20 
HI 	15 	15 
PF 	15 	15 
 
C.  Measurement and Calculation of Landscape and Tree Canopy Areas. 
1.  Tree Canopy Measurement. 
a.  Tree canopy is measured by computing the area that the mature canopy will encompass, based on the tree list contained in the Site Design Criteria Manual. The mature canopies may be estimated for existing trees on-site. Any tree not on the tree list may be estimated by a registered landscape architect. 
b.  The required percentage of tree canopy required shall be based on the zoning of the property as described in Table 7.D. The required tree canopy area shall apply to either: 
i.  The entire development impact area, or 
ii.  The entire lot being developed, minus the footprint area of any proposed buildings. 
c.  The selected method for calculating the required tree canopy must be explicitly stated on the Landscape Plan. 
2.  Qualifying Types of Landscaping and Tree Canopy - General. The following may count towards meeting the landscape and tree canopy requirements: 
a.  All landscaped areas planted and maintained within the development impact area; 
b.  Tree canopy in the adjacent public right-of-way; 
c.  All required mitigation trees may count towards landscaping (including street trees and yard trees) if planted trees have a minimum of two-inches dbh; and 
d.  Plazas and pedestrian circulation areas if constructed with pervious material and not located within the public right-of-way. 
3.  Qualifying Types of Low Impact Development (LID) Designs. Low Impact Development (LID) options count toward required landscape if installed and maintained pursuant to the North Central Texas Council of Governments Integrated Storm Water Management (iSWM) strategies, including: 
a.  Bioswales: Bioswales are vegetated swales planted with wet tolerant species of plants or ornamental grasses. They transport, store, and allow infiltration of water, and can be designed as a landscape feature. Bioswales are not grassed, but are planted with a variety of plant species that can withstand occasional water inundation for short periods of time. 
b.  Grassed Swales: Grassed swales are designed conveyance devices used to transport water over the surface of the ground to a point of disposal that may be a catch basin, ditch, or water body that will filter, infiltrate, evaporate, and clean the water of total suspended solids and other pollutants. Swales are often appropriate along property lines, public streets, and around buildings. 
c.  Bioretention Facilities: (a.k.a. Rain Gardens) Bioretention facilities are small shallow depressions planted with a variety of native or ornamental plants that can treat small amounts of runoff to improve water quality. Bioretention facilities are generally small collections of flood-tolerant plants planted on a low site area that naturally collects rainfall. 
d.  Sand Filters: Sand filters are depressions, trenches, barriers, or sand lens, constructed of porous mineral matter that improve ground water recharge, to filter, clean and trap waterborne pollutants. 
D.  Appropriate Planting Materials. 
1.  Ninety percent of plantings shall be from the approved landscape plant list in the Site Design Criteria Manual. 
2.  In order to ensure biodiversity and protect against tree disease, if 20 or more trees are planted, no one species of tree may exceed 30 percent of the total new trees on the site. 
3.  At least 50 percent of the trees planted must be native, indigenous, or adapted, as indicated on the approved landscape plant list. 
E.  Minimum Landscaping for Single-Family Detached Dwelling, Duplex, Townhome, Triplex, and Fourplex Lots. 
1.  All single-family, duplex, and townhome lots must contain a minimum of one large shade tree per dwelling. 
2.  All triplex and fourplex lots must contain a minimum of one large shade tree per lot. 
3.  At least 30 percent of the front yard shall be landscaped. 
4.  At least 20 percent of the rear yard shall be landscaped. 
F.  Landscape Plan and Point System. In addition to the above standards, the following requirements shall apply to all developments except single-family detached dwelling, duplex, and townhome lots: 
1.  A landscape plan is required for all developments demonstrating compliance with the required minimum landscape area requirements, at the time of application for whichever of the following comes first: 
a.  Specific use permit; 
b.  Site plan; or 
c.  Building permit. 
2.  All landscape plans shall be drawn and sealed by a registered landscape architect. 
3.  All landscape plans shall contain at a minimum the following elements: 
a.  A delineation of the property boundary, the development impact area, ESAs, preserved habitat areas, and any easements; 
b.  Dimensioned buffer areas, right-of-way screening areas, and parking lot landscaping areas; 
c.  Location and tabulation of all proposed plantings, including size at the time of planting and expected canopy area of all trees at maturity, as provided for in the Site Design Criteria Manual; 
d.  Tabulation of how the required landscape and buffer points, as described in the sections below, are provided; 
e.  Tabulation of the required and provided number of street trees, unless provided on a separate street tree plan at the time of platting; and 
f.  Any additional information required to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section. 
4.  Landscape area and tree canopy shall be designed using a combination of elements from the point system described below: 
a.  All developments are required to provide a combination of landscaping elements from Table 7.E, totaling at least 30 points and meeting the minimum required percentage of landscape area and tree canopy. 
b.  At least two elements must be selected from both Sections A and B in Table 7.E, except as noted below. The remaining points may be selected from Sections A, B, or C. 
i.  Right-of-way screening shall be provided between the front-most row of parking and the street. Screening area shall begin at the back edge of either the right-of-way or public utility easement, as necessary to prevent encroachment into those areas. The area dedicated to right-of-way screening must contain sufficient area to plant the proposed screening elements and allow for full growth potential. For developments where parking is not located between the building and the street, any drive aisles located in front of the building are required to be screened by at least one of the elements in Section A in Table 7.E. 
ii.  Parking lot landscaping shall be provided internal to the parking lot. Turf grass does not satisfy requirements for planting materials in parking lot landscaping areas. Planting materials permitted include drought-tolerant plants, ornamental and/or native grasses, and pervious non-living ground cover installed with a permeable weed-barrier. 
iii.  If proposed, living walls and living green roofs should be engineered in accordance with building industry standards to ensure building safety and longevity of the plant material. Living green roofs shall be installed in a manner allowing for inspection consistent with applicable OSHA standards, along with all other site landscaping. 
Table 7.E: Landscape Area Point System 
Section A. Right-of-Way Elements
(Minimum 2 unless no front parking, then 1) 	Points 
A landscaped berm with a maximum 3:1 side slope on both sides. 	5 
One large canopy tree planted every 40 linear feet. 	5 
Three small accent trees clustered every 30 linear feet when space does not permit large canopy trees. 	5 
A minimum three-foot high continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs. 	5 
A minimum three-foot high continuous wall made of any combination of wrought iron, masonry, or stone. If wrought iron is used, vines shall be planted every 10 feet on center on the wrought iron to create a more opaque wall. 	5 
Section B. Parking Lot Landscaping Elements
(Minimum 2) 	Points 
Internal landscape islands with an area of at least nine feet by 18 feet containing at least one large canopy tree placed evenly at an average of one for every ten spaces (or portion thereof). For lots of ten spaces or less, at least one internal landscape island is required but does not have to be centrally located within a row of parking spaces. 	5 
End caps with an area of at least 9-feet by 18-feet containing at least one large canopy tree. 	5 
A landscape median of at least 8-feet wide running the length of a parking row and containing at least one large tree per 30 linear feet. 	5 
Section C. Other Site Landscaping Elements 	Points 
A minimum 10-foot wide area provided for the length of the building frontage between the front of the building and the parking lot and containing a five-foot wide landscaped area abutting the building wall. This area may be paved as a walkway if pots or planters are provided along at least 75 percent of the building frontage. 	3 
Each planted tree meets or exceeds four caliper inches at the time of planting. 	5 
At least 75 percent of plants proposed are drought-tolerant as indicated in the approved landscape plant list or adaptive to Denton's plan hardiness zone as determined by the US Department of Agriculture. 	5 
Landscape area provided exceeds required minimum by an additional 10 percent or more. 	3 
No more than 30 percent of landscaped areas are covered in turf grass. 	3 
Tree canopy exceeding minimum requirement by an additional 25 percent or more. 	3 
A mixture of bioswales, grassed swales, bioretention facilities, and sand filter (low-impact design techniques pursuant to Subsection 7.7.5C.3) as described in this section. If designed as part of a parking lot island or median, points may be counted for both elements. 	7 
Living walls/vertical gardens provided in a designated pedestrian area or as an architectural feature of a principal building wall. Living walls must account for at least 25 percent of the wall face. 	5 
Rooftop vegetation provided as part of an engineered green roof accounting for at least 25 percent of the roof area. 	5 
Butterfly or pollinator gardens that include native milkweed and nectar plants that are provided as part of a designated pedestrian amenity or plaza area and that comprise at least five percent of the required overall landscape area. Butterfly and pollinator gardens are encouraged due to Denton's designation as a Monarch City. 	5 
 
G.  Landscape Installation and Maintenance. 
1.  Landscaping installed as part of the requirements of the landscape standards shall be free from diseases and insects and maintained in a healthy and growing condition at all times. 
2.  The property owner is responsible for regular weeding, mowing, irrigation, fertilizing, pruning, litter removal, and other maintenance as needed for all plantings. 
3.  The property owner shall remove and replace any required landscaping as part of an approved landscape plan that dies with other approved living plants from the approved plant list contained in the Site Design Criteria Manual no later than 30 days after: The landscaping has died, or after the postmarked date of written notification from the city, whichever is sooner. The Director or designee may, in his sole discretion, extend this time period due to weather, appropriate planting season, or other events outside of the reasonable control of the property owner. 
H.  Irrigation. To ensure viability, landscape areas shall be irrigated by one or a combination of the following methods: 
1.  An automated underground system; 
2.  A drip irrigation system; and/or 
3.  The Director or designee may waive the irrigation system requirement if the approved landscape plan includes drought tolerant plants, a xeriscape system, or other approved materials. In such cases, a temporary irrigation system shall be installed and maintained until the plants are established. 
I.  Permits, Enforcement, and Drought. 
1.  No permits will be issued for any nonresidential and multifamily development until a landscape plan is submitted as part of the site plan, specific use permit, or building permit review process. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the approved landscape plan and applicant shall call for inspection of all landscape installation. 
3.  An as-built landscape plan shall be provided to the city upon final inspection. 
4.  Landscaping that dies shall be replaced by the owner with plants of similar variety and size no later than 30 days after the landscaping dies or 30 days after being notified from the Director or designee, whichever occurs first. The Director or designee may in his sole discretion, extend this time period due to weather or other events outside of the reasonable control of the property owner. Replacement trees of similar mature canopy may be replanted with approval from the Director or designee. Replacement trees must be a minimum of three-inch caliper, measured six inches above the ground. 
5.  A planting extension may be granted by the Director or designee, in his sole discretion, if substantial evidence is presented to indicate abnormal circumstances beyond the control of the owner or his agent. Seasons of drought, extreme heat, or heavy rainfall causing construction delays are examples of abnormal circumstances. 
J.  Payment in Lieu of Planting. In instances where easements, encumbrances, physical constraints, or life safety requirements limit the ability to plant the required trees needed to meet the minimum tree canopy coverage, an applicant may pay into the tree fund as an alternative. The Director may approve a reduction in minimum tree canopy area of up to 10 percent of the required amount. Any reduction in tree canopy area shall be mitigated by payment into the city's tree fund based upon the standard canopy size of a large canopy tree as specified in the Site Design Criteria Manual, assuming each required tree measures two caliper inches. The payment per inch shall be calculated as provided in the city's payment schedule.  
7.7.6 - Compatibility Landscape Buffer Requirements. 
Compatibility buffers are required to mitigate or minimize potential nuisances such as noise, light, glare, dirt, litter, signs, parking, or storage areas and to provide a transition between incompatible uses. 
A.  Minimum Buffer Required. 
1.  All developing uses, unless exempted in subsection D. below, shall be required to install a buffer as specified in Table 7.F below. All replacement trees included as part of an approved tree preservation/replacement plan will be credited against trees required in this subsection. 
Table 7.F: Buffer Points and Minimum Width Requirements 
Developing Use 	Adjacent Use 
	Agricultural 	Single-family detached or duplex 	Multifamily and townhome 	Commercial and institutional 	Industrial 
Agricultural 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Single-family detached and duplex 	Minimum 10 points; no minimum width 	None 	Minimum 10 points; no minimum width 	Minimum 10 points; no minimum width 	Minimum 10 points; no minimum width 
Multifamily and townhome 	Minimum 10 points; no minimum width 	Minimum 20 points; Minimum width 10 feet 	None 	Minimum 20 points; Minimum width 10 feet 	Minimum 20 points; Minimum width 10 feet 
Commercial or Institutional 	None 	Minimum 30 points; Minimum width 15 feet 	Minimum 30 points; Minimum width 15 feet 	None 	Minimum 20 points; Minimum width 10 feet 
Industrial 	None 	Minimum 50 points; Minimum width 30 feet 	Minimum 50 points; Minimum width 30 feet 	Minimum 30 points; Minimum width 30 feet for institutional and 10 feet for commercial 	None 
 
2.  For mixed-use buildings or development sites, buffers shall be provided based on the most intense use within such building or development site. 
B.  Buffer Point System. Buffers shall earn the designated point total by selecting a combination of elements as indicated in Table 7.G below. For buffers including more than two listed elements, vegetation may also include a combination of shrubs and trees. No more than one fence or wall type may be used to meet the buffer point requirements. 
Table 7.G: Buffer Points 
Buffer Element 	Points 
Solid opaque screening fence, minimum 6 feet in height, single-faced 	5 
Vinyl, composite, double-faced solid wood, or similar non-masonry screening fence, minimum 6 feet in height 	10 
Solid masonry wall, minimum 6 feet in height 	20 
5 or more additional feet in landscaped buffer width beyond required minimum 	5 
3 ornamental trees for every 50 linear feet of buffer (meeting planting standards of Site Design Criteria Manual) 	5 
3 ornamental trees for every 25 linear feet of buffer (meeting planting standards of Site Design Criteria Manual) 	10 
5 shrubs for every 20 linear feet of buffer (5-gallon size) 	5 
5 shrubs for every 20 linear feet of buffer (10-gallon size) 	10 
1 large canopy tree for every 30 linear feet of buffer (minimum 3-inch caliper) 	10 
Preservation of existing Landmark, Heritage, Quality, or Secondary trees within at least 50 percent of the buffer area 	5 
 
C.  Buffer Standards. 
1.  Buffer Location. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeters of a lots or parcels, and shall extend to the limits of the developed area of the site. Buffers shall not occupy any portion of an existing, dedicated, or reserved right-of-way, or be located on public property. 
a.  In instances where a required drainage or public utility easement is located within a buffer area, the easement area will count toward the buffer area requirement. No trees or shrubs are allowed within the easement. However, if the remaining buffer area outside the easement is 10 feet or greater, buffer elements are required. 
b.  In those instances where a perimeter fence or wall is used in conjunction with a buffer, the perimeter fence or wall shall have a minimum height of six feet, shall be constructed of material permitted by Subsection 7.7.8: Walls, Fences, and Screening, and shall be located on the outside boundary of the required buffer. 
2.  Buffer Design. 
a.  The entire buffer area shall be landscaped with ground cover other than turf grass. 
b.  Vegetation included in the buffer shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  Plant species shall be selected from the approved landscape plant list or native plant list. 
ii.  At least 50 percent of the plants shall be evergreen. 
iii.  No more than 50 percent of the plants shall be from the same genus. 
c.  Buffers may contain pedestrian or bike trails to promote connectivity to adjoining properties as long as no required plant material is omitted from the design, and the buffer width is maintained. 
3.  Designated tree preservation areas occupying a portion of a required buffer satisfy the planting requirements for the portion they occupy. 
4.  When healthy protected trees are located within the required buffer, the protected trees should be preserved to the greatest extent possible. The Director may determine if additional buffer elements are required to mitigate or minimize potential nuisances based on specific site conditions. 
5.  When a preserved ESA is located in an area where a buffer would be required, the ESA may count as the required buffer for that portion of the property. 
D.  Exceptions to Buffer Requirements. 
1.  Buffer requirements may be waived by the Director when the property is an internal site within a master planned development or within a mixed-use development. Buffers shall still be required around the perimeter of the development based on the requirements in this subsection. 
2.  Buffer requirements shall not apply to the MD district except that the buffer requirements shall apply to multi-family and nonresidential properties adjoining single-family detached, duplex, or townhome uses within the MD district.  
7.7.7 - Street Tree Requirements. 
A.  Applicability. Applications for development shall propose and be required to plant street trees in accordance with the following standards, and in accordance with the spacing requirements identified in the Site Design Criteria Manual. The Director may approve alternative plans due to special site conditions, which may, for reasons such as safety or existing trees on the lot, affect the ability to meet these regulations. All replacement trees included as part of an approved tree preservation/replacement plan will be credited against the required street trees. 
B.  Street Tree Plan. A street tree plan shall be submitted with a site plan for multifamily or nonresidential developments and with a final plat for new residential subdivisions. Additionally, street trees should be specifically called out on building permits and landscape plans. 
C.  Street Tree Location. Street trees shall be located within the street right-of-way or within 10 feet of the street right-of-way. 
D.  Number and Spacing. 
1.  At least one street tree is required for every 30 feet of street frontage. 
2.  Street trees are not required to be regularly spaced at 30-foot intervals; however, street trees shall not be planted further apart than 50-foot intervals and not closer than 25 feet apart. 
3.  Street trees shall be planted in accordance with the spacing requirements from utilities, intersections, and driveways described in the Site Design Criteria Manual. 
4.  To ensure biodiversity and protect against tree disease, if 20 or more street trees are planted, no one species of tree may exceed 30 percent of the total new street trees. Where multiple species are required within a single block, trees of the same species shall be planted non-contiguously to the greatest extent possible. 
E.  Tree Planting. 
1.  Tree planting standards shall be in accordance with the Site Design Criteria Manual. 
2.  Each tree planted shall meet the most current version of American Standards for Nursery Stock ANSI Z60.1, and shall have a minimum size of three-inch caliper measured six inches above grade, unless the trees are planted as replacement for the removal of existing trees, in which case the trees must have a minimum size of two inches dbh. Any tree that does not meet ANSI Z60.1 may be rejected by the Director. 
F.  Maintenance. 
1.  Property Owner Responsibility. 
a.  Street trees shall be maintained by the adjoining property owner. 
b.  It is the adjoining property owner's responsibility to water, prune, fertilize, and treat for insect and disease, as may be deemed necessary. All incurred costs are to be borne by the property owner. 
c.  It is the adjoining property owner's responsibility to remove any hazardous or dead tree, as may be deemed necessary. All incurred costs are to be borne by the property owner. 
2.  Tree Canopy Clearance Height. All trees shall be maintained by pruning and other necessary care by the adjacent property owner to ensure a minimum clearance of 15 vertical feet from the curb line, 15 vertical feet from an alley, and eight vertical feet from the sidewalk. 
3.  Removal of Trees or Plantings in Public Right-of-Way. The city may prune or remove any tree or planting that constitutes a hazard to person or property or for any other reason for trees and plantings located in public right-of-way or in a landscape maintenance easement. 
4.  Pruning. All pruning shall be in accordance with the most current version of American National Standards for Tree Care Operations ANSI A300. 
5.  Tree Replacement. The city may replace an approved street tree or other planting that has died or may have been removed for any reason, or plant additional street trees deemed appropriate and consistent with available resources. 
6.  Abuse or Mutilation. It shall be unlawful for any person to break, destroy, or mutilate any approved street tree, or to set fire or permit any fire to cause damage to any portion of any street tree, or to attach or place any rope or wire, sign, poster or other device on any street tree. Each occurrence shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
7.  Trees Adjacent to Overhead Electric Utilities. Street trees planted adjacent to overhead electric distribution lines shall be of a species having a mature height less than 30 feet to accommodate maintenance of a 10-foot minimum separation between vegetation and electric lines.  
7.7.8 - Walls, Fences, and Screening. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to provide reasonable regulations for the appearance, location, type, and maintenance of fences and walls to ensure the safety of residents and the high-quality character and appearance of the city. 
B.  When Required. 
1.  Residential Subdivision Perimeter Fences. A perimeter fence meeting the standards of this section shall be provided around the perimeter of residential subdivisions along all arterials and corridors. 
2.  Other Fences. Except for residential subdivision perimeter fences, fences are not mandatory; however, when used, all fences or walls shall be constructed in compliance with applicable Municipal Code of Ordinance provisions, and are subject to the standards of this subsection. 
C.  Perimeter Fence Standards. Perimeter fences surrounding residential subdivisions and nonresidential uses shall comply with the following fencing material standards: 
1.  Perimeter Fences Adjacent to and Fronting Public Right-of-Way. 
a.  For new development, allowable materials include only masonry, wrought iron, elevated and sealed wood, or a combination of masonry, wrought iron, and elevated and sealed wood. 
b.  For existing development, individual backyard fences along an arterial or collector are allowed to replace the existing originally constructed fence with the same materials or with higher quality materials. 
2.  Perimeter Fences not Adjacent to or Fronting Public Right-of-Way. 
a.  Allowed Materials. 
i.  Wood; 
ii.  Wrought iron; 
iii.  Masonry; 
iv.  Brick; 
v.  Vinyl; 
vi.  PVC; 
vii.  Architectural metal panels; or 
viii.  Composite material. 
b.  Prohibited Materials. 
i.  Barbed wire; 
ii.  Razor wire; and 
iii.  Electrified fences. 
D.  Fences on Individual Lots. 
1.  Summary Table of Fence Standards. A summary of the standards for fences on individual lots is provided in Table 7.H, below: 
Table 7.H: Fencing Standards on Individual Lots 
Fence Type 	Allowed Materials 	Prohibited Materials 	Maximum Height 
Single-Family Detached, Duplex, Townhome, Triplex, and Fourplex 
Front yard and side yard facing right-of-way 	Coated chain link provided such fence does not extend beyond the front building line of the principal structure; wood; wrought iron; masonry; brick; vinyl; PVC; architectural metal panels; or composite material 	Galvanized chain link; corrugated metal; barb wire; razor wire; and electrified fences 	8 feet, provided such fence does not extend beyond the front building line of the principal structure; 4 feet otherwise 
Interior side yard or rear yard 	Coated or galvanized chain link; wood; wrought iron; masonry; brick; vinyl; PVC; architectural metal panels; or composite material 	Barb wire; razor wire; and electrified fences 	No maximum 
Multifamily and Commercial Uses 
Front yard and side yard facing right-of-way 	Masonry provided such fence does not extend beyond the front building line of the principal structure; wrought iron, elevated and sealed wood; or a combination of such materials 	Any materials not listed as allowed materials 	8 feet 
Interior side yard or rear yard 	Coated chain link; wood; wrought iron; masonry; brick; vinyl; PVC; architectural metal panels; or composite material 	Galvanized chain link, barb wire; razor wire, and electrified fences 	No maximum 
Institutional Uses 
Front yard and side yard facing right-of-way 	Any materials approved by the City unless expressly prohibited and except that front yard fences extending beyond the front building line of the principal structure are limited to masonry; wrought iron; elevated and sealed wood; or a combination of those materials 	Barb wire; razor wire; electrified fences; and corrugated metal 	8 feet 
Interior side yard or rear yard 	Any materials approved by the City unless expressly prohibited 	Barb wire; razor wire; electrified fences; and corrugated metal 	No maximum 
Industrial Uses 
Front yard and side yard facing right-of-way 	Any materials approved by the City unless expressly prohibited and except that front yard fences extending beyond the front building line of the principal structure are limited to masonry; wrought iron; elevated and sealed wood; or a combination of those materials 	None, except that front yard fences extending beyond the front building line of the principal structure are limited to allowed materials 	8 feet 
Interior side yard or rear yard 	Any materials approved by the City 	n/a 	No maximum 
Agricultural Uses 
Front yard and side yard facing right-of-way 	Any materials approved by the City 	n/a 	8 feet 
Interior side yard or rear yard 	Any materials approved by the City 	n/a 	No maximum 
Uses on City-Owned Properties 
Front yard and side yard facing right-of-way 	Any materials approved by the City 	n/a 	8 feet 
Interior side yard or rear yard 	Any materials approved by the City 	n/a 	No maximum 
 
2.  Materials and Design. 
a.  All fences shall be constructed of materials pursuant to Table 7.H and shall be designed and constructed to allow proper drainage flow. The structural support members shall not be visible from public view. Natural vegetative edge row is also permitted. 
b.  Barbed wire, razor wire, or electrified fences may only be used as specified in Table 7.H or to comply with federal or state law. 
c.  Fence design and materials shall be installed and maintained consistently for the entire length of the fence. 
3.  Fence Height. 
a.  Fence height shall not exceed the maximum height specified in Table 7.H. 
b.  Fences over four feet tall in the front yard that extend beyond the front building line shall not exceed 50 percent opacity. 
4.  Fence Location. Fences shall not be located within any right-of-way, easement, designated fire lane, or within any required parking spaces. Fences shall not obstruct safe vehicular or pedestrian passage; ingresses or egresses; nor shall they obscure any sight visibility lines or sight visibility triangles contained in the Transportation Criteria Manual. 
E.  Screening. Screening is required for the following applications, as specified below: 
1.  Refuse Container Screen. 
a.  Containers for commercial solid waste and recycling service shall be screened from public view. Refuse containers that are not visible to the public are not required to be screened. 
b.  Containers for solid waste and recycling service for nonresidential, mixed-use, and multifamily development shall be enclosed on all sides with a gated solid screening wall at least six feet in height. 
c.  Materials used for container enclosure construction shall be of masonry, metal, wood, vinyl, or composite material that is compatible with the principal structure and shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times. 
d.  All refuse and recyclable materials shall be contained within the screened refuse and recyclables area. A concrete or asphalt pad shall be installed beneath the waste collection area. 
e.  All refuse and recycling collection areas shall meet applicable requirements of the Solid Waste and Recycling Criteria Manual. 
2.  Mechanical Equipment Screen. 
a.  All mechanical equipment, including those on roof tops, shall be screened from all rights-of-way and residential uses or zoning districts. 
b.  Mechanical equipment shall not be located between the main structure on the site and any street adjacent to a front or side yard, and every attempt shall be made to place such equipment so that it is not visible from adjacent public streets. 
c.  Mechanical equipment may be placed in a side yard abutting a side street if there are lot or building constraints from placing it in the other side yard and the equipment is screened with a fence or landscaping. 
d.  Any installation of mechanical equipment shall require a building permit. 
3.  Outside Storage. Except for industrial uses that are legally permitted, and uses in the LI district, all outside storage shall be screened from all rights-of-way with a fence or wall at least six feet in height. No outside storage shall be stacked in a way that it becomes visible from the public right-of-way. 
4.  Inoperable or Junk Vehicle. Unless otherwise provided, all inoperable or junk vehicles that are stored outside an enclosed structure shall be screened from all rights-of-way. 
F.  Exceptions to Screening Requirements. Screening requirements may be waived by the Director or his or her designee if an opaque screening of equivalent height or greater exists immediately abutting, and on the opposite side of the lot line. 
G.  Maintenance. Fencing and screening installed as part of the requirements in this Section shall be maintained in good working condition at all times. See Subpart A, Municipal Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17: Property Maintenance, Article VIII: Fences.  
7.8 - Access and Circulation 
 
7.8.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to reduce the number and length of automobile trips and related greenhouse gas emissions by encouraging walking and bicycling by integrating sidewalks and bicycle routes in new development and redevelopment, and by providing for shorter and more direct routes between many destinations.  
7.8.2 - Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.8: Access and Circulation, the standards in this section, and the Transportation Design Criteria Manual shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability.  
7.8.3 - Parking and Circulation Plan Required. 
A.  All development, except for single-family, duplex, and townhouse residential uses within previously platted subdivisions shall prepare a parking and circulation plan. The plan shall meet the requirements of the Administrative Criteria Manual, Transportation Design Criteria Manual, and contain the following information: 
1.  Internal circulation and connectivity to existing street network; 
2.  Emergency and service vehicle access; 
3.  Parking layout; 
4.  Loading operations; 
5.  Turning radii based on uses; 
6.  Traffic calming measures where future "cut-through" traffic is likely; 
7.  Pedestrian, bicycle, and transit facilities; and 
8.  Other similar issues identified by the Director. 
B.  The Director may waive the requirement for a circulation plan on a case-by-case basis if a development is expected to have no impact upon circulation or proposes no change in existing circulation patterns. This standard shall not be construed to exempt development that includes additional parking, driveways, or substantial modifications to the existing pedestrian network. 
C.  A circulation plan shall be submitted with the respective site plan or subdivision application, as appropriate.  
7.8.4 - Compliance with Specifications. 
A.  Developments shall provide for streets, sidewalks, bicycle, and transit facilities to serve the development in accordance with the requirements of this section, the design standards in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual, and the City Mobility Plan, as amended. 
B.  All street, sidewalk, bicycle, and transit improvements shall be constructed in accordance with Division II, Materials, and Division III, Methods, of the City's Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG Standard Specifications), as amended by the city. 
C.  Where any provision of this DDC conflicts with a provision or requirement of the NCTCOG Standard Specifications, the provisions of this DDC shall control. 
D.  Prior to construction of sidewalks or any other public pedestrian facility for developments where the total cost of pedestrian improvements will exceed $50,000, the developer must show proof of Texas Department of Licensing review and approval for accessibility. 
E.  For sidewalks or other pedestrian facilities proposed in a TxDOT right-of-way, Texas Department of Licensing review must occur prior to applying for a TxDOT Permit. Proof of review must be submitted with the Permit application.  
7.8.5 - Street Design. 
All streets shall be designed to comply with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual.  
7.8.6 - Street Connectivity. 
A.  Purpose. Street and block patterns shall include a clear hierarchy of well-connected streets that distribute traffic over multiple streets and avoid traffic congestion on principal routes. Within each development, the access and circulation system should accommodate the safe, efficient, and convenient movement of vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians through the development, and provide ample opportunities for linking adjacent neighborhoods, properties, and land uses consistent with the City's Mobility Plan, as amended. Local neighborhood street systems are intended to provide multiple, direct connections to and between local destinations such as parks, schools, and shopping. 
B.  Applicability. All developments shall provide the necessary street system to ensure safe and adequate access to each lot within the development in accordance with these standards, the Transportation Design Criteria Manual, and any other applicable City Ordinance. 
C.  General Standards. 
1.  Alignment. All streets shall be aligned with existing streets by continuation of the centerline. 
2.  Coordination with Surrounding Streets. 
a.  The street system for each development shall connect with existing, proposed, and anticipated streets within and outside the development and shall extend to the property boundary to provide for adequate access and the safe and effective movement and circulation of traffic. 
b.  Street sections from an existing development shall continue to the first intersection of the new development. Requirements concerning block length, land use versus street sections and maximum traffic trips are all applicable in the extension of existing streets into a new development. 
c.  If there are no adjacent public streets, subdivisions and/or site plans shall provide for connections along each boundary abutting adjacent vacant land for future connections spaced at intervals not to exceed 1,000 feet for arterials, or 660 feet for other street types, or as otherwise approved. 
d.  An extension or connection of a public street and right-of-way to an abutting property shall include the extension or connection of associated bikeways and sidewalks. 
3.  Temporary Turnarounds. 
a.  The Director and/or the City Engineer may require a temporary turnaround at the end of a roadway extension if needed to facilitate traffic flow or to accommodate emergency vehicles pending the roadway's connection to other roadways. In cases where a temporary turnaround is required, it shall be designed as a temporary cul-de-sac in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
b.  Temporary dead-end streets may be approved by the City Traffic Engineer, based on the criteria set forth below, without a temporary cul-de-sac. If a temporary cul-de-sac is not required, signage shall be posted indicating that the street will be extended in the future is required. 
D.  Modifications to Street Connectivity. 
1.  In limited circumstances, the City Traffic Engineer may modify the requirements or standards for the extension or connection of a public street from or to an abutting property if such extension or connection is impractical or undesirable because it would: 
a.  Require crossing a significant physical barrier or environmentally sensitive area (e.g., watercourses, floodplains, riparian areas, steep slopes; wildfire hazard areas); 
b.  Require the extension or connection of a proposed internal public street to an abutting property with existing development whose design makes it unlikely that the street will ever be part of a network of public streets (for example, the abutting existing development has no public streets, or there are no "stubbed-out" street rights-of-way or open corridors between the proposed development site and public streets in the abutting development to accommodate a current or future extension or connection); 
c.  Require the extension or connection of a proposed internal public street to an abutting property owned by a government or public utility to which vehicular access is restricted, or other property to which vehicular access is restricted by easement or deed; or 
d.  Require the extension or connection of a proposed internal public street to an abutting property that is developed or zoned for a use whose level and type of generated traffic would be incompatible with the proposed development. 
2.  Any modification that is not considered impractical as listed above shall follow the variance procedures established in Subsection 2.8.1: Variance.  
7.8.7 - Developer Responsibility for Access and Circulation Improvements. 
The requirements of this Subsection 7.8.7, shall be subject to the proportionality requirements in TLGC, Section 212.904. 
A.  Internal Streets. 
1.  If a street is proposed within a development site, the developer shall provide street, bikeway, sidewalk, and other access and circulation improvements in accordance with the standards in this DDC, the Denton Transportation Design Criteria Manual, and the City Mobility Plan, as amended, or another adopted plan and shall dedicate or reserve any required rights-of-way or easements as determined necessary by the city. 
2.  If a development site includes the proposed corridor of a street designated on an adopted plan, the development shall incorporate a provision of the street into the design of the development, and shall dedicate right-of-way that meets the right-of-way width standards for the street, and an additional five feet to provide for any sloping needed between the pavement and the property line, as determined by the city. 
3.  All streets shall be provided with curb and gutter along the side abutting the development. 
4.  If the street is ultimately proposed to serve as a divided arterial street and the development is required to install half of the arterial street, then curb and gutter shall be provided on both sides of the street so as to provide the curb for the future median of the arterial street. 
B.  Perimeter Streets. 
1.  Unimproved Perimeter Streets. 
a.  Any development on the perimeter of an unimproved street shall dedicate the right-of-way and improve or reconstruct the street to the same extent as is required for new streets, unless the perimeter street has already been partially improved, in which case the development shall dedicate the additional right-of-way and make the additional street improvements necessary to complete the perimeter street to the classification required. 
b.  For the purpose of this subsection, an "unimproved perimeter street" shall mean a perimeter street which does not have curb and gutter or which does not substantially comply with the standards for street construction listed in the Transportation Criteria Manual or NCTCOG Specifications. 
c.  Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way in accordance with the Transportation Criteria Manual shall be provided at the time of subdivision. 
d.  Any perimeter street required to be improved to meet the specifications for new streets shall be connected to existing off-site streets in accordance with the horizontal design specifications in the Transportation Criteria Manual. 
e.  The City Engineer may authorize a developer to not improve a street and instead pay the full impact fee in cases where the Engineering Department has determined that the entire street will need to be improved in the near future. 
2.  Phasing of Perimeter Paving Improvements. 
a.  Perimeter paving improvements are required to be constructed adjacent to the property which is final platted. 
b.  In a development where final platting will occur in phases, the developer may choose to perform the required perimeter paving improvements adjacent to each phase as it is platted, or may choose to perform all perimeter paving improvements at one time with the platting of a latter phase as long as the paving is constructed prior to or with the phase of the development that includes 50 percent of the lots in the entire development and the subject perimeter road is not the sole access to the property. 
c.  The developer will be required to enter into a perimeter paving postponement escrow agreement. 
3.  Exemptions to Perimeter Street Requirements. The provisions requiring the improvement of existing unimproved perimeter streets to city specifications for new streets shall not apply to the following: 
a.  A plat for a single-family detached, duplex, or townhome residential lot, where such lot is not part of a larger general scheme of development or subdivision of land containing more than one residential lot; 
b.  A development that abuts less than 100 feet of an existing perimeter street, where the existing off-site perimeter street on either side of the abutting perimeter street is not improved to city specifications and there are no proposals or plans for improvements to the perimeter street on either side of the abutting perimeter street as evidenced by the City's Capital Improvement Plan or plats approved or pending approval; 
c.  A development that: 
i.  Is not required or does not propose to extend a city water line to the property to serve the development; and 
ii.  Is located more than 8,000 feet from an existing city water line, measured along a straight line from the nearest boundary of the development to the nearest water line; or 
iii.  A state or federal highway. 
4.  Rural/Suburban Streets. Upon recommendation of the City Engineer, a required perimeter street meeting standards outlined in the Transportation Criteria Manual for a rural/suburban street may be approved whenever: 
a.  The required perimeter street is for a residential development in rural district, as shown in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  The development is not located in an area where the pattern or intensity of development would create the need for improved urban drainage facilities in the foreseeable future; and 
c.  There are no existing or proposed improved drainage facilities, as shown by the City's Capital Improvement Plan or by plats approved or pending approval, in such proximity to the development that would connect to or receive the drainage waters from the required street drainage improvements. 
C.  Improvements to Existing Off-Site Streets. 
1.  Fewer than 100 Daily Vehicle Trips. Developments generating fewer than 100 vehicles per day are not required to make pavement improvements to off-site streets, but shall be required to participate in the cost of any proposed signal improvements at the nearest intersection in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual if signalization in the future is expected. 
2.  Between 100 and 1,000 Daily Vehicle Trips and Less than 100 Trips per Hour. 
a.  Developments expected to generate at least 100 but less than 1,000 vehicle trips per day and less than 100 vehicle trips per hour at full development shall improve or repair connecting off-site streets as necessary to provide a safe and adequate paved surface for the amount and type of traffic generated by the development. 
b.  The off-site street improvements or repairs need not meet the specifications for new streets, but shall be made to a standard determined to be necessary by the City Engineer to provide for the safe movement of vehicular traffic generated by the development, pursuant to a distress rating performed by the City Engineer in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
c.  Off-site street improvements shall not be required to extend beyond the nearest existing intersecting arterial or collector street as indicated on the roadway component of the Mobility Plan. 
d.  Such developments accessing an arterial street shall provide right turn lanes into each entrance and left turn lanes into each entrance that left turns are possible. 
e.  Such developments shall be required to participate in the cost of any proposed signal improvements at nearby intersections determined by the City Engineer in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual if signalization in the future is expected. 
3.  More than 1,000 Daily Vehicle Trips and More than 100 Trips per Hour. 
a.  Developments generating 1,000 or more vehicle trips per day or 100 or more vehicle trips per hour shall provide offsite street improvements as determined by the City Engineer in accordance with an approved Transportation Impact Analysis. 
b.  Offsite improvements may include but are not limited to installation of turn lanes, pavement widening, pavement reconstruction, signal construction, installation of pavement markings, signage or equitable participation in the cost of any of the listed types of improvements. 
c.  Such improvements shall be required to the extent that the effects of the increased traffic the development generates will not reduce level of service of surrounding streets rather than allowing absorption of existing street capacity on a first come first serve basis. 
D.  Payment in Lieu of Improvements. 
1.  Where any development would be required by this DDC to improve an existing unimproved street to less than its full width and the city's approved Capital Improvement Plan proposes improvement of the existing perimeter street to city specifications within three years of the date the required improvements are to be undertaken, the development may elect, in lieu of making the required perimeter street improvements, to pay to the city prior to filing the plat, the total construction cost, excluding engineering and design cost, of the required street improvements. 
2.  The amount to be paid shall be determined by the City Engineer, based on the actual cost of providing for the improvements, as shown in the most recent public bids for the same or similar type street improvements. 
3.  If the money paid to the city is not used for the required improvements within five years of payment, the funds shall be returned to the person making the payment. 
4.  In the event that the plat is not filed until after the city has entered a contract with a contractor to construct the subject street improvements, the payment by the development is no longer required.  
7.8.8 - Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA). 
A TIA shall be required for any proposed site development in accordance with the thresholds established in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual.  
7.8.9 - Driveways and Access. 
A.  Applicability. No person shall construct, reconstruct, replace, relocate, alter, enlarge, improve or perform any work on or make use of any driveway for any property within the city, except in accordance with the requirements of this section, the Transportation Design Criteria Manual, and any other relevant standard in this DDC. 
B.  Compliance with Specifications. 
1.  All driveway improvements shall comply with the design specifications, as contained in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
2.  All driveway improvements shall be constructed in accordance with Division II, Materials, and Division III, Methods, of the City's Standard Drawings and Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG Standard Specifications), as amended by the City. Where any provision of this DDC conflicts with a provision or requirement of the NCTCOG Standard Specifications, the provisions of this DDC shall control. 
3.  All driveways shall be designed, installed, located and constructed in accordance with the approved specifications, plans, conditions and requirements of the permit issued for the property and the requirements of this section. 
4.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building on any property for which a permit is required, until the construction, improvements, alterations or other work covered by the permit is completed in accordance with the permit issued, the requirements of this section or the provisions of any other applicable ordinance. 
5.  Where no building permit was required in connection with the requested permit, no driveway on the property for which the permit was issued shall be used until and unless the work is completed in accordance with the permit and this DDC. 
C.  General Standards. 
1.  Every lot shall have sufficient access providing adequate means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles and for those needing access to the property for its intended use. 
2.  All driveway entrances and other openings onto streets shall be constructed so that: 
a.  Vehicles may safely enter and exit the property; 
b.  Interference with the free and convenient flow of traffic in abutting or surrounding streets is minimized; and 
c.  Shared driveways are provided to the maximum extent feasible to minimize the number of access points to streets. 
3.  Unobstructed, direct, and convenient access for vehicles to and from a public street shall be provided for all off-street parking spaces. Access from any parking area to a public street shall be designed to allow vehicles to enter and exit in forward drive. 
4.  Driveways shall align with existing driveways and "T" intersections on the opposite side of the street, or shall be offset in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
5.  Driveway approaches shall be paved with concrete surfacing constructed in accordance to City Standard Drawings and Specifications. 
D.  Vehicle Maneuvering. 
1.  Except for single-family detached or duplex uses, groups of more than five parking spaces per lot shall be provided with adequate aisles or turn-around areas so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner. 
2.  Except for single-family detached or duplex uses, more than five parking spaces shall be served by a driveway designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic on or off the site, with due regard to pedestrian and vehicle safety, and shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined. 
3.  Two-way and one-way driveways shall meet minimum and maximum widths established in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
4.  Parking lots exceeding 100 spaces shall be designed with a clear hierarchy of circulation. The hierarchy shall consist of: 
a.  Major entry driveways without parking spaces; then 
b.  Major circulation drives with little or no parking; then 
c.  Parking aisles for direct access to parking spaces. 
Figure 7.8-A: Vehicle Maneuvering
 
E.  Minimum Driveway Clearances to Street Corners. Driveways located near intersections shall maintain the corner clearances as indicated in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
F.  Separation of Driveways. Driveways shall be separated in accordance the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
G.  Driveway Widths and Grades. Driveway widths and grades shall be designed in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
H.  Access to Collector Streets. Access to collector streets for commercial, office, or industrial development is required and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards provided in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
1.  Driveway access to single-family detached or duplex dwelling units is not permitted. 
2.  Single-family and duplex lots developed prior to October 1, 2019, with exclusive frontage on a collector street and no alley, may be developed with a circular drive. Such driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for circular drives provided in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
I.  Access to Arterial Streets. Access to an arterial street shall not be permitted unless there is no other reasonable means of providing safe access to the property. 
1.  No development shall be allowed access to an arterial street if property excluded from the development could have been used to provide reasonable access to a lesser classified street or if the property has been previously subdivided in violation of state law or City Ordinance, if access could have been provided to a lesser street except for such unapproved subdivision of the property. 
2.  Existing commercial or industrial lots created prior to October 1, 2019, by legal subdivision procedures with exclusive frontage on an arterial street may take access to the arterial in accordance with the access standards in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
3.  Existing single-family detached and duplex lots created prior to October 1, 2019, by legal subdivision procedures with exclusive frontage on an arterial street may be developed with a circular drive. Such driveway shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standards for circular drives provided in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
4.  When driveway access to an arterial street is the only reasonable means of providing safe and adequate access to the property as determined by the City Engineer, the driveway design, number of driveways, location and construction shall be in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
J.  Access to Freeways. 
1.  Direct access to freeway main lanes shall only be provided by ramps and interchanges. 
2.  Direct access to freeway frontage roads shall be prohibited in the vicinity of ramp connections and shall be subject to Texas Department of Transportation requirements. 
3.  Direct access to frontage roads may be provided in accordance with the standards for access to arterial streets in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual and shall be approved by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
K.  Temporary Driveways for Agricultural Purposes. A driveway that does not meet the minimum requirements of this DDC may be permitted for undeveloped property used for agricultural purposes under the following conditions: 
1.  No building or parking lot permit is being applied for; 
2.  The driveway will be located a minimum of 50 feet from adjacent intersections; 
3.  The driveway will not be paved; 
4.  The driveway will be a minimum of 15 feet wide, but no more than 24 feet wide; 
5.  All drainage structures associated with the driveway will be sized to carry a 100-year storm; and 
6.  If applicable, the driveway meets Texas Department of Transportation Design Criteria. 
L.  Residential. Residential driveways shall meet minimum and maximum widths established in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
M.  Closing Driveways. 
1.  Where the closing or relocating of one or more existing driveways or portions thereof is necessary to comply with this DDC or a curb cut permit issued, access shall be closed by the removal of the existing driveway approach and the installation of curb and gutter along the gutter line of the street, all in accordance with city specifications. 
2.  If there is no existing curb and gutter on the street, the driveway shall be closed in the manner specified by the City Engineer. 
3.  Where the closing or relocating of one or more existing driveways or portions thereof, drainage patterns must be maintained or improved to meet the standards of this DDC and vegetation shall be installed to meet the standards of this DDC.  
7.8.10 - Cross-Access Between Abutting Development. 
A.  All nonresidential development shall be designed to allow for cross-access to adjacent properties to encourage shared parking and shared access points on public or private streets. This may be established by one or more of the following: 
1.  Connecting streets and drives; 
2.  Coordinating parking structure and parking lot entrances; 
3.  Common service/delivery areas; 
4.  Legally shared parking structures and parking lots; 
5.  Linkages between parking lots and parking structures; or 
6.  Providing shared driveways for two adjacent lots from public rights-of-way to minimize curb cuts. 
B.  When cross-access is deemed impractical by the Director and/or City Engineer on the basis of topography, the presence of natural features, or vehicular or pedestrian safety factors, this requirement may be waived provided that appropriate bicycle and pedestrian connections are provided between adjacent developments or land uses. 
C.  Cross-access and maintenance agreements associated with such interconnections shall be recorded with the County Clerk and provided, if necessary, with the associated subdivision or development application.  
7.8.11 - Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. 
A.  Applicability. All developments shall provide for the pedestrian and bicycle facilities necessary to serve pedestrian/bicycle traffic to, from, or across the development in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual and the Bicycle/Pedestrian component of the Mobility Plan. 
B.  Exemptions. Pedestrian and bicycle improvements required by this Subsection 7.8.11 shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Except for Planned Developments, along streets fronted by a subdivision in the RR zoning district provided that: 
a.  All lots are platted and have a minimum lot area of five acres; and 
b.  The lots do not have access from a street that serves more than 200 total vehicle trips per day. 
2.  For a replat of property zoned for single-family detached residential use if the preceding plat covering the same property did not require sidewalks or bicycle facilities and a zoning change to a district other than single-family detached residential use is not anticipated. 
3.  The development is not required to make perimeter street improvements in accordance with Subsection 7.8.7. 
4.  Improvements that result in an increase in the floor area of the existing building or buildings by less than 10 percent; 
5.  Improvements will not require the construction of additional parking spaces as required in Subsection 7.9.2, Applicability. 
C.  Types of Facilities. 
1.  Sidewalk. 
a.  Intended for the use of pedestrian traffic only and located outside of the street pavement. 
b.  Sidewalks are required along residential, collector, and arterial streets. 
c.  Required geometry, locations and materials shall be in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
2.  On-Road Bicycle Path. 
a.  Intended for the use of bicycle traffic only and required within the street pavement on arterial streets and where shown in accordance with the Bicycle/Pedestrian Component of the Mobility Plan. 
b.  Required geometry, location and materials shall be in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
3.  Off-Road Combination Pedestrian and Bicycle Path. 
a.  Intended for the use of bicycle and pedestrian traffic, located outside of the street pavement. 
b.  These facilities are required along residential, collector, arterial, and freeways and where shown in accordance with the Bicycle/Pedestrian Component of the Mobility Plan. 
c.  Required geometry, location and materials shall be in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
D.  On-Site Pedestrian Walkways. 
1.  On-Site Pedestrian Walkways Required. All development shall provide an on-site system of pedestrian walkways with a minimum width of five feet designed to provide direct access and connections to and between the following: 
a.  The primary entrance or entrances to each building, including pad site buildings; 
b.  Any sidewalks, walkways, or multi-use paths on adjacent properties that extend to the boundaries shared with the development. Interconnected walkways should be designed with similar and/or complementary details, colors, finishes, etc.; 
c.  Any parking areas intended to serve the development; 
d.  Any sidewalk system along the perimeter streets adjacent to the development; 
e.  Any public transit station areas, transit stops, park and ride facilities, or other transit facilities on-site or along an adjacent street; 
f.  Any adjacent residential neighborhoods (planned or existing) if sidewalk stubs are planned or existing; and 
g.  Any adjacent or on-site public park, trail system, open space, greenway, or other public or civic use or amenity. 
2.  On-Site Pedestrian Walkway Design. Required on-site pedestrian walkways shall: 
a.  Be a minimum of five feet in width; 
b.  Be distinguishable from areas used by vehicles using one or more of the following techniques: 
i.  Changing paving material, patterns, and/or paving color, but not including the painting of the paving material; 
ii.  Changing paving height; 
iii.  Decorative bollards; 
iv.  Raised median walkways with landscaped buffers; 
c.  Have adequate lighting for security and safety; 
d.  Be conveniently and centrally located on the subject property; 
e.  Be ADA accessible; and 
f.  Not include barriers that limit pedestrian access between the subject property and adjacent properties. 
E.  Pedestrian Access through Parking Areas. 
1.  All parking lots that contain more than 100 parking spaces shall include pedestrian walkways through the parking lot to the principal building entrance or a sidewalk providing access to the principal building entrance. At a minimum, walkways shall be provided for every three driving aisles or at a distance of not more than 150 foot intervals, whichever is less. 
2.  Parking lots with 100 spaces or more shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscaped areas or walkways at least 10 feet in width, or by a building or group of buildings. 
F.  Pedestrian Access through Parking Garages. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided through parking garages from the parking area to the abutting public right-of-way and/or to the primary entrance of the building served. Pedestrian walkways shall not use vehicle entrance or exit driveways from the parking area to a public right-of-way. 
G.  Crosswalks. 
1.  Crosswalks shall be identified in consultation with the City Traffic Engineer to meet the specific need and functionality of pedestrian movement at a particular location. 
2.  The type and size of the crosswalk shall be determined based on federal and state guidelines described in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
H.  Pedestrian Transportation Impact Analysis. For developments proposed within one-half mile of a public elementary, secondary school, or a University, a pedestrian TIA will be required in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual to determine the appropriate size and location of sidewalks and bicycle facilities to serve those uses. 
I.  Required Bicycle Access. 
1.  All new development, except individual lot development of single-family detached, duplex, or townhome dwellings, shall be served by an internal bicycle circulation system (including shared roadway lanes, widened outside roadway lanes, bike lanes, shoulders, and/or separate bike paths) that permits safe, convenient, efficient, and orderly movement of bicyclists among the following origin and destination points within the development: 
a.  Bicycle parking facilities or areas near the primary entrance(s) of principal buildings (or the buildable area of lots, for subdivisions), as well as any adjacent transit station areas, transit stops and shelters, public parks, greenways, schools, universities, community centers, and shopping areas; 
b.  Any designated or planned bus stops and shelters; and 
c.  Recreation facilities and other common use area and amenities. 
2.  The development's internal bicycle circulation system shall not conflict with the safe, convenient, efficient, and orderly movement of vehicles between the development's internal origin and destination points and adjacent parts of an existing or planned external, community-wide bicycle circulation system, as well as any adjacent transit stations, bus stops and shelters, public parks, trails, greenways, schools, community centers, and shopping areas. 
3.  Sidewalks shall not be used to satisfy the bicycle circulation requirement. 
4.  Required bike lanes shall be provided within the right-of-way of the street unless the City Engineer determines that location within the right-of-way is not practicable or preferable—in which case, alternatives may be allowed by the Director and/or the City Engineer. 
J.  Use and Maintenance of Pedestrian Connections. 
1.  Restrictions on Use. Sidewalks, walkways, and trails are intended to provide pedestrian access. Vehicle parking, garbage containers, merchandise storage or display, utility boxes and poles, signs, trees, and other obstructions shall not encroach into the required minimum clear width of any required sidewalk, trail, walkway, or other pedestrian way. Pedestrian amenities including bollards and trash receptacles for pedestrians are exempt from this requirement. 
2.  Maintenance. Sidewalks, trails, and walkways required by this title shall be maintained in usable condition throughout the year.  
7.8.12 - Public Transit. 
The requirements of this Subsection 7.8.12 shall be subject to the proportionality requirements in TLGC, Section 212.904. 
A.  Applicability. All developments shall provide for the transit facilities necessary to serve pedestrian/bicycle traffic to, from, or across the development in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual and the Bicycle/Pedestrian component of the Mobility Plan. This shall include major and minor bus stops and park and ride facilities, the specifications for which are in the Criteria Manual. 
B.  Location of Bus Stops. 
1.  Major bus stops shall be provided on arterials or collector streets at intersections of arterial streets, or arterial and collector streets but no closer than one-half mile apart. 
2.  Minor bus stops shall be provided on arterials and collector streets at the intersections of collectors and intersections, which include a local street if there is not an arterial or collector intersection existing or proposed within a one-half mile distance along the street. 
3.  Bus stops shall be located on the approaching side of the intersection. 
4.  The City Engineer will determine which and how many quadrants of an intersection a bus stop will be required. 
C.  Pull Outs. Pull out lanes will be required in conjunction with any bus stops along any street where the posted speed limit is more than 40 miles per hour. 
D.  Payment in Lieu of Improvements. Where a development would be required by this DDC to provide a bus stop or stops, and the proposed development is not on an existing bus route, the developer may in lieu of providing signage, shelter and seating provide cash payment equal to the cost of such items to the city for future construction of the facility. In these instances, the developer shall still provide the additional street pavement for a pull out if required, a concrete loading area, and a concrete pad adjacent to the sidewalk for a future shelter or seating in accordance with the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
E.  Participation Funding for Park and Rides. Developments generating 1,000 vehicle trips per day or more that are located within or adjacent to MR or MD zoning district may participate in the funding of the proposed park and ride for that district as shown on the Transit Component of the Mobility Plan in lieu of providing a portion of the required offsite traffic improvements identified by a review of the Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA). Participation shall be provided by a cash payment to the City to be used for future construction of the facility. The developer, at the discretion of the City Engineer, may donate a portion up to one-half of the monetary value of the required offsite improvements for park and ride facilities. If located appropriately, the city instead of cash participation may accept donation of land for the facility. The remainder of the required offsite traffic improvements will be provided in accordance with the recommendations based on the TIA review. In the event that the park and ride facility is already constructed, this provision will not apply to developments in or adjacent to that district. 
F.  Development Adjacent to Park and Ride. All developments adjacent to an identified park and ride facility are required to provide vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle linkages to the park and ride facility from the development.  
7.9 - Parking and Loading 
 
7.9.1 - Purpose. 
This section is intended to provide off-street parking and loading facilities in proportion to the generalized parking, loading, and transportation demands of different land uses. This section is also intended to help protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by: 
A.  Avoiding and mitigating traffic congestion; 
B.  Providing necessary access for service and emergency vehicles; 
C.  Providing for safe and convenient interaction between motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians; 
D.  Encouraging multi-modal transportation options and enhanced pedestrian safety; 
E.  Providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation and access demands of various land uses in different areas of the city; 
F.  Reducing stormwater runoff, reducing heat island effect from large expanses of pavement, improving water quality, and minimizing dust pollution; and 
G.  Avoiding and mitigating the adverse visual impact of large concentrations of exposed parking.  
7.9.2 - Applicability. 
A.  General Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.9: Parking and Loading, the standards in this Section, and the Transportation Design Criteria Manual shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability, with the following modifications: 
1.  New Development. 
a.  A new principal structure is constructed; or 
b.  An existing principal structure is relocated on the lot. 
2.  Expansions and Enlargements. All expansions or enlargements shall be considered together with any other expansions or enlargements during the previous two-year period. 
a.  The entire site shall comply with this Section 7.9 when: 
i.  The number of multifamily dwelling units on a property is increased by 25 percent or more; or 
ii.  Ten or more additional multifamily dwelling units are created within the MD zoning district; or 
iii.  The square footage of a nonresidential building is expanded or enlarged by more than 50 percent; or 
iv.  The addition or expansion of one or more structures or uses that requires specific use permit approval. 
b.  The portion of the site being expanded and/or improved shall comply with this Section 7.9 when: 
i.  Except for within the MD zoning district, the number of dwelling units on a property is increased by 10 percent or 10 dwelling units, whichever is less; or 
ii.  The square footage of a nonresidential building is expanded or enlarged by between 10 and 50 percent; or 
iii.  Parking area improvements or expansions including reconfiguring, reconstructing, or other similar projects, but not including resurfacing or restriping. 
3.  Change of Use. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided pursuant to this section for any change of use that increases the minimum number of required vehicle parking or loading spaces by more than 25 percent above those that currently exist on the site or on permitted off-site locations, except that changes of use in the MD Zoning District shall not be required to provide additional parking or loading for nonresidential uses. 
B.  Exemptions from Minimum Parking Requirements. Minimum required off-street parking spaces indicated in Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Properties containing less than 5,000 square feet of lot area, except for single-family detached, duplex, and townhome dwelling uses. 
2.  Expansions or enlargements that cumulatively increase the square footage of an existing structure or use by less than 10 percent of the gross floor area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less, provided that the amount of existing off-street parking remains the same. For purposes of this standard, cumulative shall mean any construction, expansions, or enlargements initiated after October 1, 2019. 
3.  Residential development with 10 or fewer dwelling units in the MD zoning district as identified on the Official Zoning Map of City, as amended. 
4.  Non-residential development in the MD zoning district as identified on the Official Zoning Map of City, as amended.  
7.9.3 - Calculations. 
A.  All square-footage based parking and loading requirements shall be computed on the basis of gross floor area of the subject use. Structured parking within a building shall not be counted in such computation. 
B.  When measurements of the number of required spaces result in a fractional number, any fraction shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. 
C.  The following types of parking spaces shall not count towards the maximum parking requirement: 
1.  On-street parking spaces provided pursuant to Subsection 7.9.5C; 
2.  Designated accessible parking; 
3.  Designated carpool parking; 
4.  Designated fleet vehicle parking; and 
5.  Structured parking, underground parking, and parking within, above, or beneath the building(s) it serves.  
7.9.4 - Amount of Off-Street Parking Required. 
A.  Minimum Required Parking. Each development or land use subject to this section pursuant to Subsection 7.9.2, shall provide at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, unless otherwise provided in this DDC. 
B.  Maximum Parking Allowed. In no case shall any use or development provide more than 125 percent of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, unless otherwise provided in this DDC. 
C.  Vehicle Stacking Space Requirements. All uses with drive-through facilities and those requiring stacking spaces shall comply with the minimum stacking space requirements in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
D.  Outdoor Sales, Display, Leasing, and Auction Areas. All uses with outdoor sales, display, leasing, and/or auction facilities shall provide one parking space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor sales, display, leasing, or auction area in addition to the minimum parking requirement prescribed in Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking. 
Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking 
DU = dwelling unit  sq. ft. = square feet  GFA = gross floor area 
Use Type 	Minimum Parking Requirement 
Residential Uses 
Household Living 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling 	4 spaces per DU (not including tandem parking in garages) 
Townhome 	4 spaces per DU (not including tandem parking in garages) 
Duplex 	4 spaces per DU (not including tandem parking in garages) 
Triplex 	2 spaces per DU (not including tandem parking in garages) 
Fourplex 	2 spaces per DU (not including tandem parking in garages) 
Multifamily Dwelling 	One bedroom and efficiency units: 1.25 spaces per unit plus guest parking as required below. 
Two or more bedroom units: One space for each bedroom plus guest parking as required below. 
Developments with more than 10 units: Guest parking shall be 10 percent of required number of parking spaces. 
Tiny Home Development 	1 space per DU 
Developments with more than 10 units: Guest parking shall be 10 percent of required number of parking spaces. 
Work/Live Dwelling 	1.5 spaces per DU 
Manufactured Home Development (HUD-Code) 	4 spaces per DU 
Group Living 
Chapter House 	1 space per 2 persons design capacity 
Community Home 	1 space per 4 persons design capacity (See Table Note A) 
Dormitory 	1 space per 2 persons design capacity 
Elderly Housing 	Retirement or Senior Living Facilities: 1 space/unit. 
Rest Homes, Homes for the Aged, or Assisted Living): 1 space per 2 patient beds or 1 space per apartment unit. 
Nursing and Convalescent Homes: 1 space per 3 patient beds. 
(See Table Note A) 
Group Home 	1 space per 4 persons design capacity (See Table Note A) 
Public, Institutional, and Civic Uses 
Community and Cultural Facilities 
Airport, City-Owned 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Cemetery, City-Owned 	None 
Club or Lodge 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA 
Community Service 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Day Care, Adult or Child 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA 
Funeral and Internment Facility 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. GFA 
Homeless Shelter 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Landfill, City-Owned 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Park, Playground, Open Space 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Religious Assembly 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. GFA 
Educational Facilities 
Business or Trade School 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA 
College or University 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. office, research, and library area; plus 1 space per 250 sq. ft. assembly areas and classrooms 
School, Private 	Elementary or middle: 1 space per 20 students design capacity 
High school: 1 space per 8 students design capacity 
School, Public 	Elementary or middle: 1 space per 20 students design capacity 
High school: 1 space per 8 students design capacity 
Healthcare Facilities 
Hospital Services 	1 space per 3 patient beds design capacity 
Medical Clinic 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. GFA 
Medical Office 	1 space per 450 sq. ft. GFA 
Commercial Uses 
Agricultural and Animal Uses 
General Agriculture 	None 
Commercial Stable 	1 space per 10 animals boarding capacity 
Community Garden 	None 
Kennel 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA 
Urban Farm 	None 
Veterinary Clinic 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA 
Recreation and Entertainment 
Amenity Center 	1 spaces per 300 sq. ft. GFA 
Indoor Recreation Facility 	Bowling or similar uses: 2 spaces per lane 
Skating Rink or similar uses: 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA 
Theaters, Auditoriums, Stadiums, Gymnasiums, or similar uses: 1 space per 4 seats in assembly areas 
Other Uses: 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA 
Outdoor Recreation Facility 	Theaters, Auditoriums, Stadiums, Gymnasiums, or similar uses: 1 space per 4 seats in assembly areas 
Golf Course: 8 spaces per hole 
Miniature Golf Course: 4 spaces per hole 
Other Uses: 1 space per 250 sq. ft. building area; plus 1 space per 10,000 sq. ft. site area 
RV Park 	1 space per designated camping or RV spot 
Food and Beverage Services 
Bar, Tavern, or Lounge 	Indoor Seating Area: 1 space per 200 sq. ft.; 
Outdoor Seating Area: 1 space per 350 sq. ft. 
Private Club 	
Restaurant 	
Restaurant, with Drive-Through 	
Mobile Food Court 	1 space per mobile food business 
Office, Business, and Professional Services 
Administrative, Professional, and Government Office 	1 space per 450 sq. ft. GFA 
Bank or Financial Institution 	
Musician Studio 	
Credit Access Business 	
Printing, Copying, and Publishing Establishment 	
Personal Services 
Laundry Facility, Industrial 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA 
Laundry Facility, Self-Service 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA 
Personal Service, General 	
Tattoo and Body Piercing Parlor 	
Retail Sales 
Building Materials and Supply Store 	1 space per 350 sq. ft. GFA 
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, Less than 5,000 Square Feet 	
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, Between 5,000 Square Feet and 15,000 Square Feet 	
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, More than 15,000 Square Feet 	
Smoke Shop 	
Lodging Facilities 
Bed and Breakfast 	1 space per bedroom; plus 1 space for the owner/operator 
Boarding or Rooming House 	
Hotel 	1 space per guestroom 
Motel 	
Short-Term Rental 	
Vehicles and Equipment 
Auto Wash 	1 space per detailing bay 
Automotive Fuel Sales 	1 space per 350 sq. ft. GFA 
Automotive Repair Shop, Major 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor sales/leasing/office area; plus 1 space per service bay 
Automotive Repair Shop, Minor 	
Automotive Sales or Leasing 	
Automotive Wrecking Service, Impound Lot, Junkyard, and Salvage Yard 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1 space per commercial vehicle generally stored on-site 
Equipment Sales and Rental 	Indoor: 1 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA 
Outdoor: 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. 
Parking Lot as a Principal Use 	None 
Travel Plaza 	1 space per 350 sq. ft. GFA 
Adult Entertainment Establishments 
Sexually Oriented Business 	1 space per 350 sq. ft. GFA 
Industrial Uses 
Manufacturing and Processing 
Craft Alcohol Production 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. production area; plus 1 space per 200 sq. ft. indoor seating/tasting area; plus 350 sq. ft. outdoor seating/tasting area 
Food Processing, Less than 2,500 Square Feet 	
Food Processing, More than 2,500 Square Feet 	
Feedlot, Slaughterhouse, or Packaging Plant 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA 
Gas Well 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Manufacturing, Artisan 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA 
Manufacturing, Low-Impact 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Manufacturing, Medium-Impact 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA 
Manufacturing, High-Impact 	
Commercial Incinerator, Transfer Station 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Storage and Warehousing 
Outdoor Storage 	None 
Self-Service Storage 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. of office; plus 1 space per 30 storage units 
Storage of Hazardous Materials 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Warehouse and Wholesale Facility 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1 space per commercial vehicle generally stored on-site 
Public and Semi-Public Uses 
Basic Utilities 	None 
Power Stations, Electric Substations, Interchanges, and Switch Stations 	None 
Solar Collector as Principal Use 	None 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) 	None 
Wireless Telecommunications 	None 
Accessory Uses 
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	1 space per bedroom 
Donation Box 	
Home Occupation 	1 space per non-resident employee 
Outdoor Storage, Accessory 	None 
Sale of Produce and Plants Raised on Premises 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. of retail area 
Solar Collector (Ground- or Building-Mounted) 	None 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS), Small (Building-Mounted) 	None 
Temporary Uses 
Temporary Storage Containers and Other Portable Storage Units 	Director determination, see Subsection 7.9.4E 
Seasonal Sales 	
Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant, Temporary 	
Farmer's Market or Open Air Market 	
Field or Construction Office 	
Special Event 	
Portable Wireless Telecommunications Facility 	
 
E.  Director Determination. For uses in Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, that reference this subsection and uses not expressly listed in Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, the Director is authorized to: 
1.  Apply the minimum off-street parking space requirement specified in Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use; or 
2.  Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement by reference to standards in parking resources published by the National Parking Association, American Planning Association, Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other acceptable sources of parking data; or 
3.  Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement based on local or national best practices; or 
4.  Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement based on a demand study prepared by the applicant. Such a study shall be prepared according to Subsection 7.9.4E. 
F.  Accessible Parking. All areas of newly designed or newly constructed buildings and facilities required to be accessible under federal and state law shall comply with the standards set forth in the Texas Accessibility Standards of the Architectural Barriers Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. Ann. § 9102 (Vernon Supp 2000), the International Building Code (IBC) as adopted in the Municipal Code of Ordinances, and the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended.  
7.9.5 - Parking Alternatives. 
The Director may approve parking alternatives that result in a cumulative adjustment not to exceed 50 percent of the minimum or maximum off-street parking spaces required by Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Infill Development. 
1.  Single-Family and Duplex Development. For single-family and duplex dwellings infill development, the minimum number of required parking spaces may be reduced to two parking spaces per dwelling unit if the reduction is consistent with the character of the existing area and the criteria in paragraph 7.9.5A.3 are met. 
2.  Mixed-Use and Non-Residential Development. For mixed-use and non-residential infill development, the minimum number of required parking spaces may be reduced by up to 10 percent, provided the criteria in paragraph 7.9.5A.3 are met. Such reduction in parking spaces shall not require approval of a minor modification in Section 2.8.2. 
3.  Qualifying Criteria. 
a.  Granting the reduction will not cause excessive congestion, endanger public safety, substantially reduce parking availability for other uses or otherwise adversely impact the neighborhood, or that such lesser amount of parking will provide positive environmental or other benefits to the users of the lot and the neighborhood, including specifically, among other benefits, assisting in the provision of affordable housing units; 
b.  Granting the reduction does not impose an undue financial administrative burden on the city; 
c.  For every vehicular parking space reduced by means of this standard, four bicycle parking spaces shall be provided. These bicycle spaces are in addition to the minimum required bicycle parking spaces. 
B.  Shared and/or Off-Site Parking. The Director may approve shared parking and/or off-site parking subject to the standards established in Subsection 7.9.4E. 
1.  Location. 
a.  For nonresidential uses, every shared and/or off-site parking space shall be located within 500 feet (measured along a legal pedestrian route) of the entrance to each building for which the shared and/or off-site parking is provided. If valet parking is provided, shared and/or off-site parking spaces may be located up to 1,000 feet from the entrance. 
b.  For residential uses, every shared and/or off-site parking space shall be located within 300 feet (measured along a legal pedestrian route) of the entrance to each building for which the shared and/or off-site parking is provided. 
c.  Shared and/or off-site parking is not permitted for single-family detached, duplex, and townhome dwelling uses. 
2.  Ineligible Activities. Accessible parking (ADA parking) shall not be permitted off-site. 
3.  Public Parking Facilities. Public parking facilities within 500 feet of the subject property may be counted toward up to 25 percent of the total amount of required off-street parking. 
4.  Documentation Required. 
a.  The owners of record involved in the joint use of shared parking facilities shall submit written documentation of the continued availability of the shared parking arrangement to the Director for review. 
b.  The Director may approve the shared parking arrangement if the Director determines that the documentation demonstrates the continued availability of the shared parking facility for a reasonable period of time. No zoning or use approval shall be issued until the Director has approved the shared parking documentation. 
c.  If the shared parking arrangement is later terminated or modified and the Director determines that the termination or modification has resulted in traffic congestion, overflow parking in residential neighborhoods, or threats to pedestrian, bicycle, or motor vehicle safety, the property owners involved in the shared parking arrangement may be held in violation of this DDC. 
C.  On-Street Parking. On-street parking may be counted toward the minimum number of required off-street motor vehicle parking spaces on a one-to-one basis, subject to the following standards: 
1.  On-street parking may not be used to meet the minimum off-street parking requirements for single-family detached, duplex, or townhouse uses; 
2.  On-street parking that is subject to residential parking permit restrictions or other time restrictions shall not be used to meet any off-street minimum parking requirements for any use; 
3.  Only those street parking spaces abutting any lot line of the subject property, and with 22 linear feet of lot frontage located between the imaginary extension of the side property lines into the street right-of-way, may be counted; 
4.  Areas in front of or within ten feet of a driveway, within 20 feet of a street intersection or within five feet of a fire hydrant shall not be counted toward required parking; 
5.  Each on-street parking space may only be counted once toward the parking requirements of the abutting lot, regardless of the number of individual buildings or tenants on the lot; 
6.  No development or use approved with an on-street parking credit shall be considered nonconforming if the on-street parking is later removed by city action and the remaining off-street parking does not meet the minimum off-street parking requirements of this section; 
7.  On-street parking spaces shall be available for general public use at all times. No signage or actions limiting general public use of on-street spaces shall be permitted unless otherwise prohibited by City Ordinance. 
D.  Proximity to Transit. Except for single-family detached, duplex, and townhome dwelling uses, the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces required in Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, for uses within one-quarter mile of a fixed transit station, measured radially in a straight line, shall be reduced by 10 percent. 
E.  Affordable and Senior Housing. The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces required in Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, shall be reduced by 25 percent for affordable residential and senior housing developments that satisfy the following: 
1.  Have a minimum of 10 dwelling units; and 
2.  At least 25 percent of the dwelling units are restricted for purchase or occupancy at below-market rate levels approved by the Director; or 
3.  At least 75 percent of the dwelling units are restricted for purchase or occupancy by persons 65 years of age or older. 
F.  Bicycle or Motorcycle Spaces. Any existing or proposed parking facility may utilize, on a substitution basis, on-site parking spaces for motorcycle or bicycle spaces that are in addition to those spaces required by Subsection 7.9.8: Bicycle Parking. 
1.  Such bicycle spaces shall be raised a minimum of six inches from grade of the adjacent parking facility. 
2.  One parking space may be omitted for each four bicycle spaces provided. 
3.  One parking space may be omitted for each two motorcycle spaces provided. 
4.  Bicycle spaces shall measure at least two feet by seven feet and shall be located in groups of four and shall be of the following three types: 
a.  A rack that secures the frame, or 
b.  An enclosed bike locker, or 
c.  A fenced, covered, locked, or guarded bike storage area. 
5.  Motorcycle spaces shall measure four feet by eight feet and shall be provided with adequate unobstructed maneuvering areas to permit easy access to the space. 
6.  In no instance shall credit for motorcycle or bicycle parking or combination thereof exceed five percent of the total required parking spaces. 
G.  Modification of Minimum Parking Requirement by Director. If an applicant submits a parking demand study pursuant to Subsection 7.9.4E demonstrating that anticipated off-street parking demand for the proposed development, use, or combination of uses will be less than that calculated from Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, and the Director determines that the information and assumptions used in the study are reasonable and that the study accurately reflects anticipated off-street parking demand for the proposed development, use, or combination of uses, the Director may authorize a reduction in required off-street parking spaces based on that study. 
H.  Modification of Maximum Parking Requirement by Director. No use shall provide off-street parking spaces in an amount exceeding the maximum established in Subsection 7.9.4B unless approved by the Director based on the following: 
1.  The proposed development has unique or unusual characteristics that typically does not apply to comparable uses, such as high sales volume per floor area or low parking turnover, that create a parking demand that exceeds the maximum ratio; 
2.  The applicant submits a demand study pursuant to Subsection 7.9.4E; and 
3.  Any parking provided above the maximum required in Subsection 7.9.4B is constructed with approved pervious surfaces.  
7.9.6 - Off-Street Parking Layout and Design. 
A.  Dimensions of Parking Spaces and Drive Aisles. All parking and maneuvering areas shall be constructed according to the following dimensional standards: 
1.  If the applicant can provide different acceptable standards based on the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards (current edition), or other professionally recognized sources, the Director may approve alternative standards pursuant to the minor modification process outlined in Subsection 2.8.2: Minor Modification. However, any alternative standards must also meet the intent and purpose of this DDC. 
2.  The length of a parking stall may be reduced to 16 feet allowing the front of vehicles to overhang the required parking space by two feet; provided that: 
a.  The curb is no more than four inches in height; and 
b.  The front of the parking space is located adjacent to a landscaped area or sidewalk that is at least six feet in width. 
3.  The minimum parking stall dimensions are illustrated in the figure below. Each letter in the figure is keyed to a corresponding dimensional requirement in Table 7.9-J. 
Figure 7.9-1: Parking Design
 
Table 7.9-J: Parking Dimensions (in feet) 
Angle 	Parking Space 	One-Way Aisle [1] 	2-Way Aisle [1] 	1-Way Bay 	2-Way Bay 
	A 	B 	C 	D 	E 	F 
0° (parallel) 	8.0 	22.0 				
30° 	16.8 	18.0 	12.0 	20.0 	45.6 	51.6 
45° 	19.1 	12.7 	13.0 	20.0 	51.2 	58.2 
60° 	20.1 	10.4 	18.0 	22.0 	58.2 	62.2 
90° 	18.0 	9.0 	26.0 	26.0 	N/A 	62.0 
Motorcycle (90°) 	16.0 	4.0 	26.0 	26.0 	N/A 	58.0 
Bus and Large Vehicle (90°) 	12.0 	40.0 				
Note: 
[1] Minimum drive aisle widths may be modified subject to approval of the Fire Marshal. 
 
B.  Compact Car Parking. Up to five percent of the total parking spaces required may be designated for compact cars. Minimum dimensions for compact spaces shall be eight by 16 feet. Such spaces shall be signed or the space painted with the words "Compact Car Only." 
C.  Surface Materials. All parking areas, aisles, turn-arounds and driveways shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or other approved surface, constructed to standards on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
1.  Single-family residential uses in the RR and R1 zoning districts may be surfaced with a permeable material, such as crushed rock, to the standards on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
2.  Permanent surfacing shall be installed prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy. 
3.  Parking areas may be surfaced with a dust-free permeable material. 
4.  Parking spaces provided above the minimum number of required parking spaces pursuant to Table 7.9-I: Minimum Required Off-Street Parking, shall be designed in accordance with iSWM standards described in the iSWM Water Quality Technical Manual. 
5.  Stall markings and/or other vehicular control devices shall be provided to the specifications of the City Engineer. 
D.  Location of Parking Areas. 
1.  Single-Family Detached, Duplex, and Townhome Dwellings. Off-street parking for single-family detached, duplex, and townhome dwelling uses shall only be allowed in a garage or on an approved surface. All other off-street parking within a required front setback area shall be prohibited. 
2.  All Other Uses. Off-street parking areas located between the front building facade and the adjacent street frontage is prohibited, unless the parcel satisfies all of the following standards: 
a.  It is located outside of the MN and MD zoning districts; 
b.  It adjoins either side of an Arterial and Commercial Collector, as defined in the City Mobility Plan; 
c.  It does not adjoin the following corridors: 
i.  Fort Worth Drive (between Carroll Boulevard and Eagle Street); 
ii.  Dallas Drive (between Teasley Boulevard and Eagle Street); 
iii.  Elm Street (between University Drive and Eagle Street); 
iv.  Locust Street (between University Drive and Eagle Street); and 
d.  The development satisfies the general regulations for parking in front of buildings as set forth in Subsection 7.9.6E. 
3.  Infill Development. Except as prohibited by paragraph 7.9.6D.2.c, infill parcels meeting the requirements of Subsection 7.9.6E are exempted from prohibitions against parking in front of buildings. 
E.  Front Parking Design Standards. 
1.  Development with 100 or Fewer Off-Street Parking Spaces. Development with 100 or fewer off-street parking spaces located between the front building façade and the adjacent street frontage shall comply with the following: 
a.  Development shall be limited to no more than two rows of parking between the front building façade and the adjacent street frontage. 
b.  Landscaping and screening shall be provided per Section 7.7, Landscaping, Screening, Buffering, and Fences, unless the development includes pad sides pursuant to paragraph 7.9.6E.2 below. 
2.  Development with More than 100 Off-Street Parking Spaces. Development with more than 100 off-street parking spaces located between the front building façade and the adjacent street frontage shall comply with the following: 
a.  Pad sites are reserved to be located at corners where two streets intersect and at both corners of the main drive into the development. For purposes of this provision, the "main drive" is the drive that receives the majority of vehicular traffic. When required, the Transportation Impact Analysis shall determine the main drive; 
b.  Corner pad site buildings shall be built to the front setback line; however, additional setback may be allowed to accommodate outdoor dining or a plaza with a focal point that includes seating, public art, and a water feature; and 
c.  Pad sites not located on a corner shall not exceed two rows of parking between the front building façade and the adjacent street frontage. 
F.  Parking Area Lighting. See Section 7.11.4. 
G.  Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. See Section 7.8.11. 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0028a, § 2(Exh. A), 2-4-2020)  
7.9.7 - Loading Areas and Drive-Throughs. 
A.  Number and Size of Loading Berths Required. 
1.  All commercial and industrial uses shall provide loading berths pursuant to the table below. 
2.  The Director may approve a variation from the required loading space requirements if warranted by the building use. 
3.  The minimum turning radius for truck traffic areas shall be 40 feet. 
Table 7.9-K: Required Off-Street Loading Berths 
Gross Floor Area 	Minimum Number of
Loading Berths 	Size of Each Loading Berth 
Less than 10,000 square feet 	None 	N/A 
10,000 to 29,999 square feet 	1 	10 feet × 25 feet 
30,000 to 100,000 square feet 	2 	12 feet × 50 feet 
More than 100,000 square feet 	2, plus 1 additional loading berth for every 100,000 square feet beyond the first 100,000 square feet 	14 feet wide × 50 feet long × 14 feet high 
 
B.  Location of Off-Street Loading Areas. 
1.  Except for properties in the LI and HI zoning districts, required off-street loading spaces shall not be permitted in any front yard or in any required street side yard. 
2.  Loading areas shall be separated from pedestrian areas. 
3.  Off-street loading spaces may occupy all or any part of a required rear yard where visibility from public streets and windows of neighboring buildings will be minimized. 
4.  Loading areas shall not interfere with parking lot maneuvering areas. 
5.  City streets or rights-of-way shall not be utilized for loading and unloading purposes. 
C.  Drive-Throughs. Any establishment that has a drive-through use is subject to the requirements in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual and the following: 
1.  Drive-through uses shall provide sufficient stacking area to ensure that public rights-of-way are not obstructed; 
2.  Drive-through uses shall be built as an integral architectural element of the principal structure and shall use the same materials as those used in the principal structure. Drive-through structures and facilities separate from the principal structure are prohibited; and 
3.  Drive-through uses shall be located to the rear or side of the principal structure, and shall be buffered on the rear and side lot lines as required in Subsection 7.7.6, Compatibility Landscape Buffer Requirements.  
7.9.8 - Bicycle Parking. 
A.  Minimum Required Bicycle Parking. Unless exempted by Subsection 7.9.8B, all multifamily and nonresidential development shall provide off-street bicycle parking spaces at a ratio of one bicycle parking space per 20 vehicle parking spaces, with no development providing less than two bicycle parking spaces. 
B.  Bicycle Parking Reduction. Subject to the approval of the Director, the number of bicycle parking spaces may be reduced because of building site characteristics. 
C.  Bicycle Parking Location and Design. 
1.  Location. Required off-street bicycle parking spaces shall be provided with bike racks, bike lockers, or similar parking facilities that comply with the following standards: 
a.  Located in a visible, well-lit ground-level area; 
b.  Conveniently accessible to the primary entrances of a development's principal building(s); 
c.  Does not interfere with pedestrian traffic; and 
d.  Is protected from conflicts with vehicular traffic. 
2.  Multiple Building Developments. For developments with multiple buildings, bicycle parking shall be distributed evenly among principal buildings. 
3.  Design. 
a.  Bicycle parking areas shall not be used for any other purposes. 
b.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be installed using standard requirements that are effective for storage and are permanently anchored to a hard surface.  
7.10 - Site and Building Design 
 
7.10.1 - Purpose. 
This Section 7.10 is intended to: 
A.  Promote high-quality development and construction; 
B.  Ensure compatibility between residential neighborhoods and adjacent commercial and mixed-use areas; 
C.  Mitigate negative impacts created by the scale and bulk of large buildings; 
D.  Provide variety and visual interest in the exterior design of buildings; 
E.  Enhance the streetscape and diminish the prominence of garages and parking areas; 
F.  Promote an environment that is friendly toward multiple modes of transportation and accommodates varying ages and abilities; and 
G.  Protect and enhance property values and encourage further investment and reinvestment.  
7.10.2 - Applicability. 
A.  General Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.10: Site and Building Design, the standards in this section and the Site Design Criteria Manual shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability, with the following modifications: 
1.  New Construction. 
a.  A new principal structure is constructed; or 
b.  An existing principal structure is relocated on the lot. 
2.  Expansions and Enlargements. 
a.  The entire site and buildings and/or dwelling units shall comply with this Section 7.10 when: 
i.  The number of multifamily dwelling units on a property is increased by more than 25 percent; or 
ii.  Ten or more additional multifamily dwelling units are created within the MD zoning district; or 
iii.  The square footage of a nonresidential or mixed-use building is expanded or enlarged by more than 50 percent; or 
iv.  The addition or expansion of one or more structures or uses that requires specific use permit approval. 
b.  The portion of the building and/or site being expanded and/or improved shall comply with this Section 7.10 when: 
i.  Except for within the MD zoning district, the number of dwelling units on a property is increased by between 10 and 25 percent or 10 dwelling units, whichever is less; or 
ii.  The square footage of a nonresidential or mixed-use building is expanded or enlarged by between 10 and 50 percent. 
B.  Exemptions. 
1.  Expansion of a single-family detached dwelling, duplex, or townhome within the permitted building coverage. 
2.  Expansions and enlargements of a multifamily or nonresidential use less than the greater of 1,000 square feet or 10 percent of the building's square footage. 
3.  Conversion of a residential structure to a nonresidential use where no site improvements are required. 
C.  Conflicting Standards. Where the site and building design standards in this Section 7.10 conflict with the design standards applicable to an overlay district or PD, the standards in the overlay district or PD shall govern. 
D.  Alternative Compliance. Alternatives to these standards may be approved by the Director if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed alternative: 
1.  Achieves the intent of the subject standard to the same or better degree than the subject standard; 
2.  Advances the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and this DDC to the same or better degree than the subject standard; 
3.  Results in benefits to the community that are equivalent to or exceed benefits associated with the subject standard; and 
4.  Imposes no greater impacts on adjacent properties than would occur through compliance with the specific requirements of this DDC.  
7.10.3 - Single-Family Detached, Duplex, Townhome, Triplex, and Fourplex Dwelling Site and Building Design. 
A.  Applicability. This subsection applies to any single-family detached dwelling, duplex, townhome, triplex, or fourplex. 
B.  Orientation. Primary entrances shall face a public right-of-way to the maximum extent practicable. The Director may approve alternative orientations for primary entrances facing common green spaces or other common areas such as courtyards, plazas, and gathering spaces. 
C.  Open Space Requirements. Any development consisting of 10 or more duplex, townhome, triplex, and fourplex dwelling units shall set aside a minimum of five percent of the land area as open space for the use and enjoyment of the development's occupants and users. Such open space shall comply with the requirements of Subsection 7.10.4C. 
D.  Architectural Variety. The same elevation shall not be used within any 10 lot grouping as defined by the two adjacent lots on either side of the subject property and the five lots immediately across the street from those same lots. This requirement shall not apply across a right-of-way dividing two adjacent blocks: 
Figure 7.10-A: Architectural Variety
 
E.  Building Mass and Form. Buildings shall incorporate at least three of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the residence: 
1.  Dormers; 
2.  Gables; 
3.  Recessed entries, a minimum of three feet deep; 
4.  Covered front porches; 
5.  Cupolas; 
6.  Architectural pillars or posts; and/or 
7.  Bay window with a minimum 24 inches projection. 
Figure 7.10-B: Building Mass and Form
 
F.  Garage Design. 
1.  Where alleys are present, garages shall be accessed from the alley to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  For front-entry garages: 
a.  The garage shall be offset a minimum of three feet from the building; and 
b.  The total width of the garage door(s) shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the ground-floor building frontage. 
3.  Side- and rear-entry garages are encouraged and may encroach into setbacks pursuant to Table 3.7-A: Authorized Exceptions to Setbacks. 
G.  Building Transparency/Windows. 
1.  Within the front façade (front adjoining a public or private right-of-way where the entrance/address is located), windows and doors (excluding garage doors) shall comprise at least 15 percent of the wall area. 
2.  Windows shall be provided with trim or shall be recessed. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb. Shutters, trims, or false windows shall not count toward the minimum requirement. 
H.  Building Materials. 
1.  Exterior finishes shall be of wood, masonry, or cementitious siding. 
2.  Masonry shall comprise a minimum of 25 percent of the exterior finishes of the total building elevation. 
3.  Other building materials may be approved by the Director provided they meet the intent of this section. 
I.  Minimum Pervious Area in the Front Yard. Each lot shall maintain a minimum 30 percent pervious area between the principal structure and the front property line, and shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 7.7: Landscaping, Screening, Buffering, and Fences. Pavers shall not count toward required pervious area. The minimum pervious area may be reduced by 10 percent for side-entry garages.  
7.10.4 - Multifamily Site and Building Design. 
A.  Applicability. This subsection applies to any multifamily development, except those that are part of a mixed-use building. 
B.  Site Design and Orientation. 
1.  Primary Building Access. Primary building access shall be oriented towards the adjacent street, and building access shall be provided from the street and/or sidewalk. 
2.  Multi-Building Developments. For developments with three or more buildings, the buildings shall be arranged using one or more of the following techniques: 
a.  Organize units around a central courtyard that maintains a consistent side yard setback between units along the street frontage; 
b.  Locate the buildings on the corner of an adjacent street intersection or entry point to the development to frame the corner; 
c.  Provide common gathering spaces between buildings; and/or 
d.  Other site improvements as approved by the Director that do not conflict with this DDC. 
Figure 7.10-C: Multi-Building Developments
 
3.  Location of Trash Storage and Mechanical Equipment. Trash storage areas, mechanical equipment, and similar areas shall not be visible from public view, and shall not be located between the building and the street. 
C.  Open Space Requirements. Any development consisting of 10 or more dwelling units shall set aside a minimum of eight percent of the land area as open space for the use and enjoyment of the development's occupants and users. Open space serves numerous purposes, including preservation and protection of natural areas and features, providing opportunities for passive and active recreation, enhancing management of stormwater runoff to protect water quality and reduce flooding, and mitigating the heat island effect of developed areas. This requirement does not apply to multifamily developments in the MD zoning district. 
1.  Design of Open Space. Such open space shall meet the following design standards: 
a.  To the maximum extent practicable, required open space shall be located and configured to include, protect, or enhance natural resource or hazard areas (including but not limited to lakes, ponds, streams, flood hazard areas, and drainage ways); 
b.  Areas covered by shrubs, bark mulch and other ground covers that do not provide a suitable surface for human use may not be counted toward this requirement; 
c.  Required open space areas shall be compact and contiguous unless a different configuration is needed to continue an existing trail or accommodate preservation of natural features; 
d.  Required open space shall be located to be readily accessible and useable by occupants and users of the development. Where possible, a portion of the open space should provide focal points for the development through prominent placement or easy visual access from streets; and 
e.  If the development site is adjacent to existing or planned parks, greenways, or other public open space, required open space shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge the park, greenway, or other public open space. 
2.  Ownership, Management, and Maintenance of Open Space. 
a.  Required open space area shall be managed and maintained as permanent open space through one or more of the following options: 
i.  Open space may be held in common ownership by the owner(s) of the development, who will be responsible for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes. 
ii.  Open space areas may be conveyed to a property owners' or homeowners' association that holds the land in common ownership and will be responsible for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes. 
iii.  Open space areas may be conveyed to a third-party beneficiary such as an environmental or civic organization that is organized for, capable of, and willing to accept responsibility for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes. 
iv.  Open space areas may be dedicated to the public and conveyed to the city or other public agency that is organized for, capable of, and willing to accept responsibility for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes. 
b.  Easements may be established on those parts of individually-owned lots including open space areas that require the areas to be managed consistent with their intended open space purposes and prohibit any inconsistent future development. Any options involving private ownership of required open space area shall include association by-laws, deed restrictions, covenants, or other legal instruments that ensure continued use of the land for its intended open space purposes and provide for the continued and effective management, operation, and maintenance of the land and facilities. Such instruments shall be approved by the city as sufficient to comply with this standard before or in conjunction with approval of any subdivision approval for the development, or any construction plan approval for the development (if no subdivision approval is required). 
c.  Responsibility for managing and maintaining open space areas lies with the owner of the land comprising the areas. Failure to maintain open space areas in accordance with the approved development shall be a violation of this DDC. Identification of who bears responsibility for managing and maintaining open space areas shall be shown on any recorded subdivision plat for the development or any approved construction plan for the development (if no subdivision approval is required). 
D.  Architectural Requirements. 
1.  Limitation on Same Building Design. For projects with 30 dwelling units or greater, or more than three buildings, the same exterior design may not be used for greater than 30 units and/or more than three buildings in a project. A variety of compatible exterior materials' use and type, building styles, massing, composition, and prominent architectural features, such as door and window openings, porches, rooflines, shall be used. 
2.  Entries. 
a.  Primary building entries shall be denoted through the use of distinctive architectural elements and materials, such as ornamental glazing or paving, over doors, porches, trellises, or planter boxes or as otherwise identified in this section. 
b.  In the mixed-use zoning districts, residential units abutting a public street shall be designed with entries and windows facing the street. In all cases, buildings shall be designed to distinguish the private realm from the public realm through such features as, but not limited to, elevation change or fencing. 
E.  Building Mass and Form. 
1.  General. 
a.  Buildings shall be designed to prevent the appearance of straight, unbroken lines in the horizontal and vertical surface. Buildings shall have no more than 50 continuous feet without a horizontal and vertical break of at least three feet. Such breaks may include recesses, projections, windows, roofs, alcoves, porticoes, awnings, and other architectural features to provide visual interest and relief. 
b.  Façades shall be broken up to give the appearance of a collection of smaller structures. Elements including but not limited to balconies, recessions, and projections may be used to articulate individual units or collections of units. 
c.  Buildings visible from the public right-of-way or private street system shall include changes in relief such as columns, cornices, bases, fenestration, and fluted masonry, for at least 15 percent of the exterior wall area. 
d.  Stairwells shall not be a prominent feature of any building façade, and shall be shielded from view from public and private streets to the maximum extent practicable. 
e.  Any building constructed with a flat roof shall contain a distinctive finish consisting of a cornice, banding, or other architectural termination. 
2.  Additional Requirements in Mixed-Use Zoning Districts. In the mixed-use zoning districts, the following additional requirements apply: 
a.  Buildings shall be designed to reduce apparent mass by including a clearly identifiable base, body, and top, with horizontal elements separating these components. The component described as the body must constitute a minimum of 50 percent of the total building height; 
b.  The first floor of multifamily buildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height; and 
c.  Stoops and higher finish-floor elevations are encouraged on the street-facing elevation for multi-family buildings. Buildings that provide stoops and/or finish-floor elevations that rise at least two feet above the sidewalk may measure building height from the beginning of the first floor, instead of from grade. 
F.  Accessory Structure/Garage. 
1.  Garages, carports, storage units, and other accessory structures (but not including leasing offices, club houses, or recreation centers) shall not be located along the portion of the building that fronts the public or private street. 
2.  Garages shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the total building frontage. This measurement does not apply to garages facing an alley or courtyard entrance. 
3.  Garages, carports, storage units, and other accessory structures visible from the public right-of-way, private street system, and/or adjacent residential properties shall include at least three of the following: 
a.  Façade modulation of at least six inches for every 30 feet of wall length; 
b.  Multiple building materials (e.g., brick, fieldstone, limestone, marble, granite, textured block, architectural pre-cast concrete, cementitious siding, wood clapboard siding, wood beaded siding, or stucco); 
c.  Multiple surface textures (e.g. rough, striated, imprinted, etc.) or patterns; or 
d.  Separation in roof pitch, variation in direction of roof pitches, inclusion or dormers, or other variation on roof design. 
G.  Building Transparency/Windows. 
1.  Within the front façade (front adjoining a public or private right-of-way where the entrance/address is located), windows and doors (excluding garage doors) shall comprise at least 25 percent of the wall area. 
2.  For all other façades that face a public or private street or right-of-way (excluding alleys), windows and doors (excluding garage doors) shall comprise 15 percent of the wall area. 
3.  Windows shall be provided with trim or shall be recessed. Windows shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb. 
4.  Use of false door or window openings shall be defined by frames, sills, and lintels. 
H.  Building Materials. 
1.  An amount equal to 40 percent of the total net exterior wall area of each building elevation, excluding gables, windows, doors and related trim, shall be masonry. 
2.  Other building materials may be approved by the Director provided they meet the intent of this section.  
7.10.5 - Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Buildings. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  This subsection applies to any nonresidential or mixed-use development. 
2.  These standards do not apply to industrial uses in the LI or HI zoning districts where the building or structure is located: 
a.  Farther than 250 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of an arterial, collector, or interstate roadway; or 
b.  Behind another building or structure that screens the building or structure from the adjacent arterial or interstate roadway. 
3.  Alternatives to these standards may be approved by the Director if: 
a.  The building is not accessed by pedestrians, such as warehouses and industrial buildings without attached offices, automotive service uses such as gasoline sales and automobile sales; or 
b.  The development is on an infill site; or 
c.  The design results in a higher-quality product that exceeds the minimum standards in this subchapter. 
B.  Site Design and Orientation. 
1.  The primary entrance of a building shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance with distinguishing features such as a canopy, portico, or other prominent element of the architectural design. 
2.  Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward the street rather than the parking area. 
3.  Buildings that are within 30 feet of the street shall have an entrance for pedestrians from the street to the building interior. 
4.  Trash storage areas, mechanical equipment, loading areas, and similar areas shall not be visible from public view, and shall not be located between the building and the street. 
C.  Multi-Building Developments. For developments with three or more buildings, the buildings shall be arranged using one or more of the following techniques: 
1.  Organize units around a central courtyard that maintains a consistent side yard setback between units along the street frontage; 
2.  Locate the buildings on the corner of an adjacent street intersection or entry point to the development to frame the corner; 
3.  Provide outdoor dining and/or common gathering spaces between buildings; and/or 
4.  Other site improvements as approved by the Director that do not conflict with this DDC. 
Figure 7.10-D: Multi-Building Development
 
D.  Building Mass and Form. Buildings shall have no more than 50 continuous feet without a horizontal and vertical break of at least three feet. Such breaks may include recesses, projections, windows, roofs, alcoves, porticoes, awnings, and other architectural features to provide visual interest and relief. 
E.  Building Transparency/Windows. 
1.  Use of glass for displays and to allow visual access to interior space is permitted. Buildings may not incorporate glass for more than 70 percent of the building skin. 
2.  Windows shall be provided with trim. Windows shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb. 
F.  Building Materials. 
1.  Fronts and street sides of buildings visible from the public right-of-way shall be non-reflective and shall be of wood, masonry, stucco, EIFS (Exterior Insulation Finishing System), or cementitious siding. 
2.  Masonry shall comprise a minimum of 50 percent of the exterior finishes of the total building elevation. 
3.  A maximum of 10 percent of architecturally finished metal can be used as an accent material or for embellishments on buildings classified as commercial uses, except that in the LI and HI districts along an arterial, architecturally finished metal can be used for up to 50 percent of the building façade. 
4.  Other building materials may be approved by the Director provided they meet the intent of this section. 
G.  Additional Standards in the MN and MD Districts. 
1.  Applicability. 
a.  These standards apply to nonresidential and mixed-use development in the MN and MD districts. 
b.  These standards are in addition to those required for nonresidential and mixed-use development in Subsection 7.10.5. 
c.  Where these standards conflict with the standards in Subsection 7.10.5, these standards shall apply. 
2.  Site Design and Orientation 
a.  At least 60 percent of the street frontage shall have buildings within 10 feet of the front property line. 
b.  A building shall be setback not more than 15 feet from the public right-of-way unless the area is used for pedestrian activities such as plazas or outside eating areas. 
Figure 7.10-E: Site Design and Orientation
 
c.  Buildings that are open to the public and are within 30 feet of the street shall have an entrance for pedestrians from the street to the building interior. This entrance shall be designed to be attractive and functional, be a distinctive and prominent element of the architectural design, and shall be open to the public during all business hours. 
d.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface, or finish emphasizing entrances. 
3.  Building Mass and Form 
a.  The top floor of any building rising over four stories shall incorporate a distinctive finish, consisting of a cornice or other architectural termination. 
b.  Buildings shall be designed to reduce apparent mass by including a clearly identifiable base, body, and top, with horizontal elements separating these components. The component described as the body must constitute a minimum of 50 percent of the total building height. 
4.  Building Transparency/Windows. 
a.  Any ground floor wall facing a main street, plaza, or other public open space shall contain at least 50 percent of the wall area facing the street in display areas, windows, or doorways. 
b.  At least 20 percent of each upper floor facing a main street, plaza, or other public open space shall contain windows or doorways. 
c.  Windows shall allow views into working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display areas. 
d.  Walls facing side streets shall contain at least 25 percent of the wall space in windows, display areas, or doors, provided: 
i.  Blank walls within 30 feet of the side street are prohibited. 
ii.  Up to 40 percent of the length of the building can be exempted from this standard if oriented toward loading or service area. 
5.  Building Materials. 
a.  A maximum of 10 percent of architecturally finished metal can be used as an accent material or for embellishments on buildings classified as nonresidential uses. 
b.  Buildings shall include changes in relief such as columns, cornices, bases, fenestration, and fluted masonry, for at least 15 percent of the exterior wall area. 
6.  Streetscape. Hardscape (paving material) shall be used to designate pedestrian-oriented areas. Sample materials could be pavers, scored and colored concrete, grass-crete, or combinations of the above.  
7.10.6 - Building Height in Transition Areas. 
A.  Any portion of a building within 50 feet of a property zoned in a Residential District, as provided in Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations, shall not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the abutting Residential District. Portions of buildings within 50 feet are not eligible for additional building height that may otherwise be allowed with a specific use permit. 
B.  Any portion of a building between 50 feet and 100 feet of a property zoned in a Residential District, as provided in Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations, shall not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the abutting Residential District, plus 15 feet. Portions of buildings between 50 feet and 100 feet are not eligible for additional building height that may otherwise be allowed with a specific use permit. 
C.  Any portion of a building beyond 100 feet from a property zoned in a Residential District, as provided in Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations, shall not exceed the allowed building height of the zoning district where the building is located. Portions of buildings beyond 100 feet are eligible for additional building height that may otherwise be allowed with a specific use permit. 
D.  Building features referenced in Table 3.7-B: Authorized Exceptions to Height Standards, shall be designed to minimize visibility from adjacent residential districts and fit within the allowed building height of the zoning district where the building is located, to the maximum extent practicable. 
Figure 7.10-F: Building Height in Transition Areas
  
7.11 - Exterior Lighting 
 
7.11.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section 7.11 is to ensure that vehicle circulation areas, pedestrian areas, parking areas, public gathering spaces, and other areas have adequate outdoor illumination to provide safety at night, while limiting the negative impacts of outdoor lighting nuisance on adjacent properties.  
7.11.2 - Applicability. 
A.  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.11: Exterior Lighting, the standards in this section shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability, with the following modifications. 
B.  Exemptions. The following types of exterior lighting are exempt from the requirements of this section, provided they shall not create glare to motorists or result in light trespass onto adjacent properties: 
1.  Holiday Lighting. 
a.  Temporary winter holiday lighting illuminated from November 1 to March 1 is allowed in mixed-use and nonresidential zoning districts; 
b.  Residential zoning districts may use holiday lighting any time of year; and 
c.  Holiday lighting shall not exceed one foot-candle at any property line, except where the property line is adjacent to walkways, driveways, and streets. 
2.  Single-Family Detached, Duplex, and Townhouse Uses. 
a.  Soffit or wall-mounted lights permanently attached to the dwelling shall be exempt from the exterior lighting regulations, provided the lights do not exceed the height of the eave; and 
b.  Such lights shall be downcast and directed away from abutting properties. 
3.  Mixed-Use, Corridor, and Other Nonresidential Zoning Districts. 
a.  Twinkle lighting located on trees, bushes, or landscape features; and 
b.  Bistro lighting. 
4.  Special Events. Special events that have been issued a temporary use permit. 
5.  Lighting Required by FAA or FCC. Lighting required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission. 
6.  Underwater Lighting. Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and decorative water fountains shall not be subject to this Section 7.11, though they must conform to all other provisions of this DDC. 
7.  Lighting Required by Building Code. Any lighting that is required by the building code for life safety purposes such as stairway lighting, walkways, and building entrances, shall not be prohibited by this section, but shall be subject to the lighting standards.  
7.11.3 - Standards Applicable to All Development. 
The following standards apply to all development unless specifically exempted in Subsection 7.11.2B: 
A.  Except in the RR, R1, R2, and R3 zoning districts, sidewalks, internal pedestrian paths, and bicycle paths shall be lit with full cutoff shielded and downcast fixtures no more than 16 feet tall and providing consistent illumination of at least one foot-candle on the walking surface. 
B.  Lighting along public rights-of-way and landscaped areas for a specific development shall be designed uniformly. 
C.  Light spillover onto adjacent properties shall not exceed one foot-candle at any property line, except where the property line is adjacent to walkways, driveways, and streets or in nonresidential developments comprised of multiple lots, and when state and federal regulations apply.  
7.11.4 - Parking Area Lighting. 
A.  Pole Height. Parking area lighting fixtures shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
B.  Shielding of Lights. 
1.  Parking area lighting shall be full cutoff shielded and downcast fixtures. 
2.  The source of light on any fixtures on a nonresidential use adjacent to a single-family, duplex, or townhouse use shall be shielded from sight. 
3.  Lighting fixtures for canopies or similar structures shall be flush-mounted or recessed above the lower edge of the canopy. 
C.  Illuminance. 
1.  Maintained average illuminance values in commercial and multifamily parking areas shall be no less than two foot-candles. 
2.  The acceptable uniformity ratio for lighted areas shall comply with recommended ranges adopted by the International Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) for low, medium, and high activity areas.  
7.11.5 - Building Lighting. 
A.  Location and Direction. 
1.  Except for decorative lighting, building-mounted lights shall be installed so that all light is directed downward. 
2.  Wall packs and similar lights shall be prohibited unless the cutoff angle effectively eliminates glare from beyond the property lines. 
B.  Decorative Lighting. Decorative lighting shall be permitted provided all light is cast against the building surface.  
7.11.6 - Street Lighting. 
A.  Street lights shall be installed for every new development, at the developer's expense to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the site and/or surrounding neighborhoods. 
B.  All fixtures shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood and city as a whole. 
C.  All street lighting fixtures shall be full cut-off and designed to direct lighting below a 90-degree horizontal plane extending from the lowest point of the light source. 
D.  All street lighting fixtures shall be designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate the direct visibility of the light source and so that they do not cast or reflect light on adjacent properties.  
7.12 - Solid Waste and Recycling Design Standards 
 
7.12.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide basic criteria and standards for the development and maintenance of solid waste and recycling container enclosures.  
7.12.2 - Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.12: Solid Waste and Recycling Design Standards, the standards in this section, and the Solid Waste Criteria Manual shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability.  
7.12.3 - General Design Standards. 
A.  Non-residential on-site solid waste and recycling storage facilities (container enclosures) shall be located on each platted lot of non-residential property, except as otherwise provided within the Solid Waste Criteria Manual, and shall be constructed and maintained by the property owner or developer, and made available for use by the City of Denton Solid Waste Department and/or commercial recycling service provider. For purposes of these solid waste requirements, "non-residential development" includes any attached residential dwellings of five or more dwelling units. 
B.  Nonresidential on-site solid waste and recycling storage facilities (container enclosures) shall be available for the storage of all municipal solid waste and recyclables generated for each platted property. The city reserves the ability to determine which, if any parcels or areas (e.g., Downtown Square, strip centers, multi-family residential, etc.) may be recommended for shared container or other alternative service. Container enclosures shall be of adequate size to contain all solid and liquid wastes and recyclables generated on the property, which may include, but are not limited to, municipal solid waste, recyclables, grease and oils, process by-products and wastes, hazardous waste, medical waste, and any special wastes, contained as necessary to meet disposal standards published by the city. The container enclosures shall be constructed to such capacity prescribed by the Solid Waste Criteria Manual for non-residential solid waste and recycling facilities. Enclosures are not required for non-residential uses where the dumpster locations cannot be seen from the public right-of-way. 
C.  See Subpart A, Municipal Code of Ordinances, Chapter 24: Solid Waste, Article III: Commercial Collection Service, for solid waste services requirements.  
7.13 - Electric Standards 
 
7.13.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide basic criteria and standards for the development and maintenance of electric transmission lines, distribution lines, substations, interchanges, and switch stations. These reasonable regulations serve to preserve the integrity of adjacent impacted lands and to prevent imminent destruction of property or injury to persons, while ensuring that these mitigating actions conform to the comprehensive plan and DDC. These regulations further serve to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and to accomplish the orderly and practical development of electric utilities, and to achieve the following broader objectives: 
A.  To protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
B.  To define and establish the minimum clearances in an effort to safeguard persons against electrical hazards during the installation, operation, maintenance and replacement of electric supply lines, electric substations, interchanges, and electric switch stations. 
C.  To adopt the most current National Electrical Safety Code, as amended (NESC) and the most current North American Electric Reliability Corporation Critical Infrastructure Protection, as amended (NERC, CIP).  
7.13.2 - Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.13: Electric Standards, and the standards in this section shall apply as set forth in Section 7.2: Applicability.  
7.13.3 - General Design. 
A.  All applicable electric industry practices and guidelines set forth in the National Electrical Safety Code, as it may be hereafter amended (NESC) are hereby adopted and shall apply to electric transmission lines, distribution lines, substations, interchanges, and switch stations. To the extent that this DDC conflicts with standards adopted in the NESC, the more restrictive standards shall apply. 
B.  All applicable protection standards set forth in the North American Electric Reliability Corporation Critical Infrastructure Protection Standards (NERC CIP), in its most current version, are hereby adopted and shall apply to electric transmission lines, distribution lines, and substations. To the extent that this DDC conflicts with standards adopted in the NERC CIP, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
C.  Adequate consideration shall be given to design criteria to include route evaluation, topography, drainage, size in relation to setbacks, roadway access, distances to residences/schools/businesses, existing trees, unique ecology, and sensitivity to cultural resources in conformance with the DDC, NERC CIP and NESC standards, Electric Service Standards, and other local, State, and/or Federal law. 
D.  A development plat shall be required for proposed substation, interchanges, and switch station sites in accordance with the requirements established in TLGC, Ch. 211; Subchapter B, Municipal Code of Ordinances; and the DDC. 
E.  Unobstructed and adequate space shall be provided for all clearance areas required by this section that will allow ingress and egress for utility-related personnel and equipment to perform operations, maintenance and replacement of electric supply and communication lines. Such clearance provision shall be included in the design and construction when real property is developed or altered. Such clearance areas shall be recorded by the property developer or by the record owner on subdivision plats; or shall be evidenced by written instrument, duly recorded, in the Public Records of Denton County, Texas. 
F.  Regulations contained herein are intended to supplement any regulations contained in the Municipal Code of Ordinances, Chapter 26: Utilities, and not to replace such existing regulations.  
7.13.4 - Overhead Electric Transmission Line Clearance. 
A.  New Electric Transmission Lines. 
1.  69kV Transmission Lines. A minimum of 60-foot wide electric transmission clearance is required on real property affected by 69kV electric transmission lines, said clearance shall be a minimum of 30 feet from either side of the centerline of the particular transmission pole(s). Clearance criteria in the National Electric Safety Code may require greater clearance widths in some instances. 
2.  138kV Transmission Lines. A minimum of 75-foot wide electric transmission clearance is required on real property affected by 138kV electric transmission lines, said clearance shall be a minimum of 37.5 feet from either side of the centerline of the particular transmission pole(s). Clearance criteria in the National Electric Safety Code may require greater clearance widths in some instances. 
B.  Existing Electric Transmission Lines. 
1.  For existing transmission lines and for transmission lines being constructed or reconstructed in developed areas, the utility may elect to perform NESC analysis and calculations to determine if safe and adequate reduced clearance widths can be utilized in lieu of the standard sixty- and seventy-five-foot widths as stated above. 
2.  Trees adjacent to overhead electric distribution lines shall comply with paragraph 7.7.7F.7: Trees Adjacent to Overhead Electric Utilities.  
7.13.5 - Overhead Electric Distribution Line Clearance. 
A.  New Electric Distribution Lines. 
1.  13.2kV/7.62kV Grounded Wye. A minimum of 35-foot wide electric distribution clearance is required on real property affected by 13.2kV/7.62kV Grounded Wye electric distribution lines, said clearance shall be a minimum of 17.5 feet from either side of the centerline of the particular distribution pole(s). Clearance criteria in the National Electrical Safety Code may require greater clearance widths in some instances. Additional electric distribution service and clearance requirements are further defined within the Electric Service Standards. 
B.  Existing Electric Distribution Lines. 
1.  For existing distribution lines and for distribution lines being constructed or reconstructed in developed areas, the utility may elect to perform NESC analysis and calculations to determine that safe and adequate reduced clearance widths can be utilized in lieu of the standard 35 foot width state above. 
2.  Trees adjacent to overhead electric distribution lines shall comply with Subsection 7.7.7F.7: Trees Adjacent to Overhead Electric Utilities.  
7.13.6 - Electric Easement Requirements. 
In all cases where primary electric lines which will feed adjacent properties are installed on private property, the following standards shall prevail: 
A.  All easements shall be dedicated as public utility easements and shall be sized per Table 7.13-L, Table 7.13-M, Table 7.13-N. The general criteria to define typical easement widths and sizes are listed in the following tables: 
Table 7.13-L: Typical Overhead Electric Line Easement Widths 
Line Type 	Along Lot Frontage 	Through Interior of Lot 
138 KV Transmission Lines 	As required to accommodate clearance specified in Section 7.13.4 	75 feet (Line to be centered in easement) 
69 KV Transmission Lines 	As required to accommodate clearance specified in Section 7.13.4 	60 feet (Line to be centered in easement) 
13.2 KV Distribution 	As required to accommodate clearance specified in Section 7.13.5 (Not required when clearance is accommodated by building setback) 	35 feet (Line to be centered in easement) 
 
Table 7.13-M: Typical Underground Electric Line Easement Widths 
Line Type 	Along Lot Frontage 	Through Interior of Lot 
13.2 KV Distribution 	8 feet (Line typically installed 3-4' from R.O.W. line) 	16 feet (Line typically installed 3-4' from edge of easement) 
13.2 KV Distribution Duct Bank (Multiple Feeders) 	20 feet (Duct bank typically centered in easement) 	20 feet (Duct bank typically centered in easement) 
Transmission Duct Banks 	20 feet 	20 feet 
 
Table 7.13-N: Typical Pad-Mounted Electric Equipment Easement Sizes 
Equipment Type 	Equipment Easement 
Single Phase Distribution Transformer 	10 feet by 10 feet 
Three Phase Distribution Transformer 	16 feet by 16 feet 
Distribution Switchgear 	18 feet by 30 feet 
Other Pad-Mounted Equipment 	As Needed 
 
B.  Easement widths and sizes are subject to change at the discretion of Denton Municipal Electric (DME) in accordance with the applicable criteria manual. 
C.  DME may allow a utility easement to be dedicated within a fire lane for underground electric distribution lines in some cases, provided that equipment easements are dedicated outside of the fire lane for pad-mounted equipment. 
Figure 7.13-A: Equipment Easement Location
 
D.  Fences within utility easements are generally prohibited, subject to the following: 
1.  Fences shall not be built within or across dedicated utility or electric easements. DME, at their discretion, may allow fences to be built across an easement if access gates at least 12 feet wide are built. 
2.  Any existing fence located within dedicated utility or electric easements that conflicts with the purpose and intent of the easement may be removed by the city at any time. 
3.  The city is under no obligation to repair or replace any fence that is damaged or removed that encroaches within a dedicated easement for the purposes of operating, maintaining, replacing or installing electric facilities within the dedicated easement. 
E.  Employees of the city shall have the authority to enter premises at any reasonable time in the regular line of duty for the purpose of inspecting, repairing or constructing any electric line or any electric meter, etc. The landowner and occupant are responsible for any construction activities occurring over or within any on-site utility in a utility easement. 
F.  If utility inspection or repair or reconstruction is necessary, any pavement, structure, or improvement damaged within a dedicated utility or electric easement, shall not be the responsibility of the city for any repairs, but shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. 
G.  The landowner assumes responsibility for any and all improvements placed within a utility or electric easement at their own risk. Additionally, the provisions of this section do not permit or supersede the limits and restrictions prescribed by the conditions of any existing utility easement for allowing improvements to be placed within utility easements. 
H.  The following shall not be installed or planted within a utility or electric easement without approval by the city: 
1.  Trees; and 
2.  Any structures, including retaining walls and signs. No part of a structure, including its underground foundation, shall encroach into an easement. 
I.  The following items are typically allowed to be installed within a utility or electric easements: 
1.  Drive approaches and parking lots (alignment within drive aisles is preferred); 
2.  Sidewalks; and 
3.  Grass and small shrubbery.  
7.13.7 - Electric Substation, Interchange, and Switch Station Design. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  Standards in this subsection require a basic level of architectural variety, compatible scale, and mitigation of negative impacts. 
2.  Where the following provisions are silent, the regulations of Subchapter 7: Development Standards, will apply. 
B.  Screening. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  All screening shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in NERC and NESC. However, to the extent this DDC provides a stricter requirement, this DDC controls. 
b.  Screening is required to obstruct, to the greatest extent possible, internal substation or switch station components from view of the public rights-of-way. This does not require screening of structures, equipment, or buildings that exceed 10 feet in height. 
2.  Screening Wall. A minimum 10-foot masonry wall is required around the perimeter of the substation, interchange, or switch station to screen the view from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. 
3.  Landscaping. 
a.  Trees or any other landscaping shall not be placed within 20 feet of station fences (clearance zone of section G. below). 
b.  Landscaping shall not interfere with the physical security of the site. 
4.  Gates. 
a.  Gates shall be provided at all entrances. 
b.  Wrought Iron or similar metal gate material shall be permitted. 
C.  Buffering. Buffers are required to minimize potential nuisances such as noise, light, glare, and litter between electric stations and other abutting land uses. Station site expansions are not required to provide space for buffers. Buffering shall not be required when it would compromise station security. Trees shall not be required within clearance zones. 
1.  Substations or switch stations abutting any property other than an industrial zoning district, shall provide a 20-foot planted strip along the common boundary that includes a combination of five evergreen and deciduous trees and 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet. 
2.  When located within the clearance zones, low growing shrubs with a maximum mature height of 24 inches shall be used to meet the requirements of this section. 
3.  Buffering shall not be required when a substation, interchange, or switch station abuts property in an industrial zoning district. 
4.  Streets and easements shall be considered as buffer. 
D.  Street Tree Standards. 
1.  Street trees are required in accordance with Subsection 7.7.7, Street Tree Requirements. 
2.  Street lights may be used in lieu of any required street trees provided they are of the same number and spacing required. 
E.  Tree Canopy Coverage. Tree canopy coverage is required in accordance with Subsection 7.7.4, but shall not be located within the clearance zone as prescribed in Subsection 7.13.7G. In determining the landscape area for the site, only the area located outside the screening wall, clearance zone prescribed in Subsection 7.13.7G, and any transmission easements shall be considered. 
F.  Access and Transportation. Access and transportation into and around the site should be provided to minimize the impacts on adjacent properties, intersections, and the overall street system. Access to the site should be carefully considered to limit the number of entrances that allow greater visibility into the site, while simultaneously allowing for adequate maneuvering of trucks and other heavy equipment necessary to construct, operate, and maintain the site. The following access and transportation standards shall be applicable. 
1.  Driveways shall be located on the perimeter streets of the lowest classification unless the only reasonable means of providing safe and adequate access to the property, as determined by the City Engineer, is to access a street of higher classification. 
2.  To the extent possible, driveways shall be located so as not to be directly across from the front yards of residential structures or uses, unless otherwise agreed to by the Director of Development Services or his/her designee. 
3.  No more than two driveways shall be located on each perimeter street. 
4.  Driveway separation is subject to the Transportation Criteria Manual. Due to unique access, large vehicular, and trailer turning radius requirements for electric stations, driveway geometry may differ from the Transportation Criteria Manual requirements. 
5.  Driveways shall be constructed of concrete from the back of edge of the curb to the entrance gate of the site. Gravel is not a permitted driveway material for any driveway outside of the site's perimeter screening wall, unless approved by the City Engineer due to the substation's distance from the roadway. 
6.  Sidewalks shall be required in accordance with Section 7.8: Access and Circulation, and the Transportation Criteria Manual. Enlarging of substation sites shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section. 
G.  Clearance Zones. 
1.  A 20-foot clearance zone around the perimeter screening wall free of visual obstructions and climbing aids is required to protect the security and safety of the site. 
2.  Any landscaping that could be used as a climbing aid shall not be placed within 20 feet of a substation fence. 
H.  Miscellaneous Standards. Development shall comply with this DDC and the NESC and/or NERC standards as applicable and as amended: 
1.  Height; 
2.  Noise; 
3.  Voltage Limitations: 
4.  Warning Signs; 
5.  Lighting; 
6.  Internal Illumination; 
7.  Vibration; 
8.  Electric Interference; and 
9.  Other development standards established by NESC and/or NERC as amended. 
I.  Minor Modifications. Minor modifications on a site plan may be approved by the Director pursuant to Subsection 2.7.2: Minor Modification.  
Subchapter 8 - Subdivisions  
8.1 - Purpose 
This subchapter establishes standards that regulate the subdivision of property in order to: 
8.1.1 Facilitate the orderly growth and harmonious development of the city and to protect and promote public health, safety, and welfare; 
8.1.2 Provide lots and parcels of sufficient size and appropriate design for the purposes for which they are to be used; 
8.1.3 Protect the natural environment; 
8.1.4 Promote the use of good design, landscape architecture, and civil engineering to preserve and enhance natural features, watercourses, drainage ways, floodplains, native vegetation, and trees; 
8.1.5 Provide safe ingress and egress for vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
8.1.6 Ensure safe and efficient traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, adjoining streets, and public facilities; 
8.1.7 Provide adequate water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage and other utilities and facilities; 
8.1.8 Provide for adequate sites for schools, recreation areas, and other public purposes; 
8.1.9 Protect or enhance real property values; 
8.1.10 Facilitate the transfer of lands having accurate legal descriptions and to establish and assure the rights, duties and responsibilities of subdividers and developers with respect to land development; 
8.1.11 Ensure that the costs of providing the necessary rights-of-way, street improvements, utilities and public areas and facilities for new developments are borne fairly and equitably; 
8.1.12 Encourage the clustering of dwellings and other structures to preserve open space, minimize adverse visual impacts, minimize public infrastructure costs, and prevent public safety hazards; and 
8.1.13 Provide a common ground of understanding and an equitable working relationship between public and private interests, so that both independent and mutual objectives can be achieved in the subdivision of land.  
8.2 - Applicability 
 
8.2.1 - Regulatory Jurisdiction. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  This subchapter shall apply to all land and all developments within the regulatory jurisdiction of the City of Denton, except as otherwise provided for in this subchapter. 
2.  The regulatory jurisdiction of the city shall be defined as follows: 
a.  The area within the corporate limits of the city; 
b.  The area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city, provided that regulatory authority has not been ceded pursuant to agreement or operation of law; and 
c.  Any other area to which the provisions of this subchapter are made applicable in accordance with and as permitted by federal, state or local law. 
B.  Land Included. Except where otherwise specifically provided for in this subchapter, all the provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the following lands located within the regulatory jurisdiction of the city: 
1.  Any tract of land which has not been recorded by plat in the plat records of Denton County, Texas, and which is intended to be sold, leased, or otherwise subdivided from another tract of land or which is intended or proposed to be used for the purpose of development. 
2.  Any tract of land which has been recorded as a lot or block by plat in the plat records of Denton County, Texas; prior to and upon which no development has been constructed or placed prior to the effective date of this subchapter. 
3.  The division of any previously platted lot into two or more parts. 
4.  The removal of one or more lot lines of any platted lot so as to permit the combining of two or more contiguous platted lots into one or more new lots.  
8.2.2 - Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. 
A.  Official Regulatory Map. 
1.  The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Denton is classified into two divisions as indicated on the City of Denton Extraterritorial Jurisdiction map on file in the Development Services Department. 
2.  The Development Services Department is directed to consider amendments to the regulatory line map whenever the certificate of public convenience and necessity for water and wastewater services is amended by the state or when directed by the City Council. Any amendments shall not be effective until the revised regulatory line map is approved by the City Council. 
B.  Division 1. All subdivisions and developments within Division 1 are subject to all of the standards of this subchapter. 
C.  Division 2. Subdivisions and developments within Division 2 are not subject to the standards of this subchapter, but shall be subject to the standards of the County of Denton and state law, as amended.  
8.2.3 - Exemptions. 
A.  Prior to the subdivision, re-subdivision, or development of any land within the city, or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, all plans, plats, and construction plans for public improvements shall first be approved in accordance with these regulations, except as provided in paragraph B. below. 
B.  The following are exempt from the subdivision regulations of this subchapter, but are subject to all other standards in this DDC: 
1.  The division of land into two or more parts, other than for purposes of development, if the smallest resulting parcels, tract or site is five acres or larger in size where each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated. 
2.  Development on a single tract which was subdivided prior to January 1, 1960, and for which extension of streets or public improvements (excluding sidewalks) are not required to support the proposed development. 
3.  Construction of additions or alterations to an existing building where no drainage, street, utility extension or improvement, additional parking or street access changes required to meet the standards of this subchapter are necessary to support such building addition or alterations. 
4.  Construction of accessory structures or fences. 
5.  Dedication of easement or right-of-way by separate document recordable in the county records if approved by city. 
6.  Cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations. 
7.  Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
8.  A change in ownership of a property through inheritance or the probate of an estate. 
9.  Construction or reconstruction of a single-family residential structure in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, provided no utility extensions or right-of-way dedications are necessary. 
10.  Development of an agricultural use.  
8.2.4 - Compliance and Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to begin, continue, or complete any development on any land within the regulatory jurisdiction of the city to which the provisions of this subchapter applies, except in accordance with and upon compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. 
B.  Except as otherwise authorized by this subchapter, the city shall not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy required by any subchapter of the city for any land located within the corporate limits to which this subchapter applies, until and unless there is compliance with this subchapter. 
C.  The city may refuse to authorize or make utility connections on the grounds set forth in TLGC, § 212.012, as amended. 
D.  No improvements shall be initiated until the approval of the city has been given. Disapproval of a final plat by the city shall be deemed a refusal by the city to accept offered dedications shown thereon. 
E.  Approval of a final plat shall not be deemed an acceptance of the proposed dedications and shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning the maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the city have both given their written acceptance of the improvements and have actually appropriated the same by entry, use, or improvements.  
8.2.5 - Platting Requirements. 
A.  Division of Property. 
1.  No land may be subdivided or platted through the use of any legal description other than with reference to a plat approved pursuant to the procedures established in Section 2.5: Subdivision Procedures, and in accordance with the standards in this DDC. 
2.  Excepting agricultural leases, no land described in this subchapter shall be platted or sold, leased, transferred, or developed until the property owner has obtained approval of the applicable plat pursuant to the procedures established in Section 2.5: Subdivision Procedures, and in accordance with the standards in this DDC. 
3.  No person shall transfer, lease, sell, or receive any portion of a parcel of land before a conveyance plat or final plat of such parcel and the remaining parcel has been approved pursuant to the procedures established in Section 2.5: Subdivision Procedures, in accordance with the standards in this DDC, and filed with the county clerk. 
4.  The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land, by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, lease or development is prohibited. 
B.  Permits for Construction Activity or Public Improvements. The city shall not issue permits for any construction activity or allow any public improvements for a development until a plat is approved and filed of record and all public improvements have been accepted (if applicable) except as provided in Section 8.2: Applicability, or for a plot or tract conveyed prior to January 1, 1960, and remaining in the same configuration, or for the following: 
1.  Model Homes. A developer may construct no more than four model homes within a single-family detached, duplex, or townhome development phase containing public improvements that have not yet been finally accepted, provided that: 
a.  All off-site, drainage or regional improvements have been installed, inspected and accepted; 
b.  Each model home is inspected and found to meet all building, plumbing and fire code requirements prior to being opened to observation by the public; 
c.  The home will not be sold or occupied as a dwelling unit until all public improvements within that phase have been completed and accepted by the city; and 
d.  The homes comply with Section 7.3: Land-Disturbing Activities. 
2.  Multifamily or Nonresidential Development. Upon application and satisfaction of the following conditions, together with other DDC, City Ordinance, and Criteria Manual requirements, otherwise applicable to full building permits, the Building Official may issue a building permit for multifamily or nonresidential development to allow for limited construction subject to the following: 
a.  The applicant shall complete installation of all drainage and other regional improvements, including off-site improvements. This requirement may be satisfied by constructing temporary drainage improvements (such as detention ponds) that, in the opinion of the City Engineer, are adequate to offset the decrease in permeable surface of the permitted phase of development and prevent harm to downstream properties, pending completion and acceptance of required permanent regional improvements for drainage. 
b.  The applicant must enter into an agreement with the city, in a form approved by the City Attorney, which indemnifies and holds the city harmless for any failure of the applicant, owner, or builder to obtain necessary access and drainage easements and permits, or to build needed offsite improvements; and 
c.  A building permit issued in this manner may be withdrawn upon failure to meet any imposed condition, as set forth in Section 1.6: Enforcement. 
d.  The applicant shall install and demonstrate proper function of fire hydrants and all-weather access improvements for fire apparatus required by the Fire Code and Chapter 29 of the Municipal Code of Ordinances, prior to any construction above slab. 
e.  The applicant complies with Section 7.3: Land-Disturbing Activities.  
8.3 - Subdivision Design 
 
8.3.1 - General. 
A.  Every subdivision shall comply with all other ordinances and regulations of the City and the TLGC. 
B.  Public infrastructure shall be constructed in accordance with City of Denton Criteria Manuals or, if no standard or specification can be found, then the standard or specification used shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer based on professional engineering practices. 
C.  The applicant shall make all required improvements, at his/her expense, according to city regulations, without reimbursement by the city, except for certain reimbursable costs as provided in Subsections 7.6.14 and 7.6.15, or as determined as a result of an exaction proportionality determination and appeal under Section 2.5.6.  
8.3.2 - Lot Planning. 
A.  General. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the location of the proposed subdivision and to the type of development contemplated. The following lot design standards shall apply to all subdivisions: 
1.  All lots created through the subdivision process shall be developable and conform to the minimum zoning, development, and floodplain standards stated in this DDC. No subdivision shall create lots that prohibit development due to configuration of the lots, steepness of terrain, location of watercourses or floodplain, natural physical conditions, or other existing conditions, except when in conflict with ESA regulations. 
2.  The minimum area and dimensions of all lots shall conform to the requirements of Subchapter 3: Zoning Districts, and Subchapter 6: Development Standards, relating to the zoning district in which the lot is located. This subsection does not apply to planned developments. Modifications may be granted pursuant to Subsection 8.3.2D of this subsection. 
3.  Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to street lines, except where other terrain makes such design impractical. 
4.  Double frontage lots may be allowed; however, driveways are only permitted on one frontage. 
5.  Flag lots and other irregularly shaped lots are discouraged. 
6.  Corner lots may be required to be wider than interior lots to facilitate conformance with setback requirements. 
7.  The city, county, school district, or other taxing agency boundary shall not divide a lot except in conformance with this DDC. 
8.  Each residential lot shall have a minimum of 15 feet of frontage along an existing or proposed public street except as provided in paragraph 8.3.2C.2. 
9.  Each mixed-use and nonresidential lot shall have a minimum 20 feet of frontage along an existing or proposed public street. 
10.  Refer to Section 7.10.3C: Open Space Requirements, for common open space requirements for single-family detached dwelling, duplex, townhome, triplex, or fourplex developments. 
B.  Drainage. Lots shall be designed and located to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and shall comply with the standards in Section 7.5: Drainage. 
C.  Access. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  Each lot shall be provided with adequate access to an existing or proposed public street. 
b.  Development adjacent to existing public streets shall include the required improvements in accordance with the city's perimeter street policy and in accordance with TLGC, § 212.904. 
c.  At least two points of vehicular access into the proposed subdivision shall be provided, where feasible, unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that legal, topographical, and/or engineering constraints preclude such access. 
2.  Single-Family Residential Private Drive. 
a.  Up to three single-family detached or townhome residential dwelling units may access a public road by means of a flag drive within a private access easement as provided in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
b.  Each residential lot shall have a minimum of 15 feet of frontage on the private access easement. 
Figure 8.3-A: Single Family Residential Private Drive
 
3.  Mixed-Use and Nonresidential Drives. 
a.  Lots within a subdivision or addition that is surrounded by developed property making it unfeasible to provide street connectivity, do not have to abut a public street if such lots have access to a public street by a public access and fire lane easement approved by the city. 
b.  Such easement shall be at least 24 feet wide and constructed, marked, and maintained to meet the standards for parking lots as contained in the Transportation Design Criteria Manual and for fire lanes as contained in the Fire Code. 
c.  The stacking requirements for public streets shall apply to the public access and fire lane easement at the point where it intersects with a public street. 
d.  In addition, the public access and fire lane easement shall be considered a driveway or curb cut access to the public street for all such lots. 
e.  Each nonresidential lot shall have a minimum 20 feet of frontage on the public access and fire lane easement. 
4.  Drilling and Production Site Access. Truck traffic related to gas well drilling and production shall not be allowed to use a plat's neighborhood streets to access a gas well drilling and production site. In addition, no plat shall be allowed to eliminate or alter an access road or easement depicted on a gas well development plat or gas well development site plan, unless written consent of the gas well operator is obtained and a separate access road or easement on the plat is provided for access to a drilling and production site. 
D.  Common Area and Facilities. Such areas shall be noted on the plat and the association's covenants shall be filed with the county pursuant to Subsection 8.3.6J. Alternatively, other arrangements for permanent maintenance of these areas and facilities may be approved by the decision-making body. 
E.  Flag Lots. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this DDC, the width of the flagpole portion of a flag-shaped lot shall be no less than: 
a.  Thirty feet when both public water and sewer systems are to serve such a residential lot. 
b.  Forty feet when both public water and sewer systems are to serve such a commercial or industrial lot. 
c.  Twenty-four feet when only a public water or a public sewer system is to serve such a lot. 
d.  Twenty-four feet when the lot will not be served by a public water or public sewer system. 
2.  The flagpole portion of the lot shall be ignored in measuring lot width. 
3.  The length of the flag pole portion of the lot shall not exceed 300 feet and shall comply with all other standards and measurements of this DDC and other regulating agencies. 
4.  Flag lots where the length of the flag pole portion exceeds 150 feet shall provide a permanent turn-a-round approved by the City Engineer and the Denton Fire Department.  
8.3.3 - Block Layout. 
A.  Block Length. Residential blocks shall not be less than 300 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length. The city may approve a longer block length when necessary to accommodate natural features such as steep slopes, environmentally sensitive lands, and pedestrian linkages. 
Figure 8.3-B: Block Length
 
B.  Block Arrangement. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of depth meeting the minimum requirements of this DDC, except where lots back onto a collector or greater street, natural feature, or subdivision boundary, or where lots face an approved cul-de-sac.  
8.3.4 - Cluster Subdivisions. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides optional standards for cluster subdivision development to protect sensitive lands and common open space areas and to implement the comprehensive plan and/or adopted area plans. A cluster subdivision is a residential subdivision in which some or all of the lots are allowed to be smaller in area and width, thus allowing flexibility in development density in those areas in exchange for permanent protection of common open space. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The cluster subdivision option is available in all residential districts as identified in Table 3.1-A: Zoning District Designations. 
2.  The minimum parcel size for a cluster subdivision shall be at least five acres. 
i.  This minimum parcel size does not apply for sites affected by Gas Well Reverse Setbacks as provided for in Subsection 6.2.6C.2. 
3.  All other standards in the DDC shall apply to cluster subdivisions unless modified by the cluster subdivision standards in this Subsection 8.3.4. 
4.  In the case of conflict between the provisions of Table 8.A: Cluster Subdivisions, and any other portion of this DDC, the provisions of this Table 8.A: Cluster Subdivisions, shall govern. 
C.  Review and Approval of Cluster Subdivisions. 
1.  Cluster subdivisions require approval of a planned development (PD) and shall be reviewed through the rezone to a planned development (PD) district procedure in Subsection 2.7.3: Rezone to a Planned Development (PD) District. 
a.  A PD is not required for cluster subdivision standards to be applied to sites affected by Gas Well Reverse Setbacks as provided for in Subsection 6.2.6C.2. 
2.  Cluster subdivisions shall be reviewed through the preliminary plat and final plat procedures in Section 2.6, Subdivision Procedures. 
D.  Cluster Subdivision Minimum Standards. The minimum standards for cluster subdivision lots are established in Table 8.A: Cluster Subdivisions below. The measurements and exceptions in Section 3.7, shall also apply to cluster subdivision lots unless otherwise stated in Table 8.A: Cluster Subdivisions. 
Table 8.A: Cluster Subdivisions 
Type of Standard 	Requirement 
Project Site Standards 
Subdivision size, minimum 	5 acres 
Block length, maximum 	600 feet 
Common open space, minimum 	30 percent of total site area 
Individual Lot Standards (minimum) 
Lot size 	2,500 square feet 
Lot width 	20 feet 
Building coverage 	Per underlying zoning district 
Setbacks (minimum)[1] 
Front 	5 feet if accommodation of at least two off-street parking spaces can be demonstrated. Otherwise, pursuant to the underlying zoning district. 
Side 	5 feet, except side yards adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be 6 feet. 
Rear 	5 feet for alley-loaded dwellings or dwellings developed with an auto court. Otherwise, pursuant to underlying zoning district. 
Notes: 
[1] Building envelopes shall be established on the final plat with any cluster subdivision. 
 
E.  Common Open Space. 
1.  Minimum Required. A minimum of 30 percent of the total site area of the cluster subdivision shall be set aside as common open space for the use of the site's residents and visitors. 
2.  Identification and Maintenance. 
a.  Common open space shall be identified on the final plat for a cluster subdivision, with a notation that indicates that those lands shall not be used for future development. 
b.  Common open space shall be identified on-site with appropriate permanent signage markers in order to distinguish these areas from private property. 
c.  Common open space shall be permanently maintained and preserved as: 
i.  Open space lots with deed restrictions; or 
ii.  Protected through a conservation easement; or 
iii.  Land dedicated and accepted to the city, at the city's sole discretion. 
d.  For any land not dedicated to the city, the developer shall provide a permanent mechanism acceptable to the City Attorney for the primary purpose of conservation, preservation, and management of protected/conserved lands. 
e.  There shall be no further subdivision of land in an area approved for cluster subdivision; however, dedication of easements for public utilities may be permitted. 
3.  Use of Common Open Space. 
a.  Common open space shall be used for low-intensity recreation, agriculture, buffers, critical wildlife habitat, or other passive park or open space purposes. A pond may also count towards the minimum common open space requirement. 
b.  The use of common open space may be further limited or controlled at the time of final approval where necessary to protect adjacent properties. 
4.  Design of Open Space. Land set aside for common open space shall meet the following design criteria, as relevant: 
a.  The lands shall be contiguous unless the land shall be used as a continuation of an existing trail, or specific topographic features require a different configuration. An example of such topographic features would be the provision of a trail or private open area along a riparian corridor. 
b.  Where open space areas, trails, parks, or other public spaces exist adjacent to the tract to be subdivided or developed, the common open space shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge the existing trail, park, or other open area land. 
c.  In larger projects, open space should flow through the site linking recreation facilities to dwellings with uninterrupted green belts. 
d.  If an ESA is preserved to meet the open space requirement, the land shall be left in an undisturbed natural state. Other open space shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 7.7, Landscaping, Screening, Buffering, and Fences. 
F.  Auto Courts. Auto courts may be considered as an alternative layout for cluster subdivisions. Up to four single-family units (attached or detached) may share a single driveway access to a public street using an auto court arrangement, provided the layout is approved with a preliminary plat pursuant to Subsection 2.6.3, Preliminary Plat. Additionally, auto courts shall comply with the following: 
1.  The surface of the shared driveway in the auto court shall be at least 20 feet wide and shall be surfaced with concrete or other permeable paving approved by the Director. 
2.  Individual driveways leading from the shared driveway to each dwelling unit shall be at least 20 feet long, as measured from the front of the garage or carport to the closest edge of the shared driveway. 
3.  The shared driveway shall be designed to comply with the standards of the Transportation Criteria Manual. 
4.  The auto court design shall comply with the applicable off-street parking requirements. 
5.  Maintenance and repair of auto courts shall be the responsibility of a property owners association or adjacent property owners. The city shall approve provisions for maintenance and repair during the subdivision review process. 
6.  Parking on the shared driveway shall be prohibited and shall be clearly marked as such. 
7.  The auto court access shall be from a standard-width street and the applicant shall demonstrate that there is adequate guest parking available on the street. 
8.  The auto court shall comply with all other city standards including fire and emergency access, and utility provisions. 
Figure 8.3-C: Auto Courts
 
(Ord. No. DCA19-0009c, § 2(Exh. C), 11-19-2019)  
8.3.5 - Gas Well Notification Disclosure. 
A plat that proposes single-family or multifamily residential lots that will be within 1,000 feet of one or more drilling and production sites, except for those drilling and production sites and their subsurface mineral interests which are eliminated through plugging and abandonment, the developer shall be required to provide all of the following disclosure notifications to all lot purchasers: 
A.  A note shall be placed on the plat identifying the drilling and production site(s) and those proposed lots that are within 1,000 feet of the drilling and production site(s). Said note shall also include a statement that advises lot purchasers of the existence of producing wells on the drilling and production site(s), the possibility of new wells that may be drilled and fracture stimulated on the drilling and production site(s), as well as the possibility that gas wells on the drilling and production site(s) may be re-drilled and/or re-fracture stimulated in the future. 
B.  There shall be depicted on the plat, and on a lot survey submitted as part of a building permit application, the location of the drilling and production site(s) in relation to the lots that are within 1,000 feet of a drilling and production site(s). 
C.  A provision shall be included in the declaration of restrictive covenants that advises lot purchasers of the existence of producing wells on the drilling and production site(s), the possibility that new wells may be drilled and fracture stimulated on the drilling and production site(s), as well as the possibility that gas wells on the drilling and production site(s) may be re-drilled and/or re-fracture stimulated in the future. 
D.  A notice document that advises lot purchasers of the existence of producing wells on the drilling and production site(s), the possibility that new wells may be drilled and fracture stimulated on the drilling and production site(s), as well as the possibility that gas wells on the drilling and production site(s) may be re-drilled and/or re-fracture stimulated in the future, shall be recorded with the Denton County Clerk's Office. 
E.  The form of the disclosure notifications required in paragraphs C. and D. above shall be approved by the City Attorney.  
8.3.6 - Gated Community. 
A gated community may be approved only through the planned development (PD) procedures in Subsection 2.7.3, Rezone to a Planned Development (PD) District. All gated communities are subject to the following standards: 
A.  Criteria Manuals. All public infrastructure within a gated community shall be constructed in accordance with City of Denton Criteria Manuals unless specific exceptions to such manuals is approved by the City Engineer during the gated community PD rezoning approval process. 
B.  Access. 
1.  All gated communities shall have a minimum of one point of access to a public street, and an alternative emergency access for emergency service vehicles if only one public access point is provided. 
2.  Turnouts or turnarounds for the public shall be provided outside the gated perimeter, pursuant to the guidelines of the Transportation Design Criteria Manual. 
3.  Turnout or turnaround areas shall be dedicated by the developer as public access easements, or as part of the public right-of-way, and shall be maintained by the developer where they are easements. 
4.  Any private street that has an access control gate or cross arm must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of 22 feet at the location of the access control device. If an overhead barrier is used, it must be a minimum of 14 feet in height above the road surface. 
5.  All gates and cross arms must be of a breakaway design. 
6.  The Fire Chief, or his designated representative, shall approve the installation of access gates, which shall meet Fire Code requirements for emergency operation, and shall be maintained at all times by the homeowner's association (HOA). 
7.  The HOA shall provide keypads and codes, as well as a receiver and mechanism designed to open gates automatically in response to a remote traffic signal preemption device meeting the specifications of emergency service providers, at all gates into the community. 
8.  In the event that at any time any gate does not promptly and automatically open for an emergency vehicle utilizing a traffic signal preemption device, the emergency responders shall be privileged to remove, disable or destroy any locking device, gate or piece of a gate in order to gain access. The deed restrictions shall recognize and incorporate this requirement, and further hold the City and its emergency providers harmless from any and all claims or damages arising from the HOA's failure to maintain the gate to this standard or for the removal or destruction of such gates or devices. 
9.  The HOA shall provide non-emergency access codes to solid waste providers, the Electric Utility, the Water Utility and Wastewater Utility Maintenance Department franchised utilities, and the US Postal Service. 
C.  Fencing Adjacent to Entry Gates. 
1.  On lots adjacent to entry gates, fences may exceed 40 inches in height, up to a maximum of eight feet within the side yard setback. 
2.  Such fences must be constructed of wrought iron with brick columns. No solid fencing panels will be allowed. 
D.  Streets. 
1.  Private Streets. 
a.  All streets and alleys in a gated community shall be private streets. 
b.  Private streets shall meet all requirements and standards for public streets. 
c.  Gated communities shall not be allowed to obstruct any existing arterial street or proposed arterial street as shown on the City Mobility Plan. 
d.  Streets shown on the Mobility Plan shall not be gated or private streets. 
e.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend the denial of the creation of any other private street if, in the Commission's judgment, the private street would negatively affect vehicular or pedestrian traffic circulation on public streets, or impair access to property (either on-site or off-site), to the subdivision, access to or from public facilities (including schools, parks and libraries), or the response time of emergency vehicles. 
f.  The city shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street. 
2.  Private Street Lot. 
a.  Private streets and alleys must be constructed within a separate lot owned by the property owners association. This lot must conform to all of the city's standards for a public street and/or alley right-of-way. 
b.  An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the city and franchised utilities, providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and maintenance. 
c.  The easement shall provide the city with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function. 
d.  The easement shall permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs emergency access. 
3.  Maintenance and Reconstruction. The city is not responsible for reconstruction or full depth repair to the private street. The city will follow customary practices in backfilling and repaving repaired sections of private streets after a utility repair, utilizing the least cost solution, with no further obligation of future maintenance for the repair, and no obligation to rebuild or repair pavements to any preexisting design or appearance, if different from the city's ordinary repair standards for public streets. Alternatively, the HOA may elect to privately undertake one or more aspects of the backfilling and pavement repair, and the city may participate in the funding of such private repairs, but only to the extent of any repair costs avoided by such private repairs. 
E.  Water and Sewer. 
1.  All water and sewer mains that serve inside the gated community and are located within public utility easements shall be dedicated to the city prior to approval of the final plat, and shall be publicly owned and maintained. 
2.  All water and sewer mains and associated appurtenances shall be designed and built according to city standards. 
3.  Public water and sewer mains and facilities shall be located within a public utility easement or other adequate water and sewer easement dedicated to the city. 
4.  Water meters and sanitary sewer cleanouts shall be located within a public utility easement and outside of the paved portion of the private street. 
F.  Street Lighting. 
1.  Street lighting on private streets is required to meet the design standards of the city and shall be installed and maintained by the HOA at no cost to the city. 
2.  Luminaries, fixtures, poles, foundations, conduit, wiring, appurtenances, and any other ancillary items associated with street lighting shall be owned, operated, and maintained by the HOA. 
3.  All energy costs will be metered and invoiced to the HOA under the appropriate rate schedule. 
4.  The HOA shall be solely responsible to obtain and pay for power needed to illuminate street lighting. 
G.  Electric Utility Infrastructure. 
1.  All electric facilities that serve inside the gated community shall be owned and maintained by the utility provider. 
2.  All electric facilities shall be designed, built, and operated according to the standards of the utility provider. 
3.  Electric utility infrastructure shall be located within a public utility easement or other adequate easement dedicated to the city. 
H.  Solid Waste Requirements. 
1.  Residential solid waste collection service shall be provided from the front of the property at the curbside of the private streets. 
2.  For residential dwellings with rear entry garages, the solid waste collection service may be provided from the alley, if the alley is designed to provide adequate turning radii for all solid waste collection trucks and if the house address number is visible from the alley. 
3.  All residential refuse collection criteria, as listed within the city's ordinances, shall apply to gated communities. 
4.  In the event that a vehicular access gate is not operable and access is not available for solid waste collection vehicles, the Solid Waste Department shall continue on with the normal progression of their daily route, and report the inaccessibility of the area to customer service. 
I.  Drainage Requirements. The developer is responsible for the installation of the stormwater system to city standards, and the HOA is responsible for maintenance of the stormwater system. 
1.  Minor Drainage System. 
a.  The minor drainage system includes the entire storm drainage collection systems within the streets, ditches and channels within the gated community that collect surface drainage originating from within the spatial boundaries of the gated community. 
b.  The minor drainage system also includes all drainage systems within the gated community that collect drainage from offsite areas up to three acres. 
c.  Drainage easements for the minor drainage system shall be consistent with this DDC and the City's Criteria Manuals, and shall be dedicated on the final plat. 
d.  The minor drainage system shall be maintained by the HOA, and the city has no obligation for the inspection or maintenance of this system. 
e.  Physical connection points shall be established between the minor and major drainage systems as described herein, that will be used to establish the physical limits for maintenance responsibilities. 
2.  Major Drainage System. 
a.  The major drainage system provides for the conveyance of stormwater runoff through the gated community, originating from any area outside of the gated community greater than three acres. 
b.  To provide for the major drainage system, green space or open space areas and floodplain areas shall be reserved for stormwater detention, retention, or conveyance of drainage. These areas shall be dedicated by simple deed as separate lots, with ownership to be retained by the HOA. The entire lot or a portion thereof shall be dedicated on the final plat as a drainage easement or as a drainage and detention easement, as appropriate. 
c.  The plat shall include dedication language stating that the drainage easement, or drainage and detention easement, will be reserved for the conveyance of drainage or floodwaters, and shall remain open at all times and maintained by the HOA in a safe and sanitary condition. 
d.  The city will not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of said lots or easements, or for any damage to private property or person that results from conditions in the lots or easements, or for the control of erosion. 
e.  No obstructions to the natural flow of stormwater run-off shall be permitted by construction of any type of building, fence or any other structure within the drainage easement or drainage and detention easement, as herein above defined, unless approved by the city. 
f.  The HOA shall keep the drainage easement or drainage and detention easement clear and free of debris, silt, and any substance that would result in unsanitary conditions or obstruct the flow of water. 
g.  The city shall have the right of ingress and egress to inspect and supervise maintenance by the HOA, or to optionally alleviate any undesirable conditions that may occur. 
h.  The city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to enter upon the lot or drainage or drainage and detention easement to remove any obstruction to the flow of water, after giving the HOA written notice of such obstruction, upon failure of the HOA to remove such obstruction. The city shall be reimbursed by the HOA for reasonable costs for labor, materials, and equipment in each such instance. 
i.  Any easement dedication shall conform to the provisions of TLGC, § 212.904. 
J.  Homeowners Association (HOA) Required. Documents establishing the HOA shall be submitted as part of the final plat application, providing for the maintenance, repair and/or replacement obligations of the HOA for private roads, alleys, gates, fences, street lighting, drainage items and/or other like held facilities and/or common areas, their appurtenances and/or other associated ancillary items and improvements, shall be incorporated into the final plat. 
1.  The HOA shall provide for the power to file a lien, to foreclose, or to otherwise secure payment from homeowners for the maintenance, repair and replacement, in part or in whole, of all privately held common areas, including but not limited to, drainage items, street lighting, and other appurtenances or associated ancillary items. 
2.  The association documents shall be submitted to, reviewed by, and approved by the City Attorney prior to final plat approval. 
3.  The covenants and restrictions documents shall indicate that the streets in the subdivision are private and are maintained by a Homeowners Association, that they are not public, and that the city has no obligation to maintain them. 
4.  The covenants and restrictions shall also state that the city has no obligation to inspect the streets or drainage in the gated community. 
5.  The covenants and restrictions documents shall indicate that the subdivision final plat, property deeds and home owner association restrictive covenants that certain city services shall not be provided on private streets. Among the services that will not be provided are: routine police patrols, enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and preparation of accident reports. All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Depending on the characteristics of the proposed development, other services may not be provided. 
6.  The covenants and restrictions shall also state that the city has no obligation to inspect the streets in the gated community. 
7.  The Homeowners Association may not be dissolved, nor may deed restrictions and covenants providing for maintenance of common areas be deleted or amended, without the prior written consent of the Planning and Zoning Commission, by way of a plat amendment. 
8.  The final plat and restrictive covenants shall contain language whereby the Homeowners' Association, as owner of various private improvements within a private street, lot or easement, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city from claims and suits for property damage or bodily injury (including death) arising from the condition, use or operation of any privately-owned streets or facilities.  
8.4 - Subdivision Improvements 
 
8.4.1 - Purpose. 
This section establishes the minimum acceptable standards for improvement of streets and utilities. All improvements in streets or easements which are required as a condition to plat approval shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.  
8.4.2 - Compliance Required. 
A.  In addition to satisfying Section 7.6: Water and Wastewater, and all applicable City Criteria Manuals, the applicant shall demonstrate the ability to satisfy the requirements set forth herein prior to development, at each stage of the platting process, including applications for preliminary plats, and final plats. 
B.  The city may deny a preliminary plat if the applicant cannot demonstrate the ability to satisfy these requirements, the requirements of Section 7.6: Water and Wastewater, and applicable City Criteria Manuals, prior to approval.  
8.4.3 - Cost of Improvements and City Participation. 
The applicant shall make all required improvements, at his expense, according to city regulations, without reimbursement by the city, except for certain reimbursable costs as provided in Subsections 7.6.14 and 7.6.15, or as determined as a result of an exaction proportionality determination and appeal under Subsection 2.5.6.  
8.4.4 - Applicant to Extend Mains and Streets to Subdivisions. 
A.  If the existing city mains and/or streets are not within or adjacent to a subdivision, the developer shall construct the necessary extension as specified in this subchapter. 
B.  These mains or streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Mobility Plan of the city. 
C.  These facilities shall be in public easements, secured and paid for by the developer. 
D.  Such easements must be recorded as required by law before service is extended to the subdivision.  
8.4.5 - Pre-Construction Phase Procedures and Requirements. 
A.  Prior to beginning construction of public improvements the City Engineer shall schedule a preconstruction conference between the owner/applicant and applicable city departments. 
B.  Representatives of public and franchise utilities shall be notified and maybe required by the city to review the proposed improvements to be made and the requirements of this subchapter.  
8.4.6 - Development Contract Required. 
A.  For all developments in which streets, drainage facilities, water or sewer lines or other improvements are to be constructed and dedicated or conveyed to the public, a development contract is required to ensure proper construction and completion of the improvements and payment is made. 
B.  The developer shall submit the development contract, along with all required documents in conformity with all city construction standards.  
8.4.7 - Construction, Inspection, and Acceptance. 
The construction, inspection of construction, and acceptance of public improvements after completion shall be approved by the City Engineer, if the construction conforms to the requirements of all city construction standards.  
8.4.8 - Streets. 
Streets and right-of-way shall conform to the Mobility Plan, the Transportation Design Criteria Manual, and the standards in this DDC, as amended.  
8.4.9 - Utilities. 
A.  New utilities shall be installed underground unless an administrative determination is made that physical barriers render undergrounding utilities infeasible. Transformers, pedestals, fire hydrants, and other appurtenances normally associated with "underground" utility installations are permitted on the surface of the ground. 
B.  When overhead utility lines exist within the property being platted, including boundary easements, these utility lines and new installations within the platted area shall be placed underground. 
C.  When overhead utility lines exist on the periphery of the property being platted, they and any additions or replacements needed to increase capacity or improve service reliability may remain overhead; provided, that any service drops into the platted area from said peripheral overhead lines shall be underground. 
D.  Underground utilities may be extended and easements shall be required to the boundaries of the plat to provide service connections to abutting un-subdivided land.  
8.4.10 - Adequate Water System. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the water system serving the development will be adequate to serve the development at the time of preliminary plat approval for development within the city limits, or at the time of final plat approval for developments within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
2.  Where a development plan or phased preliminary plat is proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that each phase of the development will be served by an adequate water system under this standard. 
3.  The approach main shall be extended to serve the entire development subject to a development plan or phased preliminary plat prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of the development plan or phased preliminary plat, unless the extension is part of a funded capital improvement project that the City has initiated consistent with its adopted Capital Improvement Plan for water facilities. 
B.  Criteria for Adequate Facilities. The water system serving the subdivision shall be deemed adequate when in conformance with Section 7.6: Water and Wastewater, and one of the following options, as applicable: 
1.  City Facilities Not Used. 
a.  Where the city is not the supplier, the applicant shall provide assurance of sufficient capacity, in accordance with the water capacity standards in the Administrative Criteria Manual, from the entity holding the certificate of convenience and necessity for the land to be subdivided. 
b.  Such entity shall have sufficient water supply, water treatment, and transmission capacity to serve the development, considering all other commitments, in accordance with city standards. 
c.  The applicant shall present written verification from the water supplier that it has agreed to provide water service to the development in conformance with Denton design and construction standards. The applicant shall provide assurances that water mains will be extended to serve the subdivision prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of a development plan or phased preliminary plat. 
2.  City Facilities are Used. 
a.  Where city distribution mains are to be used for supplying water, and there is an existing distribution main with adequate capacity to serve the development within one mile of the boundary of the proposed subdivision, the applicant may, at his initial expense, and subject to standard city participation policies, extend one or more approach mains from the existing distribution main to the subdivision, of a size sufficient to serve the development. 
b.  The city reserves the right to require oversizing of the line in accordance with standard City of Denton oversize policies. This requirement does not apply where the approach main is already a component of a funded capital improvement project that the city has initiated, consistent with its adopted Capital Improvement Plan for water facilities. 
C.  Water and Sewer Utilities Connections. The city shall not provide any water or sewer utility connection to land proposed for subdivision under this DDC until all of the following requirements have been met: 
1.  The water supply, treatment, storage and off-site distribution system to serve the subdivision meet the requirements of Subsection 8.4.10; 
2.  The sanitary sewer treatment and collection system to serve the subdivision meet the requirements of Subsection 8.4.11; 
3.  The owner or developer of the subdivision or addition has executed a written agreement with the city, providing for the offsite extension of water and sewer mains to serve the development, in accordance with the existing water and sewer extension regulations; 
4.  Off-site mains have been extended to the subdivision pursuant to the agreement and this section, and water and sewer mains have been installed in accordance with the city's specification in the block facing the street on which the property is situated and accepted by the City; and 
5.  "As built" plans in digital format are required at the end of construction showing the actual location of all improvements.  
8.4.11 - Adequate Sewer System. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  No preliminary or final plat application shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates that there will be an adequate sanitary sewer system to serve the subdivision concurrent with development. 
2.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the sanitary sewer system serving the development will be adequate at the time of preliminary plat approval for development within the city limits, or at the time of final plat approval for developments within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
3.  Where a development plan or phased preliminary plat is proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that each phase of the development shall be served by an adequate sanitary sewer system under this standard. 
4.  The approach main shall be extended to serve the entire development subject to a development plan or phased preliminary plat prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of the development plan or phased preliminary plat, unless the extension is part of a funded capital improvement project that the city has initiated consistent with its adopted Capital Improvement Plan for wastewater facilities. 
5.  Adequacy of treatment facilities cannot be demonstrated by reliance upon package treatment plants. 
B.  Criteria for Adequate Facilities. The sanitary sewer system serving the development shall be deemed adequate when in conformance with Section 7.6: Water and Wastewater, and one the following options, as applicable: 
1.  City Facilities Not Used. 
a.  Where the city's sanitary sewer system is not to be used, the applicant shall provide assurance that the entity collecting the sewage holds a certificate of convenience and necessity for the land to be subdivided, that collection systems are adequate to accommodate sewage flows from the development and that the treatment system to be used has adequate capacity in accordance with the standards in Section 7.6: Water and Wastewater. 
b.  The applicant shall provide assurances that sanitary sewer mains will be extended to serve the subdivision prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of a development plan, or phased preliminary plat. 
2.  City Facilities are Used. 
a.  Where city collection mains are to be used for collecting sewage, and there is an existing collection main with adequate capacity to serve the development within one mile of the boundary of the proposed subdivision, the applicant may agree to extend one or more existing collection mains to the subdivision of a size adequate to serve the development, at his expense, including the cost to construct all necessary lift stations and force mains, in accordance with standard city participation policies. 
b.  The city reserves the right to require oversizing of the line in accordance with standard City of Denton oversize policies. This requirement does not apply where the approach main is already a component of a funded capital improvement project that the city has initiated, consistent with its adopted Capital Improvement Plan for wastewater facilities.  
Subchapter 9 - Definitions  
9.1 - Rules of Construction 
 
9.1.1 - General. 
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this DDC shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully implemented. The Director is responsible for making any interpretations of this subchapter.  
9.1.2 - Headings, Illustrations, and Text. 
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this DDC and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.  
9.1.3 - Lists and Examples. 
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms such as "for example," "including," and "such as," or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities.  
9.1.4 - Computation of Time. 
The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city. 
A.  "Day" means a calendar day. 
B.  "Week" means seven calendar days. 
C.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
D.  "Year" means a calendar year.  
9.1.5 - Delegation of Authority. 
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate, and authorize a subordinate to perform the required act or duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specifies otherwise.  
9.1.6 - Nontechnical and Technical Words. 
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.  
9.1.7 - Mandatory and Discretionary Terms. 
The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive.  
9.1.8 - Conjunctions. 
Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
A.  "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply; and 
B.  "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply.  
9.2 - Definitions 
100-Year Water Surface Elevation (100-Yr W.S.E.): The water surface elevation established by hydrologic/hydraulic analysis of a stream, river, stream, or tributary, using the 100-year fully developed watershed, based upon the 100-year rainfall event. 
Accessory Building: A building on the same lot with, and of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal building. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A subordinate dwelling unit added to, created within, or detached from a single-family residence, that contains a dwelling that is subordinate to a principal single-family detached dwelling and that provides basic requirements for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitation. A HUD-Code manufactured home shall not be considered an accessory dwelling unit. 
Accessory Use: A use incidental or secondary to the principal use of a lot, building or structure and located on the same lot as the principal use. 
Administrative, Professional, or Government Office: A building in which services are provided and/or business is conducted including administrative, professional, governmental, or clerical operations. Typical examples include real estate, insurance, property management, investment, financial, employment, travel, advertising, law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, call centers, and similar offices. This use includes accessory uses such as restaurants, coffee shops, health facilities, parking, limited retail sales, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building. 
Adopted Plan: Any statement of goals, objectives, and policies adopted as an official plan by the City of Denton, Texas. 
Adult Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to 5 or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult Bookstore/Adult Video Store: 
1.  A commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
b.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
2.  For the purpose of this definition, a commercial establishment shall be considered to have as "one of its principal business purposes" the sale or rental of the materials described in subsection 1. above, if: 
a.  The establishment makes use of a sign visible from any public street, whether located on or off the property of the establishment, advertising the availability at the establishment of any materials described in subsection 1.; 
b.  The establishment devotes more than 30 percent of its total floor area which is open to the public to the display of items for sale or rental that are materials described in subsection 1.; 
c.  More than 30 percent of the total number of items displayed for sale or rental by the establishment are materials described in subsection 1; or 
d.  The establishment regularly maintains on the property for sale or rental materials described in subsection 1. whole total retail value is more than 50 percent of the total retail value of all materials kept on the premises for sale or rental. 
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
1.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
2.  Live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas"; or 
3.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult Entertainment Establishments: Adult entertainment establishments include: adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio and all other adult entertainment establishments. 
Adult Motel: A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that: 
1.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
2.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or 
3.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours. 
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas." 
Adverse Impact: An impact that: 
1.  Creates, imposes, aggravates, or leads to inadequate, impractical, unsafe, unhealthy conditions on a site or degrades or damages environmental or cultural resources on a site proposed for development or on off-site property or facilities; or 
2.  Creates, imposes, or leads to a nuisance on a site proposed for development or on off-site property or facilities. 
Advertise: As it applies to short-term rentals, the written, audio, oral or other methods of drawing the public's attention whether by brochure, written literature or on-line posting to a Short Term Rental in order to promote the availability of the short term rental. 
Agriculture and Animal Uses: This category includes agricultural and farming activities, including nurseries and facilities for processing and selling agricultural products. Agricultural uses involve farming, dairying, pasturage, beekeeping, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal husbandry. Animal-related uses include the boarding and care of animals on a commercial basis. Accessory uses may include confinement facilities for animals, parking, and storage areas. 
Airport Hazard: Any structure or object of natural growth, or use of land, which obstructs the air space required for the taking off, landing and flight of aircraft, or that interferes with the visual, radar, radio or other systems for tracking, acquiring data relating to, monitoring or controlling aircraft. 
Airport, City-Owned: A landing area, runway, or other city-owned facility designed, used, or intended to be used for the landing or taking off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and open spaces. 
Alley: A public way that provides access to abutting property and which is not intended for general travel or circulation. Alleys are typically a secondary means of access to a property. 
Alley Access Garage: See "Garage, Alley Access." 
Alternative Mounting Structure: A man-made tree, clock tower, church steeple, bell tower, utility pole, light standard, identification pylon, flagpole, or similar structure, designed to support and camouflage or conceal the presence of telecommunications antennas. 
Amenity Center: A building or facility owned or operated by a corporation, association, person, or persons for a place of meeting, social, cultural, educational, or recreational purposes, to which membership or residency requirements is required for participation. 
Antenna: A structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves, including directional antennas, such as panels, wireless cable and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whips, but not including satellite earth stations. 
Antenna Array: An arrangement of antennas and their supporting structure. 
Antenna, Dish: A parabolic bowl shaped device that receives and/or transmits signals in a specific directional pattern. 
Antenna, Panel: An antenna which receives and/or transmits signals in a directional pattern. 
Antenna, Stealth: A telecommunications antenna that is effectively camouflaged or concealed from view. 
Antenna, Telecommunications: An antenna used to provide a telecommunications service. This excludes lightning rods, private mobile radio systems, amateur radio antennas less than 50 feet (15 meters) in height and whip antennas less than four inches (10 cm) in diameter and less than 10 feet (three meters) in height. 
Antenna, Whip: An omni-directional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape which is no more than 6 inches (15 cm) in diameter. 
Applicant: Unless otherwise specified, an owner or other person with a legal property interest, including heirs, successors, and assigns, or an owner's authorized agent, who has filed an application for zoning, subdivision, or development activity. 
Approach Surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is applied to each end of each runway based upon the type of approach available or planned for that runway end. 
Architectural Compatibility: Consistency in roof pitch, exterior construction materials, exterior color, and architectural design and detail. 
Architectural Element: Authentic architectural projections and details. 
Architectural Projection: Eaves, decorative extensions, bay windows having no floor space, or other portions of a structure having neither living space nor key structural value. 
Assisted Living Facility: An establishment that: 
1.  Furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment; and 
2.  Provides personal care services. 
Auto Court: Auto court development is an arrangement of single-family, duplex, or townhome dwellings with a shared access to minimize curb cuts and/or provide shared parking facilities. 
Auto Wash: The use of a site for washing, cleaning, and detailing of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles, or other light-duty equipment. This use includes self-service and any facility attended by an employee. 
Automotive Fuel Sales: An establishment where fuel, motor oil, automobile lubricants, travel aids and other supplies are sold to the motoring public. Outside storage of any automobiles or materials such as tires, auto parts, etc., is prohibited. The sale of motor vehicles is prohibited. 
Automotive Repair Shop, Major: An establishment primarily engaged in providing vehicle repair, body work, mechanical servicing, and/or painting. 
Automotive Repair Shop, Minor: An establishment primarily engaged in providing minor vehicle repair services such as lubrication, oil and tire changes, and tune-ups, brake repair, tire replacement, and detailing and polishing. Major repairs such as vehicle bodywork or painting or repair of engines or drive trains shall not be provided. 
Automotive Sales or Leasing: The sale, display, lease, rental, or storage of light motor vehicles, including automobiles, vans, light trucks, light trailers, boats, ATVs, snowmobiles, and recreational vehicles. This definition shall not include salvage operations, scrap operations, vehicle impound yards, or commercial parking lots available for short-term use. 
Automotive Wrecking Service, Impound Lot, Junkyard and Salvage Yard: A business that stores, buys, or sells materials that have been discarded or sold at a nominal price by a previous owner and that keeps all or part of the materials outdoors until disposing of them. This definition includes activities such as junk or salvage storage or operation; vehicle wrecking and salvage operation; and vehicle storage at a state licensed facility. A licensed vehicle storage facility is a garage, parking lot, or other facility owned or operated by a person other than a governmental entity for storing or parking 10 or more vehicles per year. 
Bank or Financial Institution: An establishment that provides retail banking, mortgage lending, and financial services to individuals and businesses. Accessory uses may include automatic teller machines, drive-through service, offices, and parking. 
Bar, Tavern, or Lounge: An eating and drinking establishment providing or dispensing by the drink for on-site consumption fermented malt beverages, and/or malt, special malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors, and in which the sale of food products is secondary. A bar, tavern, or lounge may include the provision of live entertainment and/or dancing; however, shall not include any adult entertainment. Accessory uses may include the manufacture of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption and/or retail sales. 
Base Flood: A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on a fully developed watershed. Also known as the 100-year flood. 
Basement: A building story partially or completely underground. A basement shall be counted as a story in computing building height where any portion of a basement has more than one-half of its height above grade. 
Basic Utilities: Infrastructure services and the structures necessary to provide those services including electricity, natural gas, telephone, telecommunications, water, or sewer. This definition includes water towers and water treatment plants. 
Bed and Breakfast: A single-family detached dwelling that is owner-occupied or occupied by a resident manager in which rooms are rented and meals may be served to transient guests on an overnight basis for a period of time less than 30 consecutive days. 
Bedroom: Any room other than a living room, family room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom, closets, or utility room, for the purpose of this DDC, shall be considered a bedroom. Dens, studies, etc. with or without closets and similar areas, which may be used as bedrooms shall be counted as bedrooms for the purposes of this DDC. 
Block Length: The distance between intersections of through streets, such distance being measured along the longest street bounding the block and from right-of-way line to right-of-way line of the two intersecting streets. 
Board of Adjustment/Board: The Board of Adjustment of the City of Denton, Texas. 
Boarding or Rooming House: A building or portion of a building, other than a hotel, motel, or multifamily dwelling wherein non-transient lodging and/or meals are provided for compensation to more than four but fewer than 20 persons. Provision for meals may be made, provided cooking is done in a central kitchen and not in individual rooms or suites. 
Buffer: A strip of land that includes landscaping, fencing, walls, vegetated earthen berm, or any combination thereof. 
Building: Any permanent structure designed, used, or intended to be used for human occupancy or use or to support the human occupancy or use of land, including manufactured homes. 
Building Coverage: The portion of the lot that is covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings. The coverage is expressed as a percentage of such area in relation to the total gross area of the lot or site. 
Building Materials and Supply Store: A business involved in the sale, storage, and distribution of structure supplies and services including lumber, brick, tile, cement, insulation, floor covering, lighting, plumbing supplies, electrical supplies, cabinetry and roofing materials. Accessory uses may include repair or delivery services and outside sale of plants and gardening supplies. 
Building Pad: The actual foundation area of the principal building and a 10-foot clear area extending from the foundation perimeter necessary for construction and grade transitions. 
Building Permit: A document signed by the Building Official or their authorized representative as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, repair, remodeling, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, demolition, moving, installment, or portion of a structure or building, which acknowledges that such use or building complies with the provisions of this Chapter or an authorized variance or specific use permit there from. 
Building, Principal: A building in which the principal use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
Business or Trade School: A secondary school offering instruction in a professional, vocational, or technical field. 
Calculated dbh: The combined dbh of the tree(s) to be removed, multiplied by the appropriate tree classification ratio, as described in paragraph 7.7.4H.5. 
Carport: A partially enclosed structure used for the housing of motor vehicles, the property of, and for use only by the occupants of the lot upon which such structure is located. For purposes of zoning, a carport attached to a principal structure shall be regarded as part of that principal structure and not as an accessory structure. A detached carport shall be classified as an accessory structure. 
Cementitious Siding: Siding used for exterior building finishes that is formed by combining water, wood pulp, fly ash, and Portland cement. 
Cemetery, City-Owned: A city-owned facility or area used or intended to be used for the interment or burial of the dead, including graveyard, burial park, mausoleum, columbarium, or any other area containing one or more graves. 
Certificate of Appropriateness (COA): An order issued by the Historic Preservation Officer (often with the approval of the Historic Landmark Commission) indicating approval of plans for alteration, construction, or removal affecting a designated landmark or property within a designated district. 
Certificate of Occupancy: Certificate issued by the Building Official for the use of a building, structure or land, when it is determined by the Building Official that the building, structure or proposed land use complies with the provisions of all applicable Codes of the City of Denton 
Certified Local Government: A local government certified or approved by the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), which has an appointed commission to oversee the survey and inventory of historic resources, to review areas for historically significant structures, and to develop and maintain community planning and education programs. 
Channel: An open conduit in which water flows with a free surface. 
Chapter House: A place of residence other than a hotel, rooming or boarding house, or dormitory that is operated by a nationally chartered membership organization or a local chartered organization and used, occupied and maintained for persons enrolled in a college, university or other educational institutions, and which is recognized and subject to controls by such educational institution. 
City: The City of Denton, Denton County, Texas, and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
City Council: The City Council of the City of Denton, Texas. 
City Engineer: The individual holding the office of City Engineer of the City of Denton, Texas, who shall actively maintain licensure in good standing as a professional engineer under the laws of the State of Texas. Those duties assigned by this DDC to the City Engineer which relate to the development review process may be reassigned by the City Manager, in whole or in part, to one or more licensed professional engineers, as needed to adjust workflow or to provide specific expertise. 
Civil Engineering Plans: Plans, profiles, cross-sections, and other required technical drawings and details for the construction of public and private improvements prepared by a registered engineer. 
Clearing and Grading: The removal of vegetation by manual or mechanical means, or altering surfaces to specified elevations or slopes including stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, shaping, or any combination thereof. 
Club or Lodge: A group of people associated with or formally organized for a common purpose, interest or pleasure, including organizations with facilities for the storage, sale, possession, or serving of any alcoholic beverage permitted by the law of the State of Texas and where none of such facilities are available except by membership qualifications, dues, or regular meetings. 
College or University: An institution of higher learning providing facilities for teaching and research and authorized to grant academic degrees. 
Co-Location: A single telecommunications tower and/or site used by more than one telecommunications service provider. 
Commercial Greenhouse or Nursery: An establishment, including a building, part of a building, or open space, for the growth, display, and/or sale of plants, trees, and other materials used in indoor or outdoor planting for retail sales and incidental wholesale trade. 
Commercial Incinerator: Establishments primarily engaged in the collection and disposal of refuse by processing or destruction for profit. Examples would be furnaces or similar devices for the burning to ash of trash or bodies. 
Commercial Incinerator, Transfer Station: A commercial facility for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or disposal of solid waste that does not impose a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment, including pollution of air, land, surface water or ground water. This definition includes any commercial incinerator, boiler, percolator or other solid waste facility at which solid waste, including previously processed solid waste is burned for the purposes of volume and weight reduction or steam heat, power or energy generation. 
Commercial Stable: A facility or area where horses, mules, or other domestic animals are kept, housed, boarded, lodged, fed, hired, trained, sold, or bred as a commercial activity. The definition includes accessory uses such as riding lessons, clinics, and similar activities. 
Common Open Space: A portion of a development permanently set aside to preserve elements of the natural landscape for public or private use, which will not be developed or subdivided. 
Community and Cultural Facilities: Uses including buildings, structures, or facilities owned, operated, or occupied by a governmental entity or nonprofit organization to provide a service to the public. 
Community Center: A building used as a place of meeting, recreation, or social activity and not operated for profit and which neither alcoholic beverages or meals are normally dispensed or consumed, and typically for use by the residents of a particular development or the community. 
Community Garden: A facility where members of the community have access to individual garden plots for the cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants. 
Community Home: A community-based residential home containing not more than six disabled persons with two supervisory personnel which meets the requirements of the Community Homes for the Disabled Persons Location Act, Tex. Hum. Res. Code Chapter 123.001, et seq. (Vernon 1990), as amended. 
Community Service: A structure or group of structures that are governmentally owned or controlled for social, educational, and/or recreational activities. Community Service facilities include federal, state, county, and City of Denton activities. Fire stations, libraries, and civic buildings are included in this definition. 
Comprehensive Plan: The comprehensive plan of the City of Denton, Texas as adopted by the City Council. The comprehensive plan shall consist of a land use plan, a mobility plan, a water system plan, a sanitary sewer plan, a storm drainage plan, a parks and recreation plan, and such other plans as may be adopted by the City. 
Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant: A temporary facility where asphalt or concrete, or its ingredients or products, are ground up, mixed, or otherwise prepared for use on-site or for transportation to another site. 
Conduit: Any open or closed device for conveying flowing water. 
Conical Surface: A surface which extends outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
Conservation District: Any neighborhood or region designated by the City Council as a conservation district. 
Conservation Easement: A voluntary and permanent deed restriction which limits the development and/or subdivision of property for the purposes of protecting conservation values in the land. The easement is a recorded restriction, applies to and binds all subsequent owners, and may be held by either a non-profit entity or organization that manages open space, such as a land trust or other qualified entity, pursuant to Section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, or a governmental entity. 
For the purposes of tree preservation, the conservation easement shall contain the prescribed minimum preservation amount, included a stand of trees and understory, and shall be the greater of 10 percent of the property or 5,000 square feet. 
Conveyance Plat: An interim plat recording the subdivision of property or defining a remainder of property created by the approval of a final plat for sole purpose of conveying land and not for development for a portion of property, where approval of final development plans is not sought. 
Cornice: A continuous, molded projection that crowns a wall or other construction, or divides it horizontally for compositional purposes. 
Craft Alcohol Production: A facility in which processing and production of beverages occurs, including canning, bottling, and packaging for sale and/or distribution to retailers, drinking establishments, restaurants, or wholesalers, but may also include onsite consumption and/or retail sales. 
Credit Access Business: A credit services organization that obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining an extension of consumer credit in the form of a deferred presentment transaction or a motor vehicle title loan, as established in Section 393.601 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
Criteria Manual: A manual pertaining to the technical and design requirements of this DDC. 
Critical Root Zone (CRZ): The area of soil extending from the tree trunk where roots required for future tree health and survival are located. This area can also be defined as a circle with a minimum radius of one-foot for every one-inch in trunk diameter at 4.5 inches above ground. 
Daycare, Adult or Child: A facility or area licensed, certified, or registered by the State to provide daytime care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision to children, adults, or elderly in a family setting for less than 24 hours a day, whether for compensation or not. This definition shall not include education facilities listed elsewhere in this DDC. The following are child- or adult-care facilities: 
Adult Day Care: A facility providing care for the elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a 24-hour day. The facility provides services under an adult day-care program on a daily or regular basis but not overnight to four or more elderly or handicapped persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner of the facility. 
Child-Care Institution: A child-care facility that provides care for more than 12 children for 24 hours a day, including facilities known as children's homes, halfway houses, residential treatment centers, emergency shelters, and therapeutic camps. 
Day-Care Center: A child-care facility that provides care for more than 12 children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day. 
Family Home: A home that provides regular care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six children under 14 years of age, excluding children who are related to the caretaker, and that provides care after school hours for not more than six additional elementary school children, but the total number of children, including children who are related to the caretaker, does not exceed 12 at any given time. The term does not include a home that provides care exclusively for any number of children who are related to the caretaker. 
Group Day-Care Home: A child-care facility that provides care for seven to 12 children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day. 
Dead or Unhealthy Tree: Any tree certified by a certified arborist, certified forester, or a registered landscape architect, to be dead or significantly diseased beyond recovery, injured, or hazardous and in danger of falling or dying. 
Demolition by Neglect: The deterioration of a property, potentially beyond the point of repair, through neglect in the maintenance or repair of any structure on property designated as an historic property or located in a Historic or Conservation District. 
Detention: The storage of storm runoff for a controlled release during or immediately following the design storm. Regional detention refers to storage of storm runoff from an entire drainage area or basin. 
Developed Floodplain: Area within the FEMA one-percent Annual Chance Floodplain (a.k.a. 100-year floodplain) for which the natural stream has been redesigned and no longer exhibits characteristics of a natural channel and/or its floodplain has been significantly modified, graded, filled, or otherwise disturbed. 
Developer: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, paving, drainage or utilities. Development activities include: subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, parking, fences, pools, signs, temporary uses, utilities, and other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; excavation, mining or drilling operations; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; and clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the exception of agricultural activities as defined and as permitted). Routine repair and maintenance activities are exempted. 
Development Assistance Team: The Development Assistance Team of the City of Denton, Texas. 
Development Impact Area: Means and includes any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, paving, drainage or utilities. Development activities include: subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, parking, fences, pools, signs, temporary uses, utilities, and other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; excavation, mining or drilling operations; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; and clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the exception of agricultural activities as defined and as permitted). Environmental Sensitive Areas (ESA), Conservation Easements, and Preserved Habitat are excluded from the Development Impact Area. 
Diameter at Breast Height (dDH): The tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of 4.5 feet above ground level. For multi-trunk trees, combine the diameter of the largest stem or trunk with one-half of the diameter of each additional stem or trunk, all measured at 4.5 feet above ground level. 
Director: The Director of Development Services or his or her designee. 
Disabled Persons: Persons whose ability to care for himself, perform manual tasks, learn, work, walk, see, hear, speak or breathe is substantially limited because the person has: 
1.  Orthopedic, visual, speech, or hearing impairments; 
2.  Alzheimer's disease; 
3.  Cancer; 
4.  Pre-senile dementia; 
5.  Heart disease; 
6.  Cerebral palsy; 
7.  Diabetes; 
8.  Epilepsy; 
9.  Mental retardation; 
10.  Muscular dystrophy; 
11.  Autism; 
12.  Multiple sclerosis; or 
13.  Emotional illness. 
District: An area, region, or section with a distinguishing character, or the regulations governing the height, area, use and design of the land and buildings. 
Disturbed Area: An area of land subjected to erosion due to the removal of vegetative cover and/or earthmoving activities, including but not limited to filling. 
Donation Box: A portable container for the acceptance of donations operated by a non-governmental entity, a for-profit company, or a non-profit organization that can be emptied and readily moved. Such uses shall be accessory to a primary business on the same lot. 
Dormitory: A place of residence, other than a hotel, rooming house, or boarding house that is used, occupied, and maintained by at least 50 or more persons enrolled in a college, university, or other educational institution, with sleeping accommodations, common gathering rooms, and may include group cooking and dining facilities designed to service the entire residency of the dormitory, and that is recognized and subject to controls by such educational institution. 
Drainage Area/Basin: The land area upon which all rainfall that falls on that area is directed towards or flows to a given point or stream. 
Drainage Facilities/Systems: Physical provisions to accommodate and regulate stormwater runoff to preclude excessive erosion and sedimentation and to control and regulate the rate of flow. Facilities/systems can include natural features and conduits, channels, ditches, swales, pipes, detention devices or other devices designed or intended to carry, direct, detain or otherwise control stormwater. 
Dripline: The outermost circumference of a tree canopy. 
Dwelling, Duplex: A building containing two dwelling units, each of which is a separate household that has an individual exterior entrance and separate utility meters. 
Dwelling, Fourplex: A single building on a single lot containing four dwelling units, each of which is a separate household that has an individual exterior entrance and separate utility meters. 
Dwelling, Manufactured Home HUD-Code: A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 400 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F.R. Section 3282.8(g). 
Dwelling, Mobile Home: A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is 400 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. 
Dwelling, Modular Home: See definition of "Single-Family Detached Dwelling." 
Dwelling, Multifamily: One or more buildings on a single lot containing five or more dwelling units. This definition includes single room occupancy, co-housing, and residential condominiums developed on a single lot. This definition does not include duplex, triplex, fourplex, or tiny home development. 
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached: A building containing one dwelling unit not physically attached to any other principal structure. This definition includes "Modular Homes" and "Dwelling, Manufactured Home HUD-Code." This definition does not include "Manufactured Home Development." 
Dwelling, Tiny Home: A single-family detached dwelling that is less than 500 square feet and more than 300 square feet in size on a permanent foundation. This does not include "Recreational Vehicle" that are allowed only in a RV Park. 
Dwelling, Townhome: Three to eight attached single-family dwelling units, each of which is a separate household on its own lot. 
Dwelling, Triplex: A single building on a single lot containing three dwelling units, each of which is a separate household that has an individual exterior entrance and separate utility meters. 
Dwelling, Work/Live: A dwelling unit containing an integrated living and working space in different areas of the unit. 
Dwelling/Dwelling Unit: A structure or portion thereof that provides living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation accommodations. This term does not include short-term rental. 
Easement: A grant of the right to use a strip of land for specific purposes. 
Educational Facilities: Uses in this category include public, private, and parochial institutions at the primary, elementary, middle, high school, or post-secondary level, trade or business schools, or colleges and college campuses. Accessory uses commonly include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and day care facilities. 
EIA-222: Electronics Industries Association Standard 222, "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures." 
EIFS: Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) is a non-load bearing exterior wall cladding system consisting of insulation board attached to the stubstrate, with a reinforced base coat and a textured protective finish coat. 
Elderly Housing: A structure licensed by the Texas Department of Aging and Disability, 80 percent of whose occupants are 55 years of age and older, and that meets the definition of one of the four uses listed below: 
Elderly Housing, Assisted Living: Services in these establishments include assistance with daily activities, such as dressing, grooming, bathing, etc. 
Elderly Housing, Congregate Care Facility: A facility for long-term residence generally for persons 55 years of age or older, and which shall include, without limitation, common dining, social and recreational features, special safety and convenience features designed for the needs of the elderly, such as emergency call systems, grab bars and handrails, special door hardware, cabinets, appliances, passageways, and doorways designed to accommodate wheelchairs, and the provision of social services for residents which shall include at least two of the following: meals services, transportation, housekeeping, linen, and organized social activities. 
Elderly Housing, Life Care Housing and Services: A residential complex, which may contain multi-family dwellings, attached dwellings, single-family dwelling and other types of dwellings and structures designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens. Such facilities will include one of the following: A congregate meals program in a common dining area, assisted living housing, nursing home facilities, congregate care facilities, or medical facilities. 
Continuing Care Retirement Center: A facility that integrates multiple senior living options into one facility including skilled nursing, assisted living, dementia care, as well as independent living. This use is not considered a multi-family dwelling unit. 
Electric Distribution Line: Any electric line or part of the power system which distributes electric power at less than 60kV when measured phase to phase, and is utilized to deliver and serve electric power to local utility customers. Electric Distribution Lines include both overhead and underground facilities and circuits that operate at our primary rated distribution voltage level of 13.2kV/7.62 kV Grounded Wye. The distribution system includes that part of the distribution line transformers and all other necessary equipment to step the primary voltage down to a lower secondary voltage level to meet service requirements. 
Electric Substation: A structure that is part of an electric generation, transmission, and distribution system which either: 
1.  Converts electric energy to a lesser voltage for the purpose of subregional or localized distribution; 
2.  Functions as a transition point from overhead to underground electric transmission lines; or 
3.  Acts as the point of convergence for two or more transmission lines. 
Electric Switch Station: A substation without transformers and operating only at a single voltage level. 
Electric Transmission Line: Any electrical line operating at a nominal line-to-line voltage equal to or greater than 60,000 volts. 
Environment: The physical condition which exists within the area that will be affected by a proposed development, including: land, air, water, mineral, flora, fauna, noise, and objects of historic or aesthetic significance. 
Environment, Natural: This environment is characterized by severe biophysical limitations, presence of some unique or natural or cultural features intolerant of intensive human use, or its value is retained only in its natural condition. Management objectives are oriented toward preserving unique features, restricting activities that may degrade the actual or potential value of this environment, and severely restricting development in hazardous areas. 
Equal Conveyance Principle: An area of the cross-section of a stream, in its existing condition, carrying a percentage of the stream flow, will continue to carry the same percentage of the stream flow after filling of the flood plain occurs, without any rise in the 100-year floodplain elevation. 
Equipment Sales and Rental: An establishment engaged in the display, sale, and rental of equipment, tools, supplies, machinery or other equipment used for building construction, manufacturing, farming or agriculture. This use includes the sale of farm-specific vehicles such as tractors, tillers, farm trailers, back hoes, graders, boom lifts, and front-end loaders, but not including car or truck rentals. 
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice, or gravity, caused either by natural or human created conditions. 
Escort: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who, for consideration, agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort Agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Estate-Style Subdivision: Estate style subdivisions are those subdivisions using barrow ditches as drainage along streets, on public or private streets. 
Existing Development: Development not otherwise exempted by this DDC that meets one of the following criteria: 
1.  It either is built or has established a statutory or common-law vested right as of the effective date of this DDC; or 
2.  It occurs after the effective date of this DDC, but does not result in a net increase in built-upon area and does not decrease the infiltration of precipitation into the soil. 
Expansion: An increase in the floor area of an existing structure or building, or the increase of area of a use. 
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration or any successor agency. 
Fabricating: The process of assembling using standardized parts. 
Family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption. 
FAR: See Floor-Area-Ratio. 
Farmer's Market or Open Air Market: The seasonal selling or offering for sale at retail directly to the consumer of fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs, or plants, processed food stuffs and products such as jams, honey, pickled products, sauces, baked goods, crafts, and art, clothing and other goods, occurring in a pre-designated area, where the vendors are generally individuals who have raised the produce or have taken the same or other goods on consignment for retail sales. 
FCC: Federal Communications Commission or any successor agency. 
Feedlot, Slaughterhouse, or Packaging Plant: The feeding of livestock, poultry, pigs, or small animals for commercial purposes in lots, pens, ponds, sheds or buildings where food is supplied primarily by means other than grazing, foraging, or other natural means, and/or a facility for the slaughtering and processing of domestic farm animals and the refining, packaging, and distribution of their byproducts. 
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Fence: A vertical device used as a boundary or means of providing protection, confinement or privacy. 
Fence, Residential Subdivision Perimeter: Fences or walls that are placed within 50 feet of the edge of the right-of-way of an arterial or collector street for the horizontal distance around the perimeter of a subdivision that includes single-family detached, townhome, duplex, triplex, or fourplex dwellings. Fences or walls that have a surface area that is 25 percent or less opaque, and hedges and screens composed of living plant material, shall not be included in this definition. 
Field or Construction Office: A temporary modular building located at a construction site which serves only as an office until the given construction work is completed. This definition shall also include leasing offices and sales trailers for new developments. 
Filling: The depositing on land, whether submerged or not, of gravel, earth, or other natural materials in any combination. 
Fire Code: The most recently adopted International Fire Code as published by the International Code Congress. 
Flood Fringe: The area located within the floodplain and outside the floodway. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where special flood hazard areas have been designated. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official community map showing special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community as issued by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
Floodplain: An area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as possibly being flood-prone, or below the immediate flood line (100-year floodplain). 
Floodway: Area regulated by federal, state, or local requirements to provide for discharge for the base flow, so that the cumulative increase in water surface elevation is no more than a designated amount within the 100-year floodplain. A river, channel or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Normally, the floodway will include the stream channel and that portion of the adjacent land areas required to pass the base flood (100-year flood) discharge without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation at any point more than one foot above that of the pre-floodway condition, including those designated on the flood insurance rate map. 
Floor Area: The floor area is the gross horizontal area of the one or more floors of a structure, excluding interior parking spaces. Residential floor space shall be exclusive of carport, basement, attic, patios and open porches. Same as Gross Leasable Floor Space. 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The ratio which is the result of dividing the total floor area of a structure by the area of the lot on which it is located. For example, a structure with a floor area of 20,000 square feet, located on a lot of 40,000 square feet has a floor area ratio (FAR) of one-half. 
Figure 9.2-A: Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
Food and Beverage Services: Uses in this category include establishments that serve prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises. Accessory uses may include food preparation areas, offices, and parking. 
Food Processing, Less than 2,500 Square Feet: A facility or area containing not more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area in which food for human consumption in its final form, such as candy, baked goods, tortillas, and ice cream is produced, and the food is distributed to retailers or wholesalers for resale on or off the premises. This use does not include commercial feedlots, meatpacking, poultry dressing, stockyards, fat rendering, or the tanning, cutting, curing, cleaning or storing of green hides or skins. 
Food Processing, More than 2,500 Square Feet: A facility or area containing more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area in which food for human consumption in its final form, such as candy, baked goods, tortillas, and ice cream is produced, and the food is distributed to retailers or wholesalers for resale on or off the premises. This use does not include commercial feedlots, meatpacking, poultry dressing, stockyards, fat rendering, or the tanning, cutting, curing, cleaning or storing of green hides or skins. 
Freeboard: The vertical distance between the design water surface level and the top of an open conduit left to allow for wave action, floating debris or any other condition or emergency without overtopping the structure. 
Front yard: See "Yard, Front." 
Frontage: That side of a lot, parcel or tract abutting a street right-of-way. 
Funeral and Internment Facility: An establishment for the care, preparation, or disposition of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected with, and conducted before, burial or cremation. This use includes mortuaries, which are facilities in which dead bodies are prepared for burial or cremation, crematoriums, columbariums, and funeral homes, and may include a facility for the permanent storage of cremated remains of the dead. 
Garage, Alley Access: A garage with vehicular access from a public or private alley, typically from the rear of the lot. 
Garage, Rear Access: A garage with vehicular access doors that faces the rear of the lot. 
Garage, Side Access: A garage with vehicular access doors primarily oriented toward one of the side lot lines or perpendicular to the street. 
Garage, Private or Public: A structure for the use of the owner or occupant of a principal structure for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature. 
Gas Well: Any well drilled for the production of gas or classified as a gas well under the Texas Natural Resources Code. 
Gated Community: A subdivision or housing development with two or more dwellings with private streets controlled through the use of a vehicular or pedestrian gate. 
General Agriculture: The land use of animal husbandry, farming, cultivation of crops, dairying, pasturage, floriculture, horticulture, viticulture, aquaculture, hydroponics, together with necessary accompanying accessory uses, buildings, or structures for housing, packing, treating, or storing said products. This definition includes associated dwellings for those involved in agricultural uses. An accessory use may include incidental sales by the producer of products raised on the farm. This definition does not include feed lots or similar uses. 
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, Between 5,000 Square Feet and 15,000 Square Feet: Retail sales containing between 1,500 square feet and 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, Less than 5,000 Square Feet: Retail sales containing not more than 1,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
General Retail Unless Otherwise Specified, More than 15,000 Square Feet: Retail sales containing more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Grade: 
1.  The inclination or slope of a conduit, channel or natural ground surface, usually expressed in the percentage of units of vertical rise or fall per unit of horizontal distance; 
2.  The elevation of the invert at the bottom of a conduit, canal, culvert, sewer, etc.; or 
3.  The finished surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of an embankment or bottom of excavation. 
Grade Separation: The physical development of structures or intersections that separate motor vehicle from motor vehicles; motor vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists from trains and other transit; motor vehicles from pedestrians and bicyclists; as well as pedestrians from bicyclists. 
Grade, Existing: The vertical elevation of the ground surface prior to excavation or filling; the surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a development regulated by this DDC; or, the vertical elevation of a site which is currently developed and built upon. 
Grade, Ground Level: The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of the structure. In case a wall is parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
Grade, Natural: The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists in its unaltered state. 
Grade, Percentage of: The rise or fall of a slope in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal difference. 
Grading: The mechanical or physical act of disturbing, moving, removing, transferring, or redistributing soil. 
Gross Leasable Floor Space: The gross horizontal floor area of the one or more floors of a structure, excluding interior parking spaces. Residential floor space shall be exclusive of carport, basement, attic, patios, and open porches. 
Ground Cover: Low growing plants, vines, or grasses that form dense, extensive growth, and have a positive effect against soil erosion and soil moisture loss. Permeable natural landscape materials, such as mulch and rock, are also considered ground cover to the extent they are used in combination with live plant materials. 
Group Home: A profit or nonprofit facility, home, or structure for the protective care of persons, both adult and adolescent, who need a watchful environment, but do not have an illness, injury, or disability which requires chronic or convalescent care, including medical and nursing services. Protective care and watchful oversight includes, but is not limited to, a daily awareness by management of the residents' whereabouts, the asking and reminding of residents of their appointments for medical checkups, the ability and readiness of management to intervene if a crisis arises for a resident, and supervision by management in areas of nutrition, medication, and actual provision of transient medical care, with a 24-hour responsibility for the well-being of residents of the facility. Personal care facilities are exempt from the definition of a family and shall be classified in one of the following ways: 
1.  Individual: One to three clients, plus manager. 
2.  Family: Four to six clients, plus manager. 
3.  Group: Seven to 15 clients, plus manager. 
4.  Congregate: 16 or more clients, plus manager. 
Group Home for Disabled Persons: A shared residential living arrangement which provides a family-type environment for six or more handicapped persons supervised by one or more primary caregivers and has obtained a license to operate under the Personal Care Facilities Licensing Act. Tex. Health & Safety Code § 247.001 et seq. A group home for disabled persons does not include community homes for disabled persons. 
Grubbing: The mechanical or physical act of removing stumps, underbrush, and rocks, prior to clearing and grading. Grubbing does not allow for any grade changes, only vegetation removal down to bare soil. A tree removal permit is required for all trees with a three-inch or greater diameter, measured at four and a half feet above natural grade. 
Handicap: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, a record of having such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addition to a controlled substance as defined by Chapter 481 of the Texas Health & Safety Code. 
Hazardous Materials or Waste: A substance classified as a hazardous material under state or federal law or a chemical, petroleum product, gas, or other substance that if discharged or released, is likely to create an imminent danger to individuals, property or the environment. A hazardous material includes, but is not limited to any one of the following, as defined by 40 C.F.R 173, or, with respect to hazardous waste, listed as a substance subject to 40 C.F.R. 262: Radioactive material; Explosives, Class A; Explosives, Class B; Poison A; Poison B; Flammable gas; Nonflammable gas; Flammable liquid; Oxidizer; Flammable solid; Corrosive material; Combustible liquid; Etiologic agent; other regulated material (ORM); or, Hazardous waste. 
Healthcare Facilities: Uses characterized by activities focusing on medical services, particularly licensed public or private institutions that provide primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury, or other physical or mental conditions. Accessory uses may include laboratories, outpatient, or training facilities, and parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building. 
Height, Airport Overlay Zone: For the purpose of determining height limitations in all zones established in Subchapter 4: Overlay and Historic Districts, and shown on the zoning map, the vertical distance of an object above mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Height, Building or Structure: Height shall be measured as the vertical distance above finished grade measured to the highest point of the roof of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the midpoint of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. 
Figure 9.2-B: Examples of Building Height Measurement
 
Heritage Trees: All Quality trees with a dbh greater than 18 inches and all Post Oaks with a dbh of six inches or greater. 
Historic District: Any neighborhood or region designated by City Council as a historic district. 
Historic Landmark: A building, district, object, site, or structure that is officially recognized by the State of Texas, or the United States government, for its outstanding architectural, archeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and political history significance. 
Historic Landmark Commission (HLC): The City of Denton Historic Landmark Commission. 
Historic Preservation: The protection, reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair or restoration of landmarks of historical, architectural or archeological significance. 
Historic Preservation Officer (HPO): The Historic Preservation Officer for the City of Denton (HPO). 
Historic Resource: Any building, structure, object or site that is 50 years or older or any resource that has been identified as a high or medium priority because of its unique history or architectural characteristics. 
Historic Resources Survey: A systematic, detailed examination of an area designed to gather information about historic properties sufficient to evaluate them against predetermined criteria of significance. 
Historic Site: The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, which may include open spaces, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Home Occupation: An occupation commonly carried on within a dwelling by members of the family occupying the dwelling. The use of the home as an occupation shall be incidental and subordinate to the use of the home as a dwelling. 
Homeless Shelter: A supervised private facility that provides temporary living accommodations for homeless individuals. 
Horizontal Surface: A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation of, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of runways 17L-35R and 17R-35L of the airport, and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
Horticulture: The cultivation of row crops, a garden, or an orchard for noncommercial purposes. 
Hospital Services: An institution providing primary health services, psychiatric services, and medical or surgical care to persons primarily on an inpatient basis. This use differs from medical clinics in that it may require stays for longer than 24 hours. This definition includes birthing center, general hospital, private psychiatric hospital, niche hospital, special hospital, and trauma facilities. This definition does not include nursing home and institutions where persons suffering from permanent types of illness, injury, deformity, deficiency, or age are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis. 
Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations at a daily rate for a period of time not to exceed 30 days, and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. Guest quarters are accessible through a main entrance and by hallways. 
Hotel Occupancy Tax: The hotel occupancy tax as defined in the Municipal Code of Ordinances, and Chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code. 
Household Living: Uses in this category are characterized by residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Common accessory uses include recreational activities, raising of pets, gardens, personal storage buildings, hobbies, and resident parking. Specific use types include: 
Impact Fee: A fee levied by the City pursuant to TLGC, Chapter 395, as a total or partial reimbursement for the total or partial cost of providing additional facilities or services needed as a result of new development. 
Impairment, Physical or Mental: 
1.  Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems; neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
2.  Any mental or psychological disorder such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness and specific learning disabilities. 
3.  The term includes but is not limited to such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech dementia, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than drug addiction caused by illegal use of a controlled substance). 
Impervious: Any hard-surface, man-made area that does not readily absorb or retain water, including but not limited to building slabs, building roofs, swimming pools, parking and driveway areas, sidewalks, paved recreation areas, and other surfaces that do not generally absorb water and are not considered by the City to be pervious surfaces. 
Impervious Surface: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. 
Imported Fill: The mechanical or physical act of bringing soil in from offsite. When stockpiling imported fill, it shall occur on private property only. 
Indoor Recreation Facility: A commercial recreational use conducted entirely within a building, including arcade, arena, art gallery and studio, art center, assembly hall, athletic and health clubs, auditorium, bowling alley, community center, conference center, exhibit hall, gymnasium, library, movie theater, museum, performance theater, pool or billiard hall, skating rink, swimming pool, and tennis court. Accessory uses may include limited retail, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
Infill Development: Development on a vacant parcel or groupings of vacant lots within an existing block surrounded by existing development that is contiguous on at least two sides for corner lots and contiguous on at least three sides for interior lots (existing development located directly in front on the other side of the street may count as a side for interior lots only), no greater than two acres in size, and is served with all or most public services and facilities, including but not limited to water, wastewater and drainage. Annexed areas on the periphery of the City limits are not considered infill sites. 
Infrastructure: The provision of systems that provide transportation, water, waste water, solid waste, stormwater drainage, electrical and franchise facilities typically required to service development. 
Inlet: An opening into a storm drain system for the entrance of surface storm runoff. 
Institution: An establishment that: 
1.  Furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment; and 
2.  Provides minor treatment under the direction and supervision of a physician licensed by the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners, or other services that meet some need beyond the basic provision of food, shelter, and laundry; or 
3.  A foster care residential facility that provides room and board to fewer than five persons who: 
a.  Are not related within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity, as determined under Chapter 573, Government Code, to the proprietor; and 
b.  Because of their physical or mental limitation, or both, require a level of care and services suitable to their needs that contributes to their health, comfort, and welfare. 
Institutional Use: A non-profit or quasi-public use, such as a religious institution, library, public or private school, hospital services, or government-owned or government-operated structure or land used for public purpose. 
Kennel: Any establishment where domestic animals (usually dogs and cats) are boarded (overnight), bred or raised for sale, or trained, exclusive of veterinary care. 
Land-Disturbing Activity: Alteration of the land surface by: 
1.  Any grading, scraping, excavating, dredging, transporting or filling of land; 
2.  Any clearing of vegetation; 
3.  Any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a building, road, driveway, parking area, or other structure, not including routine maintenance such as painting, repair, or reconstruction of existing structures or surfaces; 
4.  Any substantial activity or use which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into waters or lands protected by this Chapter; and, 
5.  It shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, repairs, additions or minor modifications of an existing single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Landfill, City-Owned: A city-owned facility for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment, or disposal of solid waste, including the destruction/conversion of solid waste into energy. Uses may include a sanitary landfill, debris landfill, facility treatment of natural gas, and a fueling station. 
Landmark Trees: A healthy tree that is designated by the property owner on the Texas Big Tree Registry regardless if the tree is protected or a non-protected tree; or a tree designated as a historic tree where an event of historic significance occurred that had local, regional, or national importance; or at the home of a citizen who is famous on a local, regional, or national basis; or that has taken on a legendary stature in the community, is mentioned in literature or documents of historic value, or is considered unusual due to size, age, or other landmark status. Historic trees shall be designated following the historic landmark designation procedure. 
Landscaping: A planted area containing trees, shrubs, and groundcovers providing a transition between structures on a site and the property line, adjacent structures, or street rights-of-way. 
Lane: A driving surface with a width as specified in the street design standards for that class of street. 
Large Secondary Trees: All healthy Bois d'Arc, Hackberry, or Cottonwood trees with a 12-inch or greater dbh. 
Laundry Facility, Industrial: An establishment that cleans clothing, carpeting, drapes, and other cloth or synthetic fiber materials using a chemical process. This definition includes uses such as rug cleaning or repair service; pressing of garments or fabrics; carpet or upholstery; power laundry; industrial launderers; and linen supply. Such establishments may also include self-service laundering facilities. 
Laundry Facility, Self-Service: An establishment providing washing, drying, or ironing machines for use on the premises by rental to the general public. This definition includes automatic, self-service, or hand laundries only. 
Legal Nonconforming: The continued existence of land, buildings, structures, uses, and site features that were lawfully established prior to the time of adoption, revision or amendment of this DDC, or granted variance of the DDC, but that fails, by reason of such adoption, revision, amendment or variance, to conform to the present requirements of this DDC. 
Living Space: Space within a dwelling unit used for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, washing, and sanitation purposes. 
Loading Space, Off-Street: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, and scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
Local Drainage System: Any drainage facility or system, which serves an area having a contributing drainage basin of less than one square mile in area. 
Local Emergency Contact: An individual other than the applicant, who resides within 20 miles of the subject property, and who is designated by the owner/applicant to act as the owner's authorized agent if the owner has traveled outside of the immediate area or is otherwise unavailable. The local emergency contact should reachable on a 24-hour basis, have access to the Short Term Rental Property, and be authorized by the owner to act in the owner's absence to address any complaints, disturbances, and emergencies. 
Local Historic Landmark: A building, district, object, site, or structure that has been officially recognized by the City of Denton for its outstanding architectural, archeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and political history significance. 
Lodging Facilities: For-profit facilities where lodging, meals, and the like are provided to transient visitors and guests for a defined period. 
Lot: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise permitted by law to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, said area to be exclusive of street right-of-way. 
Lot Depth: The horizontal distance from the midpoint of the rear of lot line to the midpoint of the front lot line. 
Lot Frontage: That portion of a lot adjacent to a street. 
Figure 9.2-C: Lot Frontage
 
Lot Line: A boundary of a lot. "Lot line" is synonymous with "property line." 
Lot Line, Front: The lot line separating the lot from the street other than an alley. In the case of a corner lot, there shall only be one street line considered the front lot line. The front lot line adjoins the public or private rights-of-way where the entrance/address is located. 
Lot Line, Rear: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and in the case of an irregular, triangular, or other shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Lot Line, Side: Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. 
Figure 9.2-D: Side Lot Line
 
Lot of Record: An individual lot or a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been legally recorded in the office of the Denton County Clerk; or a parcel of land the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the Denton County Clerk. 
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the side lines, measured at the front property line adjacent to the public right-of-way. The lot width for a corner lot shall be measured along the right-of-way upon which the address is assigned. The flagpole portion of a flag lot shall be ignored in measuring lot width. 
Figure 9.2-E: Lot Width
 
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting the intersection of two or more streets other than an alley. 
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot, Flag: Any lot without standard legal access to a city street, and that is provided with access by a driveway parallel to the lot line of a lot having standard access to a public right-of-way. 
Lot, Gross Area: An area under public or private property ownership, whose lot lines are described by plat or deed. 
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot. 
Lot, Through: An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys. Through lots are prohibited. 
Figure 9.2-F: Through Lot
 
Manufactured Home Development (HUD Code): A development of a single lot divided into more than one stand for the placement of HUD-Code manufactured homes, accessory uses, and service facilities, meeting all requirements of this DDC and any applicable deed restrictions and state laws. 
Group Living: Uses in this category are characterized by residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of "household living." Tenancy is arranged on a monthly or longer basis and the size of the group may be larger than a family. Generally, group living structures have a common eating area for residents. Residents may receive care, training, or treatment, and caregivers may or may not also reside at the site. Accessory uses commonly include recreational facilities and vehicle parking for occupants and staff. 
Manufacturing and Processing: Uses including all transformative processes, regardless of whether or not the new product is finished or semi-finished. Production is typically for commercial wholesaling rather than for direct sales. Accessory uses may include retail sales, offices, storage, cafeterias, employee amenities, parking, warehousing, and repair facilities. 
Manufacturing, Artisan: An establishment or business where an artist, artisan, or craftsperson teaches, makes, or fabricates crafts or products by hand or with minimal automation and may include direct sales to consumers. This definition includes uses such as small-scale fabrication, manufacturing, and other industrial uses and processes such as welding and sculpting. 
Manufacturing, High-Impact: An establishment or business that uses hazardous inputs or creates hazardous by-products in the course of manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, or materials treatment, or that uses manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, or treatment processes that create potentially hazardous impacts on the environment or surrounding areas. Examples include but are not limited to: acid manufacture; acid bulk storage; cement, lime, gypsum or plaster manufacture; central concrete mixing or concrete proportioning plant; distillation, manufacture or refining of bones, coal or tar asphalt; explosives, manufacture or storage; fat, grease, lard or tallow rendering or refining; fertilizer manufacture from organic matter; glue or size manufacture; paper manufacture; petroleum or asphalt refining or storage; smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores; and storage or processing raw hides or fur. 
Manufacturing, Low-Impact: Industrial operations relying on the assembly, distributing, fabricating, manufacturing, packaging, processing, recycling, repairing, servicing, storing, or wholesaling of goods or products, using parts previously developed from raw material. Low-impact manufacturing uses include only those uses that will not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building where such assembly, fabrication, or processing takes place. 
Manufacturing, Medium-Impact: Industrial operations relying on the assembly, distributing, fabricating, manufacturing, packaging, processing, recycling, repairing, servicing, storing, or wholesaling of goods using raw materials and mechanical power and machinery. 
Masonry: Building materials consisting of clay brick, natural and manufactured stone, granite, marble, architectural concrete block, tilt wall concrete panels and other similar materials. This definition does not include cementitious siding or EIFS. 
Maximum Extent Feasible: As determined by the Director, no feasible and prudent alternative exists, and all possible efforts to comply with the regulation or minimize potential harm or adverse impacts have been undertaken. Economic considerations may be taken into account but shall not be the overriding factor in determining "maximum extent feasible." 
Maximum Extent Practicable: The degree to which a project meets an adopted standard in which all possible efforts to comply with the standard or to minimize harmful or adverse effects have been undertaken by the applicant, but full compliance cannot be achieved, and no feasible or practical alternative exists. Economic considerations may be taken into account, but shall not be the overriding factor determining "maximum extent practicable." 
Mechanical Equipment: Equipment or devices installed for a use appurtenant to the principal use. Such equipment shall include heating and air conditioning equipment, solar collectors, parabolic antennas, disc antenna, radio or TV receiving or transmitting antennas, and any power generating devices. The following equipment or devices are exempt: 
1.  Private, noncommercial radio and television antennas not exceeding a height of 70 feet above grade or 30 feet above an existing structure, whichever height is greater. No part of such antenna shall be within the yards required by this Chapter. A structure permit shall be required for any antenna mast, or tower over 50 feet above grade or 30 feet above an existing structure when the same is constructed on the roof of the structure. 
2.  Parabolic antennas under three feet in diameter. 
Medical Clinic: An establishment for the provision of medical, psychiatric, or surgical services on an outpatient basis. These facilities can be differentiated from a medical office in that such facilities may either be open to and operated for the general, walk-in public, or require an appointment. This definition includes ambulatory surgical center (ASC); end-stage renal disease facility (dialysis), outpatient services, freestanding emergency medical care facility. 
Medical Office: An establishment where patients receive consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative, or corrective personal treatment by doctors, dentists, or similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans, medical or dental laboratories. These facilities can be differentiated from a medical clinic in that such facilities primarily operate on an appointment basis, are generally not open to the general walk-in public, and offer specialized services or attention. This definition includes dentist's office and doctor's office. 
Minor Plat: A subdivision resulting in four or fewer lots, where all lots involved front an existing public street, and that does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. 
Mitigation dbh: The total combined dbh of trees removed that must be mitigated by replanting, or by alternative means as described in Subsection 7.7.4F. This total is determined by subtracting credits granted for preserved trees from the Preliminary Mitigation dbh. 
Mixed-Use Building: A building containing more than one type of use, such as governmental, institutional, office, personal service, retail, and residential; including a mix of residential and non-residential uses. 
Mobile Food Business: A business that serves food or beverages from a self-contained unit either motorized or in a trailer on wheels, and is readily movable, without disassembling, for transport to another location. 
Mobile Food Court: The lot or parcel where mobile food truck(s) or trailer(s) can be located for the business of selling food. 
Mobile Food Trailer: A mobile food business that serves food or beverages from a nonmotorized vehicle larger than three feet in width and eight feet in length that is normally pulled behind a motorized vehicle. 
Mobile Food Truck: A mobile food business that serves food or beverages from an enclosed self-contained motorized vehicle. 
Motel: A structure or group of structures on the same lot containing individual guest units for rental to transients, with separate exterior entrances, and consisting of individual sleeping quarters, detached or in connected rows, with or without cooking facilities. 
Musician Studio: A facility where the principal use is the production, editing, and/or storage of audio media occurs, or formal private instruction in playing a musical instrument or singing. 
National Register of Historic Places: The Nation's official list of buildings, districts, and sites (including structures and objects) significant in American history and culture, architecture, archeology, and engineering maintained by the National Park Service and administered on a state-wide basis by the Texas Historical Commission. Restrictions on these properties exist only when there is an undertaking that uses federal funds or that requires a federal permit or license. 
Neighborhood: A sub area of the City of Denton in which the residents (or non-residential uses) share a common identity focused around a school, park, or community business center that are generally within walking distance of the homes or businesses, architecture, or other features with boundaries that may include highways, railroads or such natural features as rivers. The neighborhood character shall be deemed to be the prevailing character of structures within 300 feet in either direction along street frontages, irrespective of intervening streets. 
New Development: Development of a site that was previously unimproved (with no existing principal structures or uses) or has been or will be cleared of structures. New development is distinguished from existing development and the expansion or alteration of existing development. 
Nonconforming Lot: A lot that was legally established before the effective date of this DDC or subsequent amendment thereof, but that does not comply with the dimensional standards that apply in the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
Nonconforming Site Feature: Any site feature established or constructed legally at the time of passage or amendment of this DDC which does not conform, after the passage or amendment of this DDC, with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming Structure: Any structure established or constructed legally at the time of passage or amendment of this DDC which does not conform, after the passage or amendment of this DDC, with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming Use: Any use of land established legally at the time of passage or amendment of this DDC that does not conform, after the passage or amendment of this DDC, with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Non-Protected Tree: The following are considered Non-Protected Trees: 
1.  Dead or Unhealthy Trees; 
2.  Trees that pose an imminent or immediate threat to persons or property; 
3.  Crepe Myrtles and ornamental pears; 
4.  Mesquite unless part of a Preserved Habitat or Conservation Easement; 
5.  Honey Locust, unless part of a Preserved Habitat or Conservation Easement; or 
6.  Any tree listed on the Texas Department of Agriculture Noxious and Invasive Plant List. 
Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or a State of Nudity: 
1.  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breasts; or 
2.  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
Nuisance: Physical or environmental conditions resulting in regular and/or continuous problems affecting the health, safety, and quality of life of citizens. 
Nursing Home: A home for the aged, chronically ill, or incurable persons who are unable to care for themselves and in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics, or other similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section 4.5: MAO - Municipal Airport Overlay District. 
Occasional Sales: Occasional sales are the sale, or offering for sale, of tangible personal property to the public, upon the premises of an existing residential dwelling, by the owner or lessee of the residential dwelling. Such sales commonly include garage or yard sales. 
Odor Threshold: The concentration of odorous matter in the atmosphere necessary to be perceptible to the olfactory nerve of a normal person. Determination of the odor threshold is prescribed by A.S.T.M.D. 1931-57, Standard Method for Measuring Odor in Atmosphere. 
Office, Business, and Professional Services: Uses in this category provide executive, management, administrative, governmental, or professional services, but do not sell merchandise except as incidental to a permitted use. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, property management, investment, employment, travel, advertising, law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, call centers, and similar offices. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, health facilities, parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building. 
Off-Site: Located outside the boundary of a development. 
On-Site: Located within the boundary of a development. 
Open Space: See "Park, Playground, Open Space." 
Outdoor Recreation Facility: Uses in this category provide recreation and entertainment activities mostly outdoors or partially within a building, including golf courses, outdoor swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts, amphitheater, outdoor arena, and outdoor theater. Accessory uses may include limited retail, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
Outdoor Storage: As a principal use, a property or area used for the long term (more than 24 hours) storage of materials, merchandise, products, stock, supplies, machines, operable vehicles, equipment, manufacturing materials, or other items not kept within a structure having at least four walls and a roof. New or used automobile sales and leasing display and parking, and outdoor sales and display areas shall not be defined as outside storage. 
Outdoor Storage, Accessory: The keeping of goods, materials, or equipment as an accessory use to a principal use located on the same lot, where such goods, materials, or equipment are not kept in a structure having at least four walls and a roof. New or used motor vehicle sales and rental display and parking areas shall not be defined as accessory outside storage. 
Outside Storage: The storage of objects, items, products or materials outside an enclosed building, and not intended for immediate sale. 
Owner: The owner of a tract of land as recorded in the Denton County Deed Records. An owner may include: a person, firm, corporation, partnership or agent, attorney-in-fact, manager or Director, or developer. Such term as used in this chapter always includes one or more of the persons enumerated in this section who own all or any part of the land which is contemplated to be developed. 
Owner-Occupied: A lot or structure that is occupied by the legal owner of record or, where there is a recorded land sales contract in effect, the purchaser thereunder. 
Park, Playground, Open Space: Any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public use or enjoyment of for the private use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of neighboring or adjoining land that are designed or used for recreational purposes and are available to the general public. Uses include neighborhood park, an urban park or plaza, a historic site, a community-wide park, a natural area, public swimming pools, golf courses, tennis courts, recreational centers, and city-owned athletic complexes. 
Parking Lot as a Principal Use: The ownership, lease, operation, or management of a surface parking lot, above-ground structure, or below-ground structure. 
Parking Space: A space within a public or private parking area, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, offices and work areas, which is for the temporary parking or storage of one motor vehicle. 
Particulate Matter: Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water, which is released into the atmosphere. 
Pedestrian Path: A graded, cleared way for individuals who travel on foot. When located along any improved street or parking area, these paths shall be adjacent to the curb at curb level. 
Pedestrian Way: A right-of-way for pedestrian traffic. 
Permitted Use: That use of a lot which is among the uses allowed as a matter of right, and subject to the restrictions of the zoning district. 
Person: An individual, firm, partnership, proprietorship, association, corporation, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, social or fraternal organization, or any other group or combination acting as a legal entity, and including any trustee, assignee, or other representative. 
Personal Service, General: An establishment that provides repair, care, maintenance or customizing of wearing apparel or other personal articles or human grooming services and includes such uses as beauty/barber shops, dry cleaning, shoe repair, alterations, spas, and tanning salons, photography studios, house cleaning services, weight reduction centers, florist, or pet grooming shops. This use does not include commercial laundry and dry cleaning facilities. 
Phase: One final platted section of a larger overall development. 
Photovoltaic System (also "Photovoltaic Installation"): An active solar energy system that converts solar energy directly into electricity. 
Photovoltaic System, Ground-Mounted: An active solar energy system that is structurally mounted to the ground and is not roof-mounted; may be of any size (small-, medium- or large-scale). 
Photovoltaic System, Roof-mounted: An active solar energy system that is structurally mounted atop a structure. 
Pilot Channel: A concrete channel section used to convey normal low flows, fix the location of the flow line of a channel, minimize erosion and provide access for maintenance. 
Planned Development (PD): A land area under unified control designed and planned to be developed in a single phase or a series of phases according to an approved development plan. 
Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission for the City of Denton, Texas. Also referred to as the "Commission." 
Planting Area: An outdoor area, the surface of which shall not be covered by impervious surface materials or structures, and devoted entirely to the planting or maintenance or plant materials, except as otherwise allowed by this DDC, such as walls, fences, plazas, landscape architectural features such as gazebos, pergolas, arbors, fountains, or sculpture. Landscape architectural features shall not include tennis courts, basketball courts or other pervious recreational facilities. 
Plants, Plant Material: Live plant material, including grasses, annuals, perennials, bulbs, groundcover, shrubs, and trees, are botanical plants that are nourished through the processes of air, water, and soil nutrients. Plastic, fibrous, silk, or other non-live materials, are not considered live plant materials. 
Plat or Final Plat: A map of a subdivision, addition, or development to be recorded in the County Clerk Plat Records after approval by the city. 
Pole-Mounted Antenna: Any antenna which is preassembled off-site and designed to be moved from site to site. 
Power Stations, Electric Substations, Interchanges, and Switch Stations: A structure that is part of an electric generation, transmission, and distribution system that: 
1.  Converts electric energy to a lesser voltage for the purpose of subregional or localized distribution; 
2.  Functions as a transition point from overhead to underground electric transmission lines; or 
3.  Acts as the point of convergence for two or more transmission lines. 
Precision Instrument Runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
Preliminary Mitigation dbh: The numeric result determined by multiplying the total calculated dbh of trees to be removed by 50 percent. 
Preliminary Plat: A map showing the salient features of a proposed development as required by this DDC submitted for the purpose of preliminary consideration prior to the submission of a final plat. 
Preserved Habitat: Areas adjacent to an ESA where vegetation is retained to preserve natural ecological conditions and protect wildlife. 
Primary Residence: The usual dwelling place of the applicant's residential dwelling and is documented as such by at least two of the following: motor vehicle registration, driver's license, Texas State Identification card, voter registration, property tax documents, or utility bill. For purposes of the short-term rental standards, a person may have only one primary residence. 
Primary Surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Printing, Copying, and Publishing Establishment: An establishment where printed material is produced, reproduced and/or copied by either a printing press, photographic reproduction techniques, or other similar techniques. This use does not include the on-site manufacture of paper products. 
Prior Regulations: Any ordinance adopted by the City of Denton related to issues addressed within this DDC and replaced by this DDC. 
Private Club: An organization that owns, leases, or occupies a building used exclusively for club purposes at all times and: 
1.  Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; 
2.  Sells alcoholic beverages only incidentally to its operation; 
3.  The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting; 
4.  Has established bylaws or a constitution to govern the club's activities; and 
5.  Is exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501(a), Internal Revenue Code, as a club described by Section 501(c)(7) of that Code. 
Private Covenants: Private legal restrictions on the use of land contained in the deed, plat, and other legal documents pertaining to the property. 
Private Utility Provider: The owner of a wire network (i.e. cable, electric, or telephone company) utilized in connecting the various cell sites to telephone switching offices, long distance providers or the public switched telephone network. 
Protected Trees: Landmark, heritage, quality, or secondary trees. 
Public Improvements: The public infrastructure needed or required by the development, or by a single phase within a larger overall development. 
Public Right-of-Way: Any designated public street, sidewalk, or alley. 
Public Street: A street which is owned or maintained by city. 
Public Utilities: The term Public Utilities means: 
1.  Entities franchised by the city to use public rights-of-way for the conduct of their business; 
2.  Entities that are "public utilities" under pertinent provisions of the Texas Utilities Code or Texas Water Code but are specifically exempted by state law from the requirement that they receive a franchise from the city for the use of public rights-of-way; 
3.  Public sanitary sewers; 
4.  Public water mains; 
5.  Public streets; 
6.  Public storm sewers; 
7.  Public detention ponds; 
8.  Municipally-owned electric utilities; and 
9.  Any contractor hired by these entities. 
Quality Trees: All healthy non-secondary trees, except Post Oaks, that measure between six inches and 18 inches dbh. 
Rear Access Garage: See "Garage, Rear Access" 
Rear Yard: See "Yard, Rear." 
Recorded Texas Historical Landmark: A state designation for buildings important for their historical associations and which have retained a high degree of their original historic fabric. They must be at least 50 years of age and retain their original exterior appearance. State historical landmarks receive greater legal protection than National Register of Historic Places designations. 
Recreation and Entertainment: This category includes indoor and outdoor recreation and entertainment activities. Accessory uses may include limited retail, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
Recreational Vehicle ("RV"): A motorized vehicle or recreational trailer, designed or maintained for use as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for travel or recreation purposes exclusively, having no foundation other than wheels or jacks. 
Recreational Vehicle Park: A parcel of land which is used solely for the rental or lease of lots for transient campers, trailers, motor homes, or temporary parking of any other recreational vehicle that is not a HUD-code manufactured home or tiny home. 
Redevelopment: Development on a tract of land with existing structures where all or a majority of the existing structures would be razed and a new structure or structures built. 
Regional improvements: Those public improvements which are required of the development for the protection of either: 
1.  Health, safety and welfare of the public at large; or 
2.  Property outside or surrounding the development; 
Examples of Regional improvements include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Water line "loops" or extensions for service; 
2.  Regional detention facilities; 
3.  Off-site drainage improvements. 
Religious Assembly: A structure used by a religious organization or congregation for regular organized religious activities. 
Replacement Inches: The total combined dbh, in inches, of all protected trees that are proposed to be removed and that are located within the development impact area. 
Replat: A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions. 
Residential Use: A single-family detached dwelling, townhome, duplex, triplex, fourplex, multifamily dwelling, manufactured home development, and tiny home development. 
Residential Zoning District: A one-family, two-family, or multi-family zoning district, or any area within a planned development zoning district which is designated for residential use, as shown on the approved site plan for the zoning district. 
Restaurant: A food establishment that is open to the public, where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. Accessory uses may include an outdoor dining area or sidewalk café, and the manufacture of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption and/or retail sales. 
Restaurant with Drive-Through: Any restaurant designed to permit or facilitate the serving of food or beverages directly to, or permitted to be consumed by, patrons in or on motor vehicles on the premises. 
Retail Sales: Uses involving the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products directly to the final consumer for whatever purpose but not specifically or exclusively for the purpose of resale. Accessory uses may include offices, parking, storage of goods, and assembly, repackaging, or repair of goods for on-site sale. 
Rezoning: To change the zoning of a parcel of land, also referred to as a zoning amendment. Rezoning may require an amendment to the comprehensive plan. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main or for another Specific Use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes means that every right-of-way established and as shown on a Final Plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Right-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the Plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
Riparian Buffer: Areas within 100 feet, measured from both sides of the stream centerline, with drainage areas greater than one square mile, and 50 feet from both sides of any streams centerline that drain areas of one square mile or less. This also applies to the outer edges of surface water bodies. 
Runway: A defined area in an airport for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
Sale of Produce and Plants Raised on Premises: The incidental on-site sale of feed, grain, fruits, flowers, vegetables, ornamental plants, or similar goods. 
Salvage Yard: Any lot or parcel of land on which wastes or used secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, processed, or handled. Materials include but are not limited to: scrap iron and other ferrous metals, paper; rags, rubber tires, bottles, discarded goods, machinery, or two or more inoperable motor vehicles. 
Satellite Earth Stations: Are considered to be accessory structures and are defined as a combination of: 
1.  An antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources; 
2.  A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals; 
3.  A coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into the interior of the structure; and, 
4.  The station must be located to the side or rear of the structure unless a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained; in which case, the property owner may request a variance from the requirement through the Board of Adjustments. Ground-mounted stations shall be no more than 10 feet above the maximum height requirement of the zoning district in which they are located. 
School, Private: Any private school meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of Texas. A facility or area for pre-kindergartens, kindergartens, elementary, or secondary education supported by a private organization, including a church or parish organization. This definition includes licensed private preschool facilities in which the principal use of the property is for preschool. This does not include home-schooling facilities that are located within residential structures or other structures on a part time basis. 
School, Public: Any public school meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of Texas. A facility or area for pre-kindergartens, kindergartens, elementary, or secondary education supported by a public organization. This definition includes licensed public preschool facilities in which the principal use of the property is for preschool. 
Screening: A method of visually shielding or obscuring land-uses or structures via fencing, opaque buffer, or some other opaque physical barrier. 
Seasonal Sales: The temporary sale of goods or products associated with the season or a cultural event, including but not limited to the sale of healthy, nonhazardous, cut or live evergreen trees, wreaths, tree stands, pumpkins, fireworks, and seasonal produce. 
Secondary Tree: A healthy Ash, Bois D' Arc, Hackberry, or Cottonwood tree, with a dbh greater than six inches. 
Self-Service Storage: A building or group of buildings consisting of individual, self-contained units that are leased to individuals, organizations, or businesses for self-service storage of personal property. 
Semi-Nude: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Setback: The minimum distance between by which any building or structure must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line. 
Sexually Oriented Business: An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, or nude model studio. 
Shared Drive: A common driveway or access shared by adjoining properties. 
Short-Term Rental: The rental of an entire dwelling unit for monetary consideration for a period of time less than 30 consecutive days, not including a bed and breakfast, boarding or rooming house, hotel, or motel. This definition does not include offering the use of one's property where no fee is charged or collected. 
Side Access Garage: See "Garage, Side Access" 
Side Yard: See "Yard, Side." 
Site Plan: A graphic representation, drawn to scale, indicating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, and indicating the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property. 
Site Plan Review: The comprehensive evaluation of a development and its impact on neighboring properties and the community as a whole, from the standpoint of: land use, site design, landscape design, environmentally sensitive areas protection, architecture, lighting, signs, clearing and grading, engineering design, health and safety, other adopted standards and criteria of this DDC, all other adopted codes and ordinances of the City. 
Smoke: The visible discharge of particulate matter from a chimney, vent, exhaust or combustion process. 
Smoke Shop: An establishment primarily engaged in the sales of tobacco products, smoking equipment, or smoking accessories. Establishments engaged in sales of tobacco products and/or smoking equipment as an incidental or accessory use shall not be classified as a smoke shop. 
Solar Access: The access of a solar energy system to direct sunlight. 
Solar Energy: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector. 
Solar Energy System: An energy system that consists of one or more solar collection devices, solar energy related "balance of system" equipment, and other associated infrastructure with the primary intention of generating electricity, storing electricity, or otherwise converting solar energy to a different form of energy. Solar energy systems may generate the energy requirements of a property in accordance to applicable local and national codes, standards, ordinances, and laws. 
Solar Energy System, Interconnected: A photovoltaic system that is physically connected to the city's electrical system so that parallel operation (on-site generation) can occur. 
Solar Energy System, Stand-Alone: A photovoltaic system that is not connected to the city's electrical system in any way. 
Special Events: A temporary outdoor use on private property that extends beyond the normal uses and standards allowed by this DDC. "Special events" include, but are not limited to, outdoor entertainment, educational and cultural events, art shows, sidewalk sales, haunted houses, carnivals, fairs, special auto sales, grand openings, festivals, home exhibitions, and church bazaars. 
Specific Use Permit: A use that is not automatically permitted by right, but that may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this DDC. 
Specified Anatomical Areas: Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified Sexual Activities: Includes any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
3.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections 1. through 2. above. 
Stealth: See "Antenna, Stealth." 
Stockpiling: The holding on land of material or products such as any soil, sand, gravel, clay, mud, debris, vegetation, or any other material, organic or inorganic, in a concentrated state. 
Storage and Warehousing: Uses in this category are engaged in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other businesses. Goods are generally delivered to other businesses or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There are typically few customers present. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking, and maintenance areas. 
Storage Containers and Other Portable Storage Units: Temporary storage containers and other portable storage units used for the storage of items on a property (excluding use for storing equipment during multi-family dwelling and nonresidential alterations and construction projects). 
Storage of Hazardous Materials: A facility or site engaged in the storage and handling of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, liquids, waste, or gasses. 
Story, Building: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Stream: Linear geographic feature that conveys flowing waters. Headwater streams are the uppermost, low-order streams of a watershed and comprise the majority of streams in the United States, both in terms of number and length. Streams can be perennial, intermittent, or ephemeral. 
Street: A public right-of-way for roadway, sidewalk, and utility installation including the terms "road," "highway," "land," "place," "avenue," "alley," or other similar designations. The entire width between the right-of-way lines of every way which provides for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
Structure: An edifice of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together which requires location on, in, or above the ground or which is attached to something having a location on, in or above the ground. Flatwork or in-ground swimming pools are excluded. 
Structure, Accessory: Any structure on the same lot with and that is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. Flatwork, in-ground swimming pools and fences or walls used as fences are excluded. 
Structure, Principal: The structure in which the principal permitted use of the lot on which the structure is located is conducted. 
Subdivision: The division or redivision of land into two or more lots, tracts, sites, or parcels that are either improved or unimproved and can be separately conveyed by sale or lease. 
Surface Water Body: Term to include streams, ponds, lakes, and freshwater wetlands. 
Tattoo and Body Piercing Parlor: An establishment where permanent marks, scars, or designs are made on the skin by a process of pricking and ingraining an indelible pigment or by raising scars; or in which other bodily decorations, such as piercing, are provided. For the purposes of zoning, jewelry stores or other retail facilities or clinics that provide piercing as an incidental and accessory use shall not be classified as a tattoo and body piercing parlors. 
Telecommunications: The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of audio and/or visual information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Telecommunications Service: The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
Temporary Portable Wireless Telecommunications Facility: A portable self-contained telecommunications facility that can be moved to a location and set up to provide wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. A temporary portable wireless telecommunications facility is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the Antenna support structure. 
Temporary Storage Container: See "Storage Containers and Other Portable Storage Units." 
Temporary Structure: A structure without any foundation or footings which is attached to the ground or other structure in some nonpermanent fashion. Temporary structures shall require a permit from the Building Inspection Department and shall be removed from the site when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was established has ceased, but not exceeding six months in duration unless an extension is obtained from the Building Inspection Department upon just cause. 
Temporary Uses: Temporary uses are defined as those activities permitted and described in Section 5.5. 
Thoroughfare Plan: The thoroughfare component of the Mobility Plan, the official map depicting the city's existing and future street system and roadway network, together with explanatory text. 
Tiny Home Development: A development that has been subdivided into separate platted lots or a single lot divided into stands for the placement of tiny homes, accessory uses, and service facilities, meeting all requirements of this DDC and any applicable deed restrictions and state laws. 
Topography: The physical land surface relief describing the terrain elevation, position of land features and slope. Topography includes land forms, water and other drainage features, and features such as gravel pits. A single feature such as a hillside or valley is called a topographic feature. 
Tower, Electric Transmission: A self-supporting structure in excess of 50 feet (15 meters) in height designed to support high voltage electric lines. This does not include local utility or distribution poles (with or without transformers) designed to provide electric service to individual customers. 
Tower, Guyed: Any telecommunications tower supported in whole or in part by cables anchored to the ground. 
Tower, Monopole: A self-supporting telecommunications tower which consists of a single vertical pole fixed into the ground and/or attached to a foundation. 
Tower, Self-supporting Lattice: A telecommunications tower which consists of an open network of metal braces forming a tower which is usually triangular or square in cross-section. 
Tower, Telecommunications: A self-supporting or guyed structure more than 20 feet (6 meters) in height, built primarily to support one or more telecommunications antennas. 
Toxic and Noxious Matter: Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter which is present in sufficient quantities to endanger health, safety and comfort of persons in the vicinity or which may cause injury or damage to property. 
Trailer: A non-motorized vehicle, pulled by an automobile or truck designed or maintained for use as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for travel or recreation purposes exclusively. 
Transfer Station: A temporary storage facility for the consolidation and eventual transfer of solid waste to a landfill. 
Transitional Surface: A surface extending outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline at a slope of 7:1 from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the approach surface. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surface which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at right angles to the runway centerline. 
Transportation Impact Analysis: A study performed by a registered traffic engineer analyzing the impacts of the expected traffic generated by a development on the existing and proposed road system including recommendations for mitigating such traffic. 
Travel Plaza: An establishment that provides refueling, servicing, repair, parking (rest), and other services to motorists. A travel center may also include the sale of accessories and equipment for vehicles, overnight accommodations, showers and restaurant facilities. 
Tree Protection Zone (TPZ): An area shown on a tree survey and preservation plan and field inspected where construction activities are prohibited or restricted to prevent injury to preserved trees, especially during pre-construction and construction, and includes the critical root zone and/or beyond. 
Ultimate Developed Condition: A fully developed area based on current approved land use plans or "C" factor of six tenths (0.6) for remaining undeveloped land in a watershed. 
Understory: A grouping of native, noninvasive low-level woody, herbaceous, or ground covers species with stems less than one inch dbh. 
Undeveloped Floodplain: Areas within the FEMA one-percent Annual Chance Floodplain (a.k.a. 100-year floodplain), that are undeveloped and in their natural state. 
United States Secretary of Interior Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties: A document that includes guidelines for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring and reconstructing historic buildings. 
Upland Habitat or Cross Timbers Upland Habitat: Contiguous areas ten acres or larger of cross timbers habitat. 
Urban Farm: A private facility for the primary purpose of farming fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants. 
Use: The purpose or purposes for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or to which such land or structure is occupied, maintained, or leased. 
Vacating Plat: The termination of, or termination of interest in, an easement, right-of-way, or public dedication of land. 
Valley Storage: Water storage capacity of a stream and is a volume that is measured below the base flood elevation. 
Variance: A deviation from the specific terms of this DDC that will not be contrary to public interest and is justified because, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this DDC's provisions will result in practical difficulties and/or hardship. 
Vegetation: All plant life; however, for the purposes of this Chapter shall be restricted to mean trees, shrubs, ground cover, annuals, perennials, bulbs, grasses, vines, and aquatic plants, with the exception of state and federally protected and endangered vegetative specie which in all cases shall be preserved. 
Vehicles and Equipment: Uses include a broad range of uses for the maintenance, sale, or rental of motor vehicles and related equipment. Accessory uses may include incidental repair and storage and offices. 
Veterinary Clinic: Facility for the diagnosis, treatment, or hospitalization of domestic animals, operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. The incidental temporary overnight boarding of animals that are recuperating from treatment is included in this definition. 
Vibration: A periodic displacement of the earth measured in inches. 
Vision Clearance Area: A triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines for a distance specified in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two sides. Where the lot lines or intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection. 
Figure 9.2-G: Vision Clearance Area
 
Warehouse and Wholesale Facility: A building or area for storage, wholesale, and/or distribution of goods and materials, supplies, and equipment that are manufactured or assembled off-site. This definition excludes the bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. Accessory uses may include retail and office uses. 
Water-Related Habitat: Areas designated as wetlands, and trees and understory vegetation containing 50 percent or more of predominately native bottomland hardwood. Bottomland hardwoods occur on the first terrace of floodplains and flats along channels. Periodic inundation prevents establishment of upland species and maintains the functioning of this type of vegetation. 
Watershed: The land area(s) that contribute surface runoff or drainage to a water system or body. 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS): A large wind energy conversion system (WECS) that has an output rating greater than 100 KW that converts wind energy into electrical power for the primary purpose of sale, resale, or off-site use. 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS), Small (Building-Mounted): A small wind energy conversion system (WECS), mounted to a legally existing building or structure, other than a building or structure accessory to a WECS facility, that has a rated capacity of 100 KW or less and is an accessory use within a zoning district. The small wind system shall support the energy needs of the principal use on the site. 
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS), Small (Ground-Mounted): A small wind energy conversion system (WECS), mounted to the ground, that has a rated capacity of 100 KW or less and is an accessory use within a zoning district. The small wind system shall support the energy needs of the principal use on the site. 
Wetland: Area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Includes adjacent and isolated wetlands. 
Window: An opening in the wall of a building or structure for admitting light and fitted with a frame containing panes of glass. 
Window, False: A device in the wall of a building or structure fitted with a frame containing panes of glass so as to resemble a window, but not admitting light. 
Wireless Telecommunications: A structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennae that transmit information (audio, video, data) in the form of electromagnetic signals to one or more receivers without the use of a physical connection between the transmitting and receiving source. 
Yard: A required open space located on the same lot as the principal structure, unoccupied and unobstructed except for accessory uses and landscaping. 
Figure 9.2-H: Yards
 
Yard, Front: A yard extended across the full width of and situated between the front lot line and the principal structure extending to the side lot lines. In the case of a corner lot, the front yard adjoins the public or private rights-of-way where the entrance/address is located. 
Yard, Rear: A yard extended across the full width of and situated between the rear lot line and the principal structure extending to the side lot lines. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard shall not extend past the corner side yard. 
Yard, Side: A yard extended across the full width of and situated between the side lot line and the principal structure extending from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a corner lot, the corner side yard shall extend from the front yard to the rear lot line.  
Appendix B - Zoning District Transition Table 
Table 9.2-A: Zoning District Transition Table 
Denton Plan 2030 Future Land Use Map Designation 	Zoning District Designation (prior to DDC effective date) 	Zoning District Designation (after DDC effective date) 
Rural Areas 	A, RD-5, RC, (including RD-5X) 	RR 
Residential - Low Density (up to 4 dwelling units per acre) 	NR-1 	R1 
	NR-2 	R2 
	NR-3 	R3 
Residential - Moderate Density (4—12 dwelling units per acre) 	NR-4 	R4 
	NR-6 	R6 
Downtown Compatibility Area 	DR-1, NRMU-12, MF-1 	R7 
Downtown Denton 	DC-N, DC-G 	MD - within Downtown 
Implementation Area (DTIP) 
MN - outside DTIP 
Regional Mixed Use 	RCC-N, RCC-D 	MR 
Community Mixed Use 	Various 	Various 
Neighborhood Mixed Use 	DR-2, RCR-1, RCR-2, NRMU 	MN 
Business Innovation 	EC-C 	GO 
	EC-I, IC-E 	LI 
Neighborhood/University Compatibility Area 	Various 	Various 
Commercial 	CM-G, CM-E 	SC - along arterials 
HC - along I-35 
Government/Institutional 	Publicly Owned Properties (e.g., City of Denton, TWU, UNT, DISD, state, and federal properties) 	PF 
Industrial Commerce 	IC-G 	HI 
Various 	PD, MPC 	PD 
Various 	Properties zoned or rezoned with conditions 	PD 
 
